{"translation":"Unofficial translation of the Official Gazette for advertising purposes.\n\nREPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES CONGRESS OF THE PHILIPPINES METROPOLITAN MANILA\n\nREPUBLIC ACT NO. 8545\n\nAN ACT AMENDING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6728, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS “AN ACT PROVIDING GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE TO STUDENTS AND TEACHERS IN PRIVATE EDUCATION, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR,” ESTABLISHING A FUND FOR THE PURPOSE OF ANSWERING THE SALARIES OF TEACHERS IN PRIVATE SCHOOLS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR\n\nSECTION 1. Republic Act No. 6728, otherwise known as “The Act Providing Government Assistance to Students and Teachers in Private Education,” is hereby amended to read as follows:\n\n“SEC. 1. Title. – This Act shall be known as ‘The Expanded Government Assistance to Students and Teachers in Private Education Act.’\n\n“SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. – It is hereby declared the policy of the State, consistent with the mandate of the Constitution, to promote and make accessible to all Filipino citizens quality education. The State also recognizes herein the complementary roles of public and private educational institutions in the educational system and the significant contribution and potential contribution of private schools to education. For this purpose, the State shall provide mechanisms to improve the quality of private education by maximizing the utilization of existing resources of private education, recognizing the responsibility of government to provide basic education at the elementary and secondary levels, post-secondary vocational and technical education, and higher education as a priority in all its endeavors.\n\n“Elementary education is the first six (6) years of basic education, excluding pre-school and grade seven, the completion of which is evidenced by a certificate issued by or with the authorization of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports. Secondary education is the four (4) years following basic education, the completion of which is evidenced by a high school diploma issued by or with the authorization of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports.\n\n“Post-secondary education may be education or training in non-degree vocational or technical courses or education in degree courses offered by higher education institutions, the completion of which is evidenced by a certificate or diploma issued by or with the authorization of the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) or the Commission on Higher Education (CHED).\n\n“SEC. 3. Bases for Assistance. — Assistance programs shall be consistent with established criteria which shall include, among others, tuition fees charged by schools, the socio-economic needs of each region, prioritizing provinces that are part of the Social Reform Agenda (SRA), the overall performance of schools, the academic qualifications and financial needs of students and teachers, and the financial needs of schools, as well as the geographic scope and student population size. \n\n“In addition to the foregoing criteria, within a reasonable period to be set by the Fund Authority, the student grantee under the Private Education Student Financial Assistance Program shall be enrolled in schools with programs that are accredited or are undergoing accreditation in accordance with the recognition of the designated Fund Authority.\n\n“Priority shall be given to students whose family income does not exceed seventy-two thousand pesos (PHP72,000.00) or such amount as may be determined by the Board, as hereinafter provided.\n\n“For purposes of this Act, assistance programs to students and teachers of private vocational and technical institutions for post-secondary and higher education institutions shall also be extended to students and teachers of community colleges in degree and non-degree programs. The implementation of the program shall encourage students to pursue vocational and technical for post-secondary and higher education courses in the same region where their families reside.\n\n“Assistance programs under this Act shall be granted only to students who are citizens of the Philippines.\n\n“The Fund Authority, together with the Department of Education, Culture and Sports (DECS), the CHED and the TESDA shall be required to develop benchmark standards for the evaluation of the quality of courses, as well as the status and standing of the recipient institutions.\n\n“Within five (5) years from the effectivity of this Act, assistance shall be given to schools: Provided, That the current allocation of tuition and other income of schools shall be used in the same proportion and allocation as prescribed by law.\n\n“SEC. 4. Forms of Assistance. — Assistance to private education shall consist of assistance to students and assistance to teachers:\n\n“The following are the forms of assistance to students in private education:\n\n“(1) Tuition supplement for students in private high school, including students in vocational and technical courses;\n\n“(2) High School Textbook Assistance Fund: Provided, That the textbook assistance for each student in private high schools shall be determined by the board and shall not exceed that granted to students in public high schools for each student under a comprehensive textbook program of the Secondary Education Development Program (SEDP): Provided, further, That textbook assistance shall be granted only to beneficiaries of the tuition supplement and the mode of contracting educational services provided for in this Act;\n\n“(3) Expansion of the existing Educational Service Contracting (ESC) Scheme;\n\n“(4) The voucher system of the Private Education Student Financial Assistance Program (PESFA);\n\n“(5) Grants of scholarships to students graduating as valedictorian and salutatorian from secondary schools;\n\n“(6) Tuition supplements to students in private colleges and universities; and\n\n“(7) Educational Loan Fund.\n\n“The following are the forms of assistance to teachers and faculty in private education:\n\n“(1) Fund for in-service training for teachers in private high schools; and\n\n“(2) Fund for College Faculty Development.\n\n“SEC. 5. Tuition Supplement for Students in Private High School. — (1) Financial assistance for the tuition of students in private high schools shall be provided by the government through a voucher system in accordance with the following manner:\n\n“(a) For students enrolled in schools charging an amount designated by the Fund Authority, the government shall provide them with a voucher equivalent to the amount designated by the board: Provided, That the government shall pay the vouchers to the concerned schools within one hundred and twenty (120) days from the closing of the registration period.\n\n“(2) The assistance under paragraph (1), subparagraph (a) shall ensure all private high schools participating in the program for the number of slots as of the effectivity of this Act equivalent to the total number of students who availed of the tuition supplement for school year 1997–1998: Provided, That the Fund Authority may set in subsequent years additional slots and/or additional participating high schools as necessary.\n\n“SEC. 6. High School Textbook Assistance Fund. — There is hereby established in the Department of Education, Culture and Sports (DECS) a High School Textbook Assistance Fund to provide assistance to each student to be given to students attending private schools exclusively for the purchase of high school textbooks, as a means of promoting the implementation of the Secondary Education Development Program: Provided, That the textbook assistance per student in private high schools shall be set by the board and shall not exceed that given to each student in public high schools: Provided, also, That textbook assistance shall be granted only to beneficiaries of the tuition supplement and the mode of contracting educational services provided for in this Act.\n\n“SEC. 7. Expansion of the Existing Educational Service Contracting (ESC) Scheme. — (a) The Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall continue to enter into contracts with private schools where the government shall shoulder the tuition and other fees of students enrolling in private high schools under this program.\n\n“(b) The Department shall also enter into contracts with private schools in communities where there are no public high schools, and shall thus shoulder the tuition and other fees of students enrolling in such private schools.\n\n“(c) The amount of assistance to be provided by the government under this section shall not exceed that prescribed as the cost per student in public high schools.\n\n“(d) The Department shall fully pay the amount shouldered to the participating schools not later than one hundred eighty (180) days from the closing of the registration period.\n\n“(e) The amount of assistance shall have an allocation and shall be distributed to the sixteen (16) regions in accordance with the proportion to the total population, as well as the population of high school age for the first school year: Provided, That starting school year 1998, an equalization program shall be implemented by the Fund Authority.\n\n“(f) The amount of assistance to private high schools participating in the program shall ensure the number of slots as of the effectivity of this Act equivalent to the number of students availing of the contracting service assistance for school year 1997–1998: Provided, That the Fund Authority may set in subsequent years additional slots and/or additional participating private high schools as necessary.\n\n“SEC. 8. Assistance to First Year College Students. — (a) Private Education Student Financial Assistance (PESFA) Voucher System. The existing Private Education Student Financial Assistance (PESFA) Voucher System covering degree and vocational/technical courses shall be expanded so that all qualified incoming students shall benefit from scholarships, and additional allowances. Such financial assistance shall be granted to deserving and underprivileged students, who shall be selected according to family income, geographic location, and results of competitive examinations to be administered by the CHED for degree courses and by the TESDA for non-degree vocational/technical courses in all secondary schools in coordination with the DECS. The program shall be equitably allocated to provinces and cities in accordance with regional and national plans for priority courses as determined by the CHED and the TESDA.\n\n“For purposes of this Act, an underprivileged student shall refer to a student whose annual total income, if any, and the combined annual total income of his/her parents does not exceed seventy-two thousand pesos (PHP72,000.00).\n\n“(b) Waiver of Tuition Fees. — Private post-secondary vocational and technical institutions and higher education institutions shall grant full or half waiver of tuition fees for five percent (5%) of incoming first year students, including valedictorians and salutatorians from both public and private high schools: Provided, That said valedictorians and salutatorians meet the entrance examinations of the concerned schools.\n\n“(c) Allowance for Valedictorians. — Under rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Fund Authority, the valedictorians referred to in subparagraph (b) above, in addition to the tuition waivers granted by the concerned schools, may receive such allowances from the government as are granted to those received from PESFA, provided they enroll in priority courses.\n\n“(d) Allowance for Other Honor Graduates. Should the graduating class consist of more than two hundred fifty (250) students, all salutatorians and honorable mentions graduating therefrom may also receive an allowance granted to the valedictorian under the preceding paragraph.\n\n“SEC. 9. Additional Assistance to Students in Private Colleges and Universities. — Tuition supplement for students of private post-secondary vocational and technical institutions and higher education institutions enrolling in priority courses shall be provided by the government through a voucher system in accordance with the following manner:\n\n“For students in priority programs in schools charging a tuition fee per unit in accordance with as set by the Fund Authority, the government shall provide the student with a voucher for the amount of the tuition supplement to be determined by the Fund Authority.\n\n“The government assistance and tuition increase described in this Section may be subject to the same conditions set forth in Section 5 (2).\n\n“SEC. 10. Educational Loan Fund. — (a) “Study Now, Pay Later” Plan. There is hereby created a special fund to be known as the Student Loan Fund to be administered by the CHED and the TESDA or by delegation of the CHED of the Student Loan Fund Authority created under Republic Act No. 6014 as hereby re-established in accordance with the provisions of the same Republic Act to be used to finance educational loans to cover tuition and other school fees and educational expenses for books, living expenses, and board and lodging.\n\n“(b) Amounts covering payment of tuition, and other school fees shall be paid directly to the concerned school.\n\n“(c) Any loan under this section shall be repaid by the student-borrower upon completion of the course or profession financed by the loan, but after two (2) years from the time he/she obtains employment: Provided, however, That an interest rate not exceeding six percent (6%) per annum shall be added to the balance from hereon.\n\n“(d) Social Security Fund. The Social Security System shall open low-interest educational loans for its members and for private educational institutions for school buildings and/or improvement of their premises and facilities.\n\n“SEC. 11. The right of any student to avail of benefits under this Act shall not be applied when he/she fails within one (1) school year in the majority of his/her academic subjects enrolled in, unless the reason for such failure is a justifiable cause beyond his/her control.\n\n“SEC. 12. In-Service Training Fund (Inset Fund). — For the purpose of improving the quality of instruction in private secondary education, there is hereby established in the Department of Education, Culture and Sports an Inset Fund to upgrade the knowledge and teaching skills of teachers in critical subject areas and for the modernization of teaching techniques and strategies, including training in the use of computers and other educational multimedia technologies to aid in instruction: Provided, That the Inset Fund shall be available only to qualified licensed teachers in participating private high schools in accordance with the determination of the Fund Authority: Provided, also, That the amount of the Inset Fund to be allocated to private secondary education shall not exceed that allocated to public secondary education on a per capita basis.\n\n“SEC. 13. College Faculty Development Fund. — For the purpose of improving the quality of instruction in private post-secondary vocational and technical institutions and higher education institutions, there is hereby established in the TESDA and the CHED a College Faculty Development Fund to provide scholarships for graduate degrees and degree and non-degree workshops or seminars for faculty members in private post-secondary vocational and technical institutions and higher education institutions: Provided, That the faculty member receiving such scholarship shall render the same number of years of reciprocal service for each year of scholarship received in accordance with the guidelines to be set by the Fund Authority in accordance with the existing policies of the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) on reciprocal service of government scholars. The scholarship shall be required in priority courses as designated by the TESDA and CHED and shall not be granted to promote or restrict sectarian objectives.\n\n“SEC. 14. Fund for Teachers’ Salary Assistance. — A Fund for Teachers’ Salary Assistance is hereby established in the DECS to enable the government to provide assistance to teachers in private high schools participating in the assistance programs contained in this Act: Provided, That the total monthly salary including assistance to be received by said teachers in private high schools shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the salary of his/her counterpart in the public sector: Provided, also, That the amount of monthly assistance shall not exceed the amount of any monthly salary increase that may be received by teachers in public high schools after the effectivity of this Act: Provided, also, That teachers in private high schools qualified to receive assistance under this Act are licensed by the Professional Regulation Commission: Provided, also, That the government shall provide them with a voucher for salary assistance to be paid directly to the teachers within sixty (60) days after the closing of the school year upon submission of proof of qualification and actual teaching service in a participating private high school: Provided, also, That the current allocation from tuition increase and other income shall be retained: Provided, finally, That in case of lack of funds, priority shall be given to married teachers with dependents.\n\n“SEC. 15. Program Administration/Rules and Regulations. — The Fund Authority shall be responsible for the policy guidance and direction, monitoring and evaluation of new and implemented programs, and the promulgation of rules and regulations, while the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, the TESDA, and the CHED shall be responsible for the day-to-day administration and implementation of the program for the assistance programs for private secondary education, post-secondary vocational and technical education, and higher education. It may also utilize the services and support of any qualified government or private entity for its implementation.\n\n“The Fund Authority, hereinafter referred to as the Board, shall be chaired by the Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports, with the Chairman of the CHED and the Director-General of the TESDA as Vice-Chairmen, with representatives from the National Economic and Development Authority, Department of Budget and Management, Department of Science and Technology, and representatives from organized national associations of teachers, students, parents, and school administrators concerned with secondary, post-secondary vocational and technical education, and higher education as members. The last three (3) members shall be designated by the Board upon recommendation of their respective sector for a term of one (1) school year which may be renewed for a maximum term of four (4) school years. One representative from the Committees on Education of both Houses shall be designated as observers to the Board.\n\n“The Board shall meet, from time to time, as necessary, to assess the effectiveness of the programs and to ensure that the secondary schools, post-secondary vocational and technical institutions, and higher education institutions where the assisted students are enrolled continue to provide quality education. For this purpose, the Board shall establish standards to determine which secondary schools, post-secondary vocational and technical institutions, and higher education institutions shall continue to receive students and teachers/faculty receiving assistance from the government under this Act.\n\n“SEC. 16. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of these programs shall be charged to the annual General Appropriations Act for the year 1998. The appropriation of one billion pesos (PHP1,000,000,000.00) already earmarked under the General Appropriations Act of 1998 shall be used for this purpose.\n\n“All funds appropriated for this purpose shall constitute a trust fund to be administered by the Fund Authority, which shall directly and automatically release to the various regional offices of the DECS.\n\n“SEC. 17. In case of any violation of any of the provisions of this Act or of the rules and regulations promulgated for its implementation by an institution, the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, the TESDA, and the CHED, upon recommendation of the Board, may disqualify the institution from participating or availing of the programs of this Act, and other programs of the Department, without prejudice to administrative and criminal suits that may be filed against the school and/or its responsible officials under existing laws.\n\n“SEC. 18. Repealing Clause. — All laws and decrees, particularly Presidential Decrees No. 932 and 1371 and such memoranda of instructions, rules and regulations, or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.\n\n“SEC. 19. Separability Clause