H. No. 1898 S. No. 8665

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7837]

AN ACT GRANTING PERMANENT RESIDENT STATUS, OTHER RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES TO FILIPINO VETERANS OF WORLD WAR II WHO ACQUIRED AMERICAN CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE UNITED STATES IMMIGRATION ACT OF 1990, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Title . – This Act shall be known as “Act Granting Permanent Resident Status, Other Rights and Privileges to Filipino Veterans of World War II Who Acquired American Citizenship under the United Sates Immigration Act of 1990 and Any Other Prior Acts for These Purposes.”

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy . – It is hereby declared to be the policy of the State to foster the general well-being of the country’s veterans in recognition of their patriotic services in times of war and peace for the cause of freedom and democracy; for the attainment of national unity and independence, and for the maintenance of peace and order, in keeping with the goals of the Government and the aspirations of the people.

SEC. 3. Qualifications . – Any Filipino veteran of World War II who acquired American citizenship pursuant to the United States Immigration Act of 1990 shall be qualified for permanent resident status and is hereby granted limited property rights and other privileges as provided for in this Act. The same rights and privileges shall likewise automatically accrue upon proper application to the spouses and legitimate, natural, recognized illegitimate, and unmarried children of Filipino veterans- who thereafter acquired American citizenship.

SEC. 4. Application for Permanent Residence . – Filipino veterans, their spouses and their legitimate, natural, recognized illegitimate, and unmarried children who are American citizens and residing in foreign lands, who wish to avail of permanent resident status in the Philippines shall comply with reentry requirements as prescribed by Philippine laws. Upon entry in the Philippines, they may acquire permanent resident status from the Bureau of Immigration and Deportation.

Filipino veterans .who did not leave the Philippines and who have acquired American citizenship in the United States Embassy may likewise apply for permanent resident status with the Bureau of Immigration and Deportation.

SEC. 5. Requirements . – Filipino veterans and their’ family members, upon filing their application for permanent residence, shall present their American passports and their birth or baptismal certificates, or any other documents that will prove that they were former Filipino citizens. All other requirements as required by law and by the Bureau of Immigration and Deportation are waived.

SEC. 6. Land Ownership . – Any Filipino veteran and his spouse and legitimate, natural, recognized illegitimate, and unmarried children who acquired American citizenship as provided in the • United States Immigration Act of 1990 shall be entitled to continue to hold and retain all the lands they have acquired before becoming American citizens, subject to the provisions of existing laws: Provided, however , That if they have had no landholding upon becoming American citizens, they shall be qualified to acquire one (1) residential lot of not more than one thousand square meters and/or a farm lot of not more than three hectares.

SEC. 7. Practice of Profession . – Any Filipino veteran and his spouse and legitimate, natural, recognized illegitimate, and unmarried children who became American citizens as provided in the United States Immigration Act of 1990 shall be entitled to practice their professions in the Philippines.

SEC. 8. Other Privileges Granted to Filipino Veterans and Their Immediate Family Members . –

a) Exemption from registration and other fees – Filipino veterans, their spouses and their legitimate, natural, recognized illegitimate, and unmarried children qualified under this Act shall be exempt from the payment of registration and other immigration fees after complying with the provisions of the Alien Registration Law.

b) Multiple entry visa – Filipino veterans, their spouses and their legitimate, natural, recognized illegitimate, and unmarried children, shall be entitled to multiple entry visa which shall be valid for a period of two (2) years.

c) Reentry permit – Filipino veterans, their spouses and their legitimate, natural, recognized illegitimate, and unmarried children, as qualified in Section 2 of this Act, may avail from the Bureau of Immigration and Deportation of reentry permits that shall be valid for two (2) years.

d) Immunity from deportation – Filipino veterans, their spouses and their legitimate, natural, recognized illegitimate, and unmarried children shall not be subject to deportation unless they commit and are convicted of crimes against the State: Provided, That their permanent residency .status has been previously canceled.

e) Other properties – Beneficiaries of this Act who acquired shares of stocks in corporations and other properties as Filipino citizens shall continue to retain ownership of such properties registered in their name prior to their acquisition of American citizenship.

SEC. 9. Implementation . – The Commissioner of Immigration shall within thirty (30) days after the effectivity of this Act, issue the rules and regulations necessary for the effective implementation of this Act.

The Bureau of Immigration and Deportation shall establish, for purposes of implementing the mandate of this Act, such registration centers as may be necessary.

SEC. 10. Repealing Clause . – Any provision of law, presidential decree, executive order, and other executive issuances inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 11. Separability Clause . – If any provision of this Act shall be held unconstitutional the other provisions shall not be affected thereby.

SEC. 12. Effectivity Clause . – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in at least two (2) national newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA, JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

(Sgd.) EDGARDO J. ANGARA President of the Senate

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No.1898 and House Bill No. 8665 was finally passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives on December 7, 1994 and December 8, 1994, respectively.

(Sgd.) EDGARDO E. TUMANGAN Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) CAMILO L. SABIO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved: DEC 16 1994

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Source : Presidential Management Staff