H. No. 8175

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7853]

AN ACT CONVERTING THE KALINGA-APAYAO SCHOOL OF ARTS AND TRADES IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF CONNER, PROVINCE OF KALINGA-APAYAO, INTO AN INSTITUTE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, TO BE KNOWN AS THE APAYAO INSTITUTE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. The Kalinga-Apayao School of Arts and Trades in the Municipality of Conner, including its present Luna Extension in the Municipality of Luna, Province of Kalinga-Apayao, is hereby converted into an institute of science and technology under the supervision of the Commission on Higher Education to be known as the Apayao Institute of Science and Technology.

SEC. 2. The Institute shall primarily provide higher technological, professional and technical-vocational courses and training as well as science courses as may be authorized by the Commission on Higher Education: Provided , That the courses to be offered are consistent with the goals for local, regional and national development.  It shall likewise promote research and development in the various disciplines and areas of specialization.

SEC. 3. The Institute shall be under the direct supervision of the Commission on Higher Education, and shall be headed by a vocational school superintendent.

SEC. 4. No student shall be denied admission to the Institute by reasons of sex, ethnic consideration and religious belief or affiliation.

SEC. 5. The body of teachers, instructors, master teachers and heads of departments shall constitute the faculty of the Institute.

SEC. 6. The faculty and other personnel of the Institute shall be covered by the Civil Service law, rules and regulations.

SEC. 7. All personnel, records, assets and properties, including buildings, sites and the improvements thereof, obligations, funds and appropriations of the Kalinga-Apayao School of Arts and Trades are hereby transferred to the Apayao Institute of Science and Technology.

SEC. 8. The Commission on Higher Education shall issue rules and regulations necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act.

SEC. 9. The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year’s appropriations of the Kalinga-Apayao School of Arts and Trades.  Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

Fees and charges, including government subsidies and other income generated by the Institute shall constitute special trust funds and shall be deposited in any authorized government depository bank, and all interest that shall accrue therefrom shall form part of the same funds for the use of the Institute.

The income generated by the Institute may, at the discretion of the Institute, be disbursed for the professional growth and development, health, welfare and other similar benefits of the faculty members and personnel, for extension and student welfare expenses so that the flexibility on use of income shall be focused on faculty, personnel improvement and student welfare activities, and for expenses necessary for the attainment of its purposes under this Act.

SEC. 10. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

(Sgd.) EDGARDO J. ANGARA President of the Senate

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA, JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on October 26, 1994 and October 6, 1994, respectively

(Sgd.) EDGARDO E. TUMANGAN Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) CAMILO L. SABIO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved: DEC 24 1994

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Management Staff