H. No. 11398

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7890]

AN ACT AMENDING ARTICLE 286, SECTION THREE, CHAPTER TWO, TITLE NINE OF ACT NO. 3815, AS AMENDED, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Article 286, Section Three, Chapter Two, Title Nine of Act No. 3815, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“ART. 286. Grave Coercions. – The penalty of prision correccional and a fine not exceeding Six thousand pesos shall be imposed upon any person who, without any authority of law, shall, by means of violence, threats or intimidation, prevent another from doing something not prohibited by law, or compel him to do something against his will, whether it be right or wrong.

“If the coercion be committed in violation of the exercise of the right of suffrage, or for the purpose of compelling another to perform any religious act, to prevent him from exercising such right or from so doing such act, the penalty next higher in degree shall be imposed.”

SEC. 2. Section 261, Paragraphs (d)(1) and (2), Article XXII of Batas Pambansa Blg. 881 is hereby repealed.

SEC. 3. All other election laws, decrees, executive orders rules and regulations, or parts thereof inconsistent with the I provisions of this Act are hereby repealed.

SEC. 4. If, for any reason, any section or provision of this Act, or any portion thereof, the application of such section provision or portion to any person, group or circumstance is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act or application of such section, provision or portion thereof to other persons, groups or circumstances shall not be affected by such declaration.

SEC. 5. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on February 16, 1995.

Approved: FEB 20 1995

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Management Staff