S. No. 2051 H. No. 13382

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday the twenty-fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7889]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES IN MINDANAO, APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the “University of the Philippines in Mindanao Act”.

SEC. 2. The Board of Regents of the University of the Philippines is hereby authorized to carry out the establishment of an autonomous campus of the University of the Philippines in Mindanao.

SEC. 3. The campus of the University of the Philippines in Mindanao shall be sited in the Bureau of Plant Industry reservation in Bago Oshiro, Plantation Unit Land Title No. TCT-1910-(061), in Davao City in an area not exceeding four hundred hectares to be set aside by proclamation of the President of the Philippines. The campus shall be utilized exclusively for educational purposes and for such other activities related to research and training activities of the University of the Philippines in Mindanao.

SEC. 4. The Board of Regents of the University of the Philippines shall have full authority to determine the instruction, research, and extension programs, schedule of preparatory work and initial operations, organizational structure, qualifications and number of academic and other personnel, enrollment and other matters related to the administration and operation of the University of the Philippines in Mindanao: Provided, That the academic program shall put an emphasis on science, technology and agriculture education: Provided, further, That the medical education program shall adopt a community-relevant step-ladder approach with the view of encouraging graduates to serve in Mindanao.

SEC. 5. The University of the Philippines in Mindanao shall provide a special scholarship program and other affirmative action programs to assist poor but deserving muslims and other members of cultural communities to qualify for admission to the University.

No student shall be denied admission to the University of the Philippines in Mindanao by reason of sex, religion, cultural or community affiliation or ethnic origin.

SEC. 6. The University of the Philippines in Mindanao shall network and collaborate with other state colleges and universities in such areas which shall contribute to the development of Mindanao.

SEC. 7. The Board of Regents of the University of the University of the Philippines shall submit a report to the President of the Philippines, Congress and Commission on Higher Education (CHED) on the actions the University has taken pursuant hereto within six (6) months after the effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 8. The amount of Twenty million pesos (P20,000,000) is hereby appropriated from the income of the duty-free shops as the initial operating expenses of the University of the Philippines in Mindanao. Thereafter, such additional amount as may be necessary for the effective implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 9. All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances, or parts thereof, which are contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 10. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 2051 and House Bill No. 13382 was finally passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives on February 13, 1995 and February 14, 1995, respectively.

(Sgd.) CAMILO L. SABIO Secretary General House of Representatives

(Sgd.) DEMAREE J. B. RAVAL Acting Secretary of the Senate

Approved: FEB 20 1995

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Management Staff