H. No. 3765

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7849]

AN ACT CONVERTING THE BUGUIAS-LOO AGRO-INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BUGUIAS, PROVINCE OF BENGUET, INTO A POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE, TO BE KNOWN AS THE BUGUIAS-LOO POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. The Buguias-Loo Agro-Industrial School in the Municipality of Buguias, Province of Benguet, is hereby converted into a polytechnic college, to be known as the Buguias-Loo Polytechnic College.

SEC. 2. The. College shall offer not only its present academic and vocational curricula but also baccalaureate degrees in arts and sciences, engineering, humanities, commerce, education, literature and philosophy, in addition to providing for the promotion of scientific and technological researches.

SEC. 3. In order not to disrupt the present administrative operation of the Buguias-Loo Agro-Industrial School, the incumbent school administrator shall be the first superintendent of the College, the teachers, instructors and other school personnel shall be absorbed into the new upgraded positions that may be created in accordance with the needs of the curricular offering of the College. They shall receive compensation and privileges equal to their counterparts in existing polytechnic colleges under the supervision of the Commission on Higher Education.

SEC. 4. The Chairperson of the Commission on Higher Education is hereby empowered to issue such rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act.

SEC. 5. The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year’s appropriation of the Buguias-Loo Agro-Industrial School. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

Fees, charges, including government subsidies and other income generated by the College, shall constitute as special trust funds and shall be deposited in any authorized government depository bank and all interests that shall accrue therefrom shall from funds for the use of the College.

The income generated by the College may, at the discretion of the College, be disbursed for the professional growth, development, health, welfare activities, and for expenses necessary for the attainment of its purposes under this Act.

SEC. 6. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on November 24, 1994 and November 17, 1994, respectively.

Approved: 30 December 1994

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Management Staff