H. No. 7255

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8023]

AN ACT DECLARING THE MAN-MADE LAKE IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BALO-I, PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL NORTE, A TOURIST SPOT

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. The man-made lake in the Municipality of Balo-i, Province of Lanao del Norte, is hereby declared a tourist spot. As such, it shall be accorded priority development by the Department of Tourism and shall be subject to the rules and regulations governing the development of tourist spots.

SEC. 2. The Department of Tourism, in coordination with the Philippine Tourism Authority and other concerned agencies of the government shall, within one (1) year from the approval of this Act, prepare a tourism development plan which shall provide for the construction, improvement and/or maintenance of such appropriate facilities and infrastructure as shall encourage tourism in the area: Provided , That said development plan shall ensure the preservation of the natural beauty and/or historical significance thereof.

SEC. 3. The Department of Tourism shall take immediate steps to implement said development plan and shall incorporate the same in its overall tourism development program for the ensuing calendar year.

SEC. 4. The Department of Tourism shall likewise promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the proper implementation of this Act.

SEC. 5. Any law which is inconsistent with any provision of this Act is hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 6. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on May 31, 1994 and February 15, 1995, respectively.

Approved:

FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Lapsed into the law on May 25, 1995, without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27(1) of the Constitution.

Source : Presidential Management Staff