H. No. 589

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7838]

AN ACT CONVERTING THE IBAJAY NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF IBAJAY, PROVINCE OF AKLAN, INTO A POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. The Ibajay National Agricultural and Industrial School in the Municipality of Ibajay, Province of Aklan, is hereby converted into a polytechnic college, to be known as the Western Aklan Polytechnic College.

SEC. 2. The college shall primarily provide higher vocational, occupational, professional and technical instruction and training in applied arts and sciences, as well as short-term vocational and technical courses. It shall also promote research, advanced studies, and progressive leadership in the stated fields.

SEC 3. It shall grant a proficiency certificate in non-degree courses and diploma to the undergraduate courses offered.

SEC. 4. The entry qualifications of high school graduates desiring to enroll shall be based on the open door policy, but limited to the actual capacity of the college for maximum efficiency in terms of graduates, efficient use of facilities, and reduction of waste material resources.

SEC. 5. The Western Aklan Polytechnic College shall be headed by a college superintendent who shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Commission on Higher Education. The powers and duties of the college superintendent shall be the same as those of the superintendent of existing government colleges.

SEC. 6. In order not to disrupt the present administrative operation of the Ibajay National Agricultural and Industrial School, all its personnel shall be absorbed by the college: Provided, That the incumbent school administrator shall be appointed as its first college superintendent

SEC. 7. The school personnel of the Western Aklan Polytechnic College shall be covered by the Civil Service rules and regulations.

SEC. 8. All buildings, equipment, facilities and funds of, and all parcels of land of the Ibajay National Agricultural and Industrial School shall be transferred to the Western Aklan Polytechnic College.

SEC. 9. The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year’s appropriations of the Ibajay National Agricultural and Industrial School. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 10. All laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 11. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on October 25, 1994 and October 3, 1994, respectively.

Approved: DEC 16 1994

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Management Staff