H. No. 14478

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7887]

AN ACT INSTITUTING ELECTORAL REFORMS FOR THE PURPOSE OF AMENDING SECTION 3, PARAGRAPHS (C) AND (D) OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7166

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 3, paragraphs (c) and (d) of Republic Act No. 7166, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“(c) The number and election of elective members of the sangguniang panlungsod and sangguniang bayan in the Metro Manila area, City of Cebu, City of Davao and any other city with two (2) or more legislative districts shall be elected by districts and in accordance with the provisions of Sections 2 and 3 of Republic Act No. 6636: Provided, That, all cities with one (1) legislative district and all municipalities in the Metro Manila area shall have twelve (12) councilors each: Provided, further, That, the Commission shall divide all cities with one legislative district and each of the municipalities in Metro Manila area into two (2) districts by barangay for purposes of representation in the sangguniang bayan as nearly as practicable according to the number of inhabitants, each district comprising a compact, contiguous and adjacent territory, and

“(d) For purposes of the regular elections on May 11, 1992 and all general elections thereafter, the regular elective members of the sangguniang panlungsod and sangguniang bayan, shall be elected at large in accordance with existing laws.

“The Commission shall promulgate rules and regulations to effectively implement the provisions of law which may hereafter be enacted providing for the election of sectoral representatives.”

SEC. 2. All provisions of laws, orders, decrees, rules and regulations or other issuances or any part thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 3. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

(Sgd.) EDGARDO J. ANGARA President of the Senate

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA, JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on February 15,1995.

Approved: FEB 20 1995

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Management Staff