H. No. 14326

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8024]

AN ACT DECLARING BUSAY FALLS IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BABATNGON, PROVINCE OF LEYTE, A TOURIST SPOT

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Busay Falls, located in the Municipality of Babatngon, Province of Leyte, is hereby declared a tourist spot. As such, it shall be accorded priority development by the Department of Tourism, subject to the rules and regulations governing the development of tourist spots.

SEC. 2. The Department of Tourism, in coordination with the Philippine Tourism Authority and other concerned agencies of the government shall, within one (1) year from the approval of this Act, prepare a development plan involving the construction, installation and maintenance of such appropriate facilities and infrastructure as shall enhance tourism in the area: Provided , That said development plan shall ensure the preservation of the natural beauty and historical significance thereof.

SEC. 3. The Department of Tourism shall take immediate steps to implement said development plan and shall incorporate the same in the Department’s overall tourism development program for the year following the approval of this Act.

SEC. 4. The Department of Tourism shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the proper implementation of this Act.

SEC. 5. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on January 30, 1995 and February 15, 1995, respectively.

(Sgd.) EDGARDO E. TUMANGAN Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) CAMILO L. SABIO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved:

FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Lapsed into the law on May 25, 1995 without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.

Source : Presidential Management Staff