MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 58

REPRIMANDING MR. EBGARDO R. HOJILLA AS CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF SPECIAL INQUIRY, BUREAU OF IMMIGRATION

This is an administrative case against Mr. Edgardo R. Hojilla, chairman of the board of special inquiry, Bureau of Immigration, (1) for failing to report to his superiors that Mr. Meneleo Bernardez, a member of his board, was in the habit of taking alcoholic drinks and (2) for not postponing the hearing of the deportation cases against Sy Chuan alias Lim Ah Tiong and others on March 25, 1954, until such time as Board Member Bernardez could be sober and would not smell of liquor.

Regarding the first charge respondent states that membership in a board of special inquiry is changed every week and consequently a member, like Mr. Bernardez, is in his board only during the week he is assigned thereto. This weekly change of a board’s composition is confirmed by the administrative officer of the Bureau. Moreover, the fact of Mr. Bernardez being addicted to liquor is of common knowledge in the Bureau of Immigration for already more than a year. Respondent’s explanation is considered satisfactory and he is therefore cleared of this specific charge.

As to the second charge, the respondent explains that there was no way for him to judge whether Member Bernardez was sober or not and he had to relay on the latter’s actuations during the proceedings to determine his fitness to participate therein. I am not impressed by the explanation of the respondent, it appearing that Mr. Bernardez admitted to him before the hearing that he had taken a drink and that the respondent was cognizant of Mr. Bernardez’ habit of taking alcoholic drinks and of being aggressive and defiant when under the influence of liquor. Uuder the circumstances, he should have suspended or postponed the hearing and reported the matter to the chief of the office.

Wherefore, and upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Justice, Mr. Edgardo R. Hojilia is hereby reprimanded.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.