MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 201

REMOVING MR. JESUS TORRECARION FROM OFFICE AS JUSTICE OF THE PEACE OF MURCIA, NEGROS OCCIDENTAL

This is an administrative case against Mr. Jesus Torrecarion, justice of the peace of Murcia, Negros Occidental, who is charged with assaulting Judge Jose Teodoro, Sr., of the Court of First Instance of Negros Occidental.

Based on the same deed, Mr. Torrecarion was prosecuted in the Court of First Instance of Negros Occidental for assault upon a person in authority, found guilty and sentenced to imprisonment from one year, eight months and one day, as minimum, to six years, as maximum, to pay a fine of P1,000, to indemnify the complainant, Judge Teodoro, in the sum of P1,000 as actual damages, P5,000 as moral damages and P5,000 as exemplary damages, with subsidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency. He has appealed to the Court of Appeals.

The administrative investigation was conducted after the criminal case had been, elevated to the Court of Appeals, and it was agreed by the parties that all the evidence taken in the criminal trial should be .considered adduced in the administrative proceedings.

The evidence shows that during a dinner-dance of the University Club in Bacolod City on January 5, 1954, respondent struck Judge Teodoro in the face with his fist, wounding him in the mouth. The reason behind the assault was the grudge nursed by respondent against the offended party who had previously held the former in contempt, for which the latter spent some days in prison, much to his chagrin and humiliation. Respondent’s conduct renders him totally unfit for a judicial and, for that matter, any other public office.

Wherefore, and upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Justice and the District Judge who heard both the criminal and administrative cases, Mr. Jesus Torrecarion is hereby removed from office as justice of the peace of Murcia, Negros Occidental, effective as of the date of his preventive suspension.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1956). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office .