MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 19

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO MAKE A STUDY OF THE ORGANIZATION, FUNCTIONS, AND DUTIES OF THE SUGAR QUOTA ADMINISTRATION AND CONDUCT AN INVESTIGATION OF ITS PERSONNEL.

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Committee composed of Solicitor General Querube C. Makalintal, as Chairman, and Atty. Eufemio Musa and Dr. Jose J. Mirasol, as members, with the following’ duties and functions:

(a) To make a study of the organization, functions and duties of the Sugar Quota Administration and to find ways and means of improving the service therein;

(b) To receive and investigate complaints against any official or employee of the said office for misconduct, graft, corruption, dereliction of duty and other irregularities, and to formulate recommendations concerning the same;

The Committee is hereby granted all the powers of an investigating committee under sections 71 and 580 of the Revised Administrative Code, including the power to summon witnesses, administer oaths, and take testimony or evidence relevant to the investigation. The Committee is also empowered to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, or upon any officer or employee thereof, for such assistance and information as it may require in the performance of its work, and, for the purpose of securing such information, it shall have access to, and the right to examine any books, documents, papers, or records thereof.

The Committee shall submit to the President its report and recommendations upon the termination of its work, or such reports and recommendations as it may deem necessary and expedient to submit from time to time.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-234]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.