MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 160

CREATING A TAX ADVISORY BOARD TO STUDY PROBLEMS OF TAXATION AND RECOMMEND APPROPRIATE SOLUTIONS

A Tax Advisory Board is hereby created to study the problems of taxation in the Philippines and recommend appropriate solutions. The Board shall be composed of the following:

Hon. Jaime Hernandez

Chairman

Hon. Dominador Aytona

Member

Gov. Miguel Cuaderno

Member

Mr. Silverio Blaquera

Member

Hon. Manuel P. Manahan

Member

Mr. Jose Arañas

Member

Mr. Alfonso Calalang

Member

Dean Artemio N. Lobrin

Member

The present tax system of the Philippines and the attendant difficulties in its administration shall be carefully examined by the Tax Advisory Board with a view to recommending immediate reforms which would effect a more equitable distribution of the tax burdens, make the tax collecting machinery more efficient and effective, prevent tax evasion, and insure adequate revenues to finance expanding essential services and public improvements.

A special study of the existing tax rates shall be made with a view to correcting inequalities and revising antiquated laws so as to jibe with the principle of ability to pay, without, however, hampering the growth of agriculture commerce and industry, or aggravating the difficulties in living conditions of the poor.

The Board is authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the Government for such assistance or information as it may require in the performance of its functions.

It is desired that the Board shall meet immediately after Christmas and submit within two weeks its report and recommendation so that the same may be made available to the committees of Congress concerned with finance and tax matters, for their consideration or implementation.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, and of the independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARIANO YENKO, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1955). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-234]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.