MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 92

CONSIDERING MR. SAMSON G. TAMPARONG, CHIEF OF POLICE OF OZAMIS CITY, AS RESIGNED FROM THE SERVICE

This is an administrative case against Mr. Samson G. Tamparong, Chief of Police of Ozamis City, who is charged in separate complaints filed by Messrs. Mike Macaombos and Pedro Parojinog, Jr. with (1) persecution of certain members of the Ozamis City Police Department; (2) electioneering; and (3) maladministration of the municipal jail.

For insufficiency of evidence, the charges of persecution of certain members of the city police force, and maladministration of the municipal jail are hereby dismissed.

With respect to the charge of electioneering, the evidence of record discloses that on November 3, 1953, on the occasion of a political rally of the Nacionalista Party in Ozamis City, the respondent was seen driving the jeep of Candidate William Chiongbian bearing a streamer with the following inscription: “Vote for the LP—the unbeatable team.” He was also seen in the company of Liberal Party leaders in the poblacion of Tangub, Misamis Occidental, during the town fiesta on September 29, 1953.

The record also reveals that the respondent approached Lt. Guillermo Anonas and Patrolman Simeon Rivera, members of the police force of the same city, who were then facing possible prosecution for discharge of firearm and infidelity in the custody of prisoners, respectively, and promised them that no criminal charges would be filed in the court against them, provided that they vote for the Liberal Party candidates.

The act of the respondent in persuading his subordinates to vote for the candidates of the Liberal Party was a clear violation of the provisions of Section 687 of the Revised Administrative Code, prohibiting officers and employees in the civil service, whether classified or unclassified, permanent or temporary, except those holding elective positions, from engaging directly or indirectly in partisan political activity or take part in any election except to vote. Furthermore, it was a highly improper act for the respondent as chief of police of a chartered city to be seen driving the jeep of a candidate during the heat of a political campaign.

Wherefore, Mr. Samson G. Tamparong is hereby considered resigned as Chief of Police of Ozamis City, effective upon receipt of notice hereof, without prejudice to receiving whatever rights and benefits he may be entitled under existing laws.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of January, in the year of Our lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1955). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Administrative Order No. 92, January 12, 1955