MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 56

CREATING A SECRETARIAT TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE MANILA CONFERENCE OF 1954

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Secretariat to formulate plans and devise ways and means for the appropriate holding of the Manila Conference of 1954 on or about September 6, 1954. The Secretariat shall be composed of the following:

ASSISTANTS TO THE SECRETARY-GENERAL

Minister Mauro Calingo, Counselor on Administration and Controls, Department of Foreign Affairs Minister Caesar Z. Lanuza, Counselor on Economic Affairs, Department of Foreign Affairs Mr. Jose Alejandrino, Counselor on Political and Cultural Affairs, Department of Foreign Affairs Mr. Victorio D. Carpio, Counselor on Legal Affairs, Department of Foreign Affairs Mr. Alberto Katigbak, Chief, Division of Intelligence, Department of Foreign Affairs Mr. Jose S. Estrada, Chief of Protocol, Department of Foreign Affairs

Mr. Jose V. Cruz, Press Secretary, Office of the President, is hereby designated as Information and Publicity Officer, and Mr. Juan C. Dionisio, Chief, Division of Foreign Service

As to the second charge, the respondent explains that there was no way for him to judge whether Member Bernardez was sober or not and he had to relay on the latter’s actuations during the proceedings to determine his fitness to participate therein. I am not impressed by the explanation of the respondent, it appearing that Mr. Bernardez admitted to him before the hearing that he had taken a drink and that the respondent was cognizant of Mr. Bernardez habit of taking alcoholic drinks and of being aggressive and defiant when under the influence of liquor. Uuder the circumstances, he should have suspended or postponed the hearing and reported the matter to the chief of the office.

Wherefore, and upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Justice, Mr. Edgardo R. Hojilla is hereby reprimanded.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.