MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 39

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO MAKE A STUDY OF EXISTING CIVIL SERVICE LAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS AND OPERATING PROCEDURES TO IMPLEMENT MORE VIGOROUSLY THE PROVISIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION CONCERNING THE CIVIL SERVICE

WHEREAS, the provisions of the Constitution concerning the civil service should be more vigorously implemented; and

WHEREAS, the increasing complexities of government and the evolvement of modern personnel practices have rendered the revision of civil service laws and rules necessary;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Committee composed of the following:

The Committee shall perform the following functions:

1. It shall undertake a study of the civil service laws with a view to drafting legislation that will provide for their codification, consolidation, amendment or repeal or the enactment of a new one. In its draft legislation the Committee shall provide the Bureau of Civil Service with explicit authority to enforce the provisions of the civil service law. It shall then undertake the drafting of civil service rules necessary to implement and supplement such legislation. Particular attention should be paid to the problems of examination, appointments, promotions, etc. The draft legislation and rules should clarify and define relationships between the Bureau and other departments of the Government. When the Bureau is given responsibility, it should be given corresponding authority.

2. It shall cause the immediate implementation of the recommendations contained in a report of a survey made by the Budget Commission, dated March 19, 1954, and submitted to the President on March 20, 1954, which the Committee may find necessary, copies of which may be procured from the Records Division of the Executive Office.

3. The Committee may submit partial reports and recommendations from time to time, but it shall complete and submit a final report not later than six months from the date hereof. Its final report shall summarize the recommendations contained in the report of the survey made by the Budget Commission, listing the recommendations which have been implemented and those which have not been implemented and the reasons therefor.

The Committee may secure records, data and information or draw personnel to assist it in its work from any bureau or office of the Government.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). Administrative Order No. 39 : Creating a Committee to make a study of existing civil service laws, rules and regulations and operating procedures to implement more vigorously the provisions of the Constitution concerning the Civil Service. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50 (7), 2925-2926.

Administrative Order No. 39, July 5, 1954