MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 226

MODIFYING ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER No. 18 DATED MARCH 23, 1954, CONCERNING MR. FELIPE LAURENA, FORMER JUSTICE OF THE PEACE OF PEREZ, QUEZON

This is a petition filed by Mrs. Lucina Ferreros-Laurena for the reconsideration of Administrative Order No. 18 dated March 23, 1954, removing her husband, the late Felipe Laurena, from office as justice of the peace of Perez, Quezon. Mr. Laurena was separated from the service as a consequence of his conviction for threats to kill. Although he was granted absolute pardon after serving sentence, he was nevertheless removed because his pardon restored his civil and political rights but not his moral fitness for the office. As the only purpose of the petition is to enable the widow to collect benefits by reason of the service of her husband as justice of the peace of Perez, Quezon, it is believed that the request may be granted.

Wherefore, and upon the recommendation of the -Sec­retary, of Justice, Administrative Order No. 18, dated March 23, 1954, is hereby modified in the sense that Mr. Felipe Laurena is considered as having voluntarily resigned from his position as justice of the peace of Perez, Quezon, effective as of January 23, 1954, the date of his preventive suspension by the District Judge by reason of the administrative case, without prejudice to receiving such benefits as he might have been entitled to under the law but without right to the payment of salary during his previous suspension from office from August, 1949, to December 31, 1953, also in connection with this case.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1956). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office .