MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 40

EXONERATING PROVINCIAL GOVERNOR ARCHIMEDES VILLANUEVA OF ZAMBALES.

This is an administrative case against Provincial Governor Archimedes Villanueva of Zambales for alleged irregularities and abuses in office contained in a complaint filed by one lid. A. Reynoso (who subsequently tried to withdraw the same for want of evidence to prove his charges) and in a report submitted by the National Bureau of Investigation. Upon the suggestion of the defunct Integrity Board, the matter was referred to the Department of Justice for investigation and report, particularly as to the following serious charges: (1) that respondent governor was supervising a contract with the Sto. Tomas Irrigation System, (2) that he was a contractor in government projects, and (3) that as a private engineer he used a government cement mixer machine without proper authority to do so.

Investigation conducted by the Provincial Fiscal of Zambales, to whom the case was in turn referred by the Department of Justice for investigation, appropriate action and report, discloses that upon assuming office as Provincial Governor of Zambales on January 1, 1952, the respondent quit as subcontractor of the C. M. Barredo Enterprises, the contractor for the construction of the Sto. Tomas Irrigation System with which the respondent had no direct dealing or contract; that since assuming office as provincial executive the respondent has never had any contract with the Government in any of its projects; and that the cement mixer in question was leased to the respondent by virtue of Resolution No. 14 dated January 6, 1951, of the Provincial Board of Zambales when he was still a private citizen engaged in his profession as civil engineer .

From the foregoing, I am satisfied that the charges against the respondent have not been substantiated, much less had he in any way taken, undue advantage of his position and influence when he entered into the contracts above referred to as he was then a private citizen. In view thereof, he is hereby exonerated of the charges filed against him.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-234]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.