MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 98

CREATING AN ECONOMIC PLANNING BOARD

WHEREAS, the proposed revision of the Trade Agreement between the Philippines and the United States demands the creation of an entity to consider the effects of such revision upon the national economy and to study measures necessary to meet the resulting situation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create an Economic Planning Board composed of the following:

The functions of the Board shall be as follows:

1. Considering the major impact on the nation’s economy of the revision of the Trade Agreement between the Philippines and the United States, to make a study of, and submit recommendations on , the present program of economic development and the activities of the various government agencies and instrumentalities which are related to or may have a bearing on economic development, devoting major attention to specific high priority developmental projects which the Government should promote;

2. To submit recommendations on the establishment of a tariff structure that will influence economic development;

3. To submit drafts of measures necessary to implement the revised economic relations between the Philippines and the United States, as contemplated in the new Trade Agreement between these two countries;

4. To submit recommendations on the necessary measures to encourage investment of domestic and foreign private capital for economic development; and

5. To review and submit recommendations on economic and financial policies.

The Board shall from time to time submit reports and recommendations on any of the matters included within the scope of its functions.

The Board is authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, or upon any officer or employee thereof, for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its work.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1955). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Administrative Order No. 98, February 7, 1955