MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 91

REPRIMANDING MR. RUBEN A. VILLALUZ, ACTING CHIEF, MOTOR VEHICLES OFFICE

This is an administrative case against Mr. Ruben A. Villaluz, Acting Chief, Motor Vehicles Office, for dishonesty.

It appears that during the months of May and August, 1954, and the period from September 1 to 15, 1954, the respondent used a government vehicle operated and maintained with funds appropriated under the law. For the same periods he collected his monthly transportation allowance of P100.00.

The respondent explains that he used the car most of the time in Manila and the suburbs in the apprehension of violators of the Motor Vehicle Law and traffic rules and regulations. He also states that all records of his travels while using a government car as well as his voucher for his transportation allowances were duly accomplished and transmitted to the Accounting Officer and the Auditor of the Motor Vehicles Office in accordance with the standing rules and regulations.

Respondent’s explanation is not entirely satisfactory. Having used a government car during the periods above indicated, he was not entitled to transportation allowance for the same periods. However, I am inclined to believe that he did not act fraudulently nor in bad faith, it appearing that he submitted to the proper officials all the records of his trips on a government car and his voucher for his transportation allowances.

Wherefore, the respondent is hereby severely reprimanded and warned that commission of a similar offense will be dealt with drastically. He is hereby required to refund the transportation allowances which he collected during the periods he used a government car.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1955). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Administrative Order No. 91, January 12, 1955