MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 88

CREATING A SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON BACKPAY CLAIMS

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Special Committee on Backpay Claims to introduce such innovations and make such changes, conformably with existing laws, in the personnel assignment, operational set-up, and office policies and procedures of the Backpay Unit, Bureau of the Treasury, Department of Finance, as may bring about the speedy and efficient processing, disposition and satisfaction of backpay claims under Republic Act No. 304, as amended by Republic Acts Nos. 800 and 897.

1. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

2. The Treasurer of the Philippines and all other officials and employees at the Backpay Unit, Bureau of the Treasury, are hereby enjoined to extend full assistance and cooperation to the Special Committee and its Consultants on Backpay Claims. Technical assistance in the work of this Committee will be furnished by the Budget Commissioner.

3. The Committee is further authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, or upon any officer or employee thereof, for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its work.

4. The Committee may submit partial reports and recommendations from time to time, but it shall complete and submit a final report not later than six months from the date hereof. Its final report shall state among other things the conditions of affairs, in the Backpay Unit before and after the implementation of the remedial measures deemed necessary and practicable by the Committee.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.