MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 191

CREATING AN EXCHANGE VISITOR PROGRAM COMMITTEE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE PARTICIPATION OF FILIPINO NATIONALS IN THE SAID PROGRAM.

For the purpose of providing an appropriate agency to coordinate Philippine participation in the Exchange Visitor’s Program and to properly channel the services of returned participants for the benefit of various government projects, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Committee for the Exchange of Visitor’s Program composed of the Secretary of Health and the Secretary of Education as Co-Chairman and the Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs and the Undersecretary of National Defense as members:

The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. To accept and screen applications of prospective applicants to the United States Exchange Visitor’s Program;

2. To endorse, for placement, qualified applicants for the consideration of the appropriate United States agency administering the program;

3. To negotiate, for the benefit of other Philippine participants, opportunities for agriculturists, industrialists, veterinarians, engineers, architects, teachers, economists, and other professionals;

4. To keep a permanent record of all applicants and participants abroad and of those who have returned, indicating the field of specialization, the period of training, and other particulars. These records shall be used as reference by the Committee in channelling the services of returned participants to government projects and important private enterprises; and

5. To advise technical departments and university authorities on the opportunities for graduate training available under the program.

The Committee is authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government for such assistance or information as it may need in the performance of its functions. It is also authorized to issue rules and regulations not inconsistent with the requirements of the Exchange Visitor’s Program to carry out the purpose of this Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, ninteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY

By the President: (Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1956). [Administrative Order Nos.: 1 – 234]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.