MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 184

REQUIRING JUSTICE OF THE PEACE PABLO URREA OF RIZAL, LAGUNA, TO RESIGN.

This is an administrative case filed by Sabina Sumague against Justice of the Peace Pablo Urrea of Rizal, Laguna, for immorality. It is alleged (1) that respondent Justice of the Peace, after having lived with complainant for eighteen years (from April 1937 to January 1955) without benefit of marriage, left her for another woman; and (2) that after leaving complainant, respondent entered into fictitious marriage with one Antonina Reyes of Sariaya, Quezon. The charges were investigated by the District Judge.

Complainant testified that from April 1937 to January 1955 she and respondent lived together as common-law husband and wife; that during all those years she worked as a laundrywoman in order to help respondent finish his law studies until he passed the bar examinations; and that when respondent became justice of the peace, he left her for another woman.

Respondent denied having lived with complainant, but admitted having courted the latter and having had sexual relations with her. He claimed that he separated from her early in 1945 and that she filed this complaint only in order to have him back and resume their illicit relationship which he did not want to do because it was immoral.

The District Judge, after considering the evidence adduced in the investigation, found that respondent had lived with complainant without benefit of marriage, and was guilty of immorality. He gave credence to the testimony of complainant that respondent left her in January 1955 and not in 1945 as alleged by respondent. The Judge reasoned out that if they had separated in 1945, and if the purpose of the filing of the complaint had been merely to force respondent to return to complainant, the latter would have filed her charges long before 1955, considering that respondent was appointed justice of the peace in 1950.

After a careful review of the evidence, I fully agree with the District Judge and the Secretary of Justice that respondent had publicly maintained illicit relations with complainant and was therefore guilty of immorality. He lived with complainant before and after his appointment as justice of the peace, although he could have married her. But he did not marry her because he considered it beneath the dignity of his office to be married to her. In fact, his only interest in her was, in his own words, to satisfy his “human want.”

It is also evident from complainant’s answer to respondent’s cross-examination that he is now cohabiting with another woman to whom he is not married. Although he denies being married, yet in the statement of his personal circumstances at the outset of his examination, it appears that he is, which tends strongly to confirm that he is living with a woman whom he treats as his wife.

The life of a justice of the peace should be above reproach so as to insure public respect for his office. By his past and present behavior, Mr. Urrea has shown himself utterly unfit to sit in judgment over his fellowmen.

Wherefore, and upon the recommendation of the District Judge and the Secretary of Justice, Mr. Pablo Urrea is hereby required to resign from his position as justice of the peace of Rizal, Laguna, within ten days from receipt of a copy of this order. If he fails to do so within the period given, he shall be deemed removed from his position effective the day following the expiration of said period.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of March, and in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1956). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-234]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.