MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 24

PRESCRIBING RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SELECTION AND APPOINTMENT OF NON-CHRISTIAN STUDENT PENSIONADOS AND DESIGNATING A COMMITTEE TO DETERMINE THE ABILITY AND FITNESS OF APPLICANTS

The following rules and regulations shall govern the selection and appointment of non-Christian student pensionados .

Scope of this scholarship . — This scholarship shall consist only of collegiate and vocational courses offered in the different, colleges and schools in the Philippines prescribing graduation from any high school of good standing as a minimum requirement, vocational and short courses preferred.

1. Who are qualified . —Only non-Christian inhabitants who are at least high school graduates and have qualified in a competitive examination given for the purpose of testing ability and fitness for scholarship, are eligible for appointment as government pensionados .

2. Examining Committee . —The Chief of Local Governments and another official designated by the Executive Secretary shall pass upon and determine the ability and fitness of applicants for appointment as government pensionados by giving appropriate competitive examination for the purpose. The division or city superintendents of schools of provinces and cities where there are applicants for government scholarship shall conduct the said examination on behalf of the Examining Committee herein created. If a city is also the capital of the province, such examination shall be conducted by the Division Superintendent of Schools.

3. Date and place of examination, transmittal of examination papers . —The Examining Committee shall prepare the examination questions and the rules and regulations governing the said examination and transmit them separately in sealed envelopes to the Division or City Superintendent of Schools sufficiently in advance of the date of the examination. The examination shall be held in the provincial capital or city where there are applicants, on the second Saturday of May of each year. If, however, the examination cannot be held on the said date owing to unforeseen events, it shall be held the next following Saturday, in which case the Division Superintendent of Schools shall give sufficient notice thereof in advance to all concerned and/or give the matter the widest publicity. Immediately after the examination, the Division Superintendent of Schools shall forward the exanimation papers of the applicants in a sealed envelope to the Examining Committee by registered special delivery or air mail, whichever is the quicker .

4. List and certification of eligibles . —The Examining Committee shall carefully appraise and grade the examination papers and thereafter submit its report to the Executive Secretary. The report shall contain, among other things, the names of the applicants properly listed in the order of the general ratings obtained by them in the examination.

5. Selection and appointment . —The following shall govern the selection for appointment of pensionados . From among the names in the list of eligibles from each province “or city the selection shall begin with, the one having the highest rating until the allotment for” such province or city is filled. Should two or more of them have the same rating in the list of eligibles, the one with higher scholastic records as evidenced by their final grades in the high school at the time of their graduation shall be preferred: Provided, That if their final grades are likewise equal, then the one who shall be certified by the Governor or City Mayor and the Congressman of the District as more indigent shall be appointed: Provided, farther, That if the Governor or City Mayor and the Congressman cannot agree as to who is the more indigent, the selection shall be made by the Executive Secretary whose decision shall be final.

6. Effectivity . —This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-234]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.