MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 218

ADMONISHING FOREIGN AFFAIRS OFFICER JUAN J. HORMILLOSA

This is an administrative case against Mr. Juan J. Hormillosa , foreign affairs officers, Class II, and until recently second secretary and consul in the Philippine Legation at Buenos Aires, Argentina, for allegedly abusing his diplomatic privileges by bringing goods into Argentina for commercial purposes during his assignment there.

The case was investigated by the Board of Foreign Service which finds the charge without basis and accordingly recommends respondent’s exoneration   therefrom.

However, it fluids him guilty of violating the foreign service regulations by participating in discussions of political or controversial questions of Argentina, in view of which the Board recommends his suspension for one week without pay.

The Secretary of Foreign Affairs agrees with the Board except as to its latter finding and recommendation, because the respondent was never charged with said violation nor given a chance to defend himself against the imputation; hence the requirement of due process was not complied with in that respect. However, as the respondent admits having expressed during social functions in Argentina his opinion defending the rights of the Catholic Church in its controversy with the then, Peron Government, which was clearly indiscreet of him, the Secretary of Foreign Affairs believes that respondent should be warned or admonished accordingly. I agree with him.

WHEREFORE, Mr. Juan J. Hormillosa is hereby admonished to be more discreet and circumspect in his actuations and utterances as a foreign affairs officer, with a warning that repetition of similar acts will be dealt with more severely.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1956). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office .