MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 74

CREATING A SPECIAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE FOR THE MOTOR VEHICLES OFFICE TO IMPLEMENT THE REVISED MOTOR VEHICLE LAW AND TO IMPROVE THE OPERATIONAL SETUP AND SERVICES THEREOF

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Special Executive Committee for the Motor Vehicles Office to effectuate the immediate implementation of the recommendations contained in the report submitted by the Special Presidential Committee on the Motor Vehicles Office and the Motor Vehicle Law on June 30, 1954, pursuant to Administrative Order No. 28, dated May 22, 1954.

1. The Special Executive Committee shall be composed of the following:

2. The Committee is authorized, subject to existing laws and regulations, to introduce such innovations and make such changes in the personnel assignment, office forms, policies and procedures of the Motor Vehicles Office as may carry out more effectively the intent and provisions of the laws on motor vehicles, and promote and maintain integrity, efficiency, economy and maximum utilization of personnel effort in its services and operations.

3. The Committee is further authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, or upon any office or employee thereof, for such assistance and information as it may require in the performance of its work, and, for the purpose of securing such information, it shall have access to, and the right to examine, any books, documents, papers, or records thereof.

4. The Committee may submit partial reports and recommendations from time to time, but it shall complete and submit a final report not later than six months from the date hereof. Its final report shall summarize the recommendations contained in the report submitted by the Special Presidential Committee on the Motor Vehicles Office and the Motor Vehicle Law, listing the recommendations which have been implemented and those which have not been implemented and the reasons therefor.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.