MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 75

REMOVING MR. IGNACIO T. CUI AS CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT, CALBAYOG CITY, FOR ELECTIONEERING (PARTISAN POLITICAL ACTIVITY)

This is an administrative case against Mr. Ignacio T. Cui, Chief of the Fire Department of Calbayog City, for electioneering (partisan political activity) during the national election held in November, 1953. Specifically, the respondent is charged with having (1) acted as campaign manager of the Liberal Party in Calbayog City; (2) appointed leaders of the Liberal Party in various districts, barrios and sitios in said city, issuing certificates of appointment duly signed by him as campaign manager; and (3) distributed typhoon relief goods at the polling place on election day, thereby creating a scandal therein.

The records of investigation submitted by the special investigator of the above charges show that the respondent was then and still is an. active member of the Liberal Party; that he had been in politics since voting age; that the Board of Directors of the Liberal Party of Calbayog City appointed him as campaign manager of the party in said city during the election held on November 10, 1953; that he accepted the said position of campaign manager; that he consented to the use of the facsimile of his signature to be stamped on the certificates of appointment of barrio leaders of the Liberal Party; and that he took a hand in. the distribution before election day, of relief goods intended for typhoon victims.

The law prohibits officers and employees in the civil service, whether classified or unclassified, permanent or temporary, except those holding elective positions, from engaging directly or indirectly in partisan political activity or take part in any election except to vote (Sec. 2, Art. XII, Constitution; Sec. 687, Revised Administrative Code).

I, therefore, find the respondent guilty of electioneering (partisan political activity).

In view of the foregoing, the respondent, Mr. Ignacio T. Cui, is hereby removed as Chief of the Fire Department of Calbayog City, effective upon receipt of notice hereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.