MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 151

EXONERATING MR. PEDRO ELIZALDE AS PROVINCIAL TREASURER OF CEBU.

In separate charges filed by three Congressmen from Cebu, the auditor of the province of Cebu, the division auditor and private parties, it is alleged that Mr. Pedro Elizalde committed a number of irregularities while provincial treasurer of Cebu, ranging from abuse of authority, immorality, nepotism, complicity in the commission of malversation by a former town treasurer, to neglect of duty and misuse of public funds and property. The charges were looked into by the Department of Finance and in his report the Secretary of Finance finds that at most the respondent deserves a reprimand with warning. As the extension or continuation of the service of Mr. Elizalde as an exception to the provisions of Republic Act No. 660, as amended, expired on April 17, 1955, and in consideration of his more than forty years’ service, the Secretary of Finance recommends that he be allowed to retire under said Act.

After going over the record of the case, I concur in the findings and recommendations of the Secretary of Finance. It is obvious, however, that if Mr. Elizalde is retired the reprimand and warning suggested will serve no useful purpose insofar as the same may be intended, as is evidently the case, to guide him in his future conduct and behavior as a public official (see case of former General Manager Eduardo Taylor of the Cebu Portland Cement Co., Administrative Order No. 113 dated April 16, 1955).

WHEREFORE, Mr. Pedro Elizalde is hereby exonerated of the instant charges against him and, as recommended by the Secretary of Finance, he is hereby considered retired under Republic Act No. 660, as amended, effective as of April 18, 1955.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARIANO YENKO, JR . Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1955). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-234]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.