MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 2251

AUTHORIZING THE DRUG ABUSE RESEARCH FOUNDATION, INC. (DARE) TO CONDUCT A FUND CAMPAIGN FOR A PERIOD OF TWO YEARS.

WHEREAS, the Drug Abuse Research Foundation, Inc. (DARE) is a non-stock, non-profit organization deeply involved in the preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects of the campaign against drug addiction and alcoholism;

WHEREAS, in pursuance of its lofty objectives, the DARE has established and continues to conduct the following programs:

(1) Maintenance of five (5) live-in centers for the rehabilitation of drug dependents, alcoholics and persons with behavioral problems;

(2) Residential schooling program (high school);

(3) Drug prevention lectures in schools;

(4) Job placements for living-out clients;

(5) Live-in training for physician-trainees of the Dangerous Drug Board;

(6) Parent’s therapy groups and meetings;

(7) Technical assistance to a Catholic organization in Thailand accredited for establishing a DARE-type of treatment program for heroine addicts; and

(8) Practicum services for students in the behavioral and social science studies;

WHEREAS, in the promotion of its objectives, the DARE has further committed itself to the following projects:

(1) Establishment of an Alcoholics-Anonymous type program to be called AA-Dare;

(2) Live-in training for teachers;

(3) A vocational project for residents;

(4) Cross-posting of staff with other agencies involved in drug addiction prevention and rehabilitation; and

(5) Construction of a permanent Therapeutic Community Center;

WHEREAS, the incalculable value and imperative necessity of the services rendered by the DARE to the community have been clearly demonstrated, and

WHEREAS, the DARE needs and no less deserves the continuing support of both the Government and the people to enable it to maintain and expand its program of public service especially at this time when Philippine society is being threatened by a growing drug menace.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Drug Abuse Research Foundation, Inc. (DARE) to conduct a fund campaign for a period of two years from the issuance of this proclamation and in connection therewith solicit and receive donations and contributions from all sources, whether public or private. I call upon all individuals, firms and entities to support the said fund campaign and give generously of their means and resources for its success.

All donations or contributions to the DARE shall be exempt from income and gift taxes, and the same shall further be deductible in full and shall not be included for purposes of computing the maximum amount deductible under Section 30, paragraph (h), of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia