MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1290

DECLARING SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 1, 1974, AS PULONG NG MGA BARANGAY DAY

WHEREAS, I have declared the period from August 23 to 31, 1974 as National Integrity Week;

WHEREAS, in proclaiming the National Integrity Week I stated:

“WHEREAS, the Constitution holds all public officials, employees and other persons performing duties and functions under the local or national government accountable to the people;

“WHEREAS, the Constitution likewise requires all national and local public officials and employees and other persons performing official functions to serve the people with the highest degree of responsibility, integrity, loyalty and efficiency;

“WHEREAS, the Constitution likewise prescribes certain essential duties and obligations as citizens of the Philippines;

“WHEREAS, my administration has always been guided by the foregoing constitutional mandates and has pursued efforts to develop the highest degree of responsibility, integrity, loyalty and efficiency among public officials and employees;

“WHEREAS, the economic, social and political stability of a country depends largely on the integrity and honesty of its public servants and the consciousness and willingness of the citizens to assume their duties and obligations as citizens of the Republic”;

WHEREAS, after having discussed their duties as citizens of the Philippines and the accountability of all public officials and employees to them, it is appropriate that a day be set for them to air their grievances, complaints, views, opinions or observations on the conduct of public officials and employees, both national and local, civilian and military.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby declare September 1, 1974 as Pulong Ng Mga Barangay Day.

The Commission on Elections shall have direct supervision and control of the Pulong Ng Mga Barangay. It shall issue the rules and regulations that may be necessary and prescribe the forms that may be required for the Pulong.

It shall be assisted by the Department of Local Governments and Community Development and the Department of Education and Culture.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 19th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia