MALACANANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1759

DECLARING 1979 AS LOCAL GOVERNMENT YEAR IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the Philippines has been chosen as the site and lost of one of the biggest conferences on local governments, the 24th Congress of the International Union of Local Authorities (IULA), a world-wide professional, non-political organization that seeks to promote the development of local governments throughout the world, which will be held in Manila on February, 1979;

WHEREAS, the Congress, which is expected to be attended by over three thousand delegates from sixty (60) members countries of local authorities, institutes of public administration, research institutions and corporate bodies involved with local governments and local government associations;

WHEREAS, the Congress is expected to focus world-wide attention to the vital role that local governments play in the solution of problems on local governments finances, social services, local administration in developing countries and more particularly promote in forging an international understanding characterized by peace, equality, and friendship among all men and nations;

WHEREAS, the national government under new social order in Calendar Year 1979 will continue with vigor and determination its increasing interest to improve the administrative and fiscal capabilities of local governments for increasing developmental responsibilities and as an effective institution in the implementation of priority national programs designated to improve the quality of life of the nation.

WHEREAS, there is always a continuing need for the Central Government to re-orient and give new direction to local governments towards the goals and objectives of the New Society;

WHEREAS, the specific institutionalization of the barangay governments as a new political based has been given priority importance whereby enormous development functions and responsibilities by the national government in order to improve the managerial competence of the barangay government as an institution and partner for countryside development; and

WHEREAS, these are developments in the Philippines which have meaningful significance to local governments.

NOW THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare 1979 as Local Government Year in the Philippines. I hereby enjoin every local elective officials, barangay officials and citizens to observe this year with fitting reflections, programs and activities on the significance of the occasion, particularly in all local government units.

LIKEWISE, I hereby direct the Department of Local Government and Community Development to coordinate with the different departments, bureaus, agencies of the national government and institutions, corporations and other organizations both public and private involved with local governments in the preparation, formulation and implementation of plans and programs and for the funding of these activities.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia