MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 2456

AMENDING PROCLAMATION NO. 2045-A, WHICH AMENDED PORTIONS OF PROCLAMATION NO. 2045 PROCLAIMING THE TERMINATION OF THE STATE OF MARTIAL LAW THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES.

WHEREAS, by virtue of Proclamation No. 2045-A the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus remains suspended in all places in the country with respect to:

“persons at present detained as well as others who may hereafter be similarly detained for all cases involving the crimes of insurrection, rebellion, subversion, conspiracy to commit sedition, inciting to sedition, and for all other crimes or offenses committed by them in furtherance or on the occasion thereof, or incident thereto, or in connection therewith, such as but not limited to offenses involving economic sabotage, illegal assemblies, illegal associations, tumults and other disturbances of public orders, unlawful use of means of publications and unlawful utterances, and alarms and scandals, or with respect to any person whose arrest or detention is, in the judgment of the President, required by public safety as a means to repel or quell the existing rebellion in the country;”

WHEREAS, there has been an escalation of violent incidents perpetrated by subversive terrorists and organizations, to include their satellite organizations, by way of armed actions such as raids, ambuscades, sabotage, depredations, assassination of government functionaries, duly constituted authorities, and innocent civilians; and burning and destruction of government buildings, infrastructures and properties as well as of the business and private sectors amounting to hundreds of millions of pesos and other terroristic acts, thereby disrupting the early recovery of the national economy;

WHEREAS, labor unrest and strikes are no longer confined to individual business firms but have followed a pattern whereby allied industrial sectors or whole geographical districts are crippled within the same period of time, thereby further slowing down early economic recovery;

WHEREAS, carefully evaluated intelligence assessments indicate that the Communist Party of the Philippines and its satellite organizations are the unseen hands behind these disruptive incidents, movements and activities;

WHEREAS, because of these recent events, ProclamationNo. 2045-A has become inadequate to meet the demands ofpublic safety and order;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the amendment of Proclamation No. 2045-A, as follows:

“The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus remains suspended in the two autonomous regions of Mindanao and in all other places with respect to persons at present detained as well as others who may hereafter be similarly detained for all cases involving the crimes of insurrection, rebellion, subversion, conspiracy or proposal to commit such crimes, inciting to insurrection or rebellion, sedition, conspiracy to commit sedition, inciting to sedition, illegal assemblies, illegal associations, direct assaults, resistance and disobedience to a person in authority or the agents of such person, alarms and scandals, tumults and other disturbances of public orders, unlawful use of means of publication and unlawful utterances, destructive arson, crimes involving destruction, unlawful picketing, unlawful strike, and economic sabotage, and for all other crimes or offenses committed by them in furtherance or on the occasion thereof, or incident thereto, or in connection therewith or with respect to any person whose arrest or detention is, in the judgment of the President, required by public safety as a means to repel or quell the existing rebellion in the country. As used herein, economic sabotage means any act or activity which undermines, weakens or renders into disrepute the economic system or viability of the country or tends to bring about such effects to include, but not necessarily limited to, the following offenses: trafficking, counterfeiting, blackmarketing or mass movement of local or foreign currency in violation of existing laws and regulations, price manipulation to the prejudice of the public especially in the sale of prime commodities in violation of price control laws, tax evasion, bank swindling, and violation of other labor laws and land reform laws and regulations.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 30th day of September, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office