MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1533

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM SEPTEMBER 10 TO 21, 1976, AND OF EVERY YEAR THEREAFTER, AS METROPOLITAN FILM FESTIVAL, CREATING AN EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE TO TAKE CHARGE OF ITS OBSERVANCE AND AUTHORIZING THE SAME TO CONDUCT FUND RAISING CAMPAIGN FOR THE PURPOSE.

WHEREAS, the cinema being a mass art and an effective tool of communications that influences the thoughts and changes the attitudes of people, should serve as a vehicle for moral regeneration, social development and cultural reawakening in the New Society;

WHEREAS, the movies should depict seriously and artistically our history, traditions, cultures, aspirations and struggles as a nation through the lives of both men of renown and the men in the street or on the farm;

WHEREAS, it is the commitment of the New Society to enrich Philippine culture, to reawaken the people to their historical heritage and traditional values, and to clarify the Filipino image, through the revival and refurbishment of native arts, among which is the Filipino cinema which should rediscover itself by upholding its inherent artistic and social responsibility; and

WHEREAS, in recognition of the value and importance of the local movie industry in the over-all developmental effort for the country, a fitting celebration to encourage quality film production both in substance and in form, as well as provide incentives to the performing artists and the technicians in the industry, is most opportune;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from September 10 to 21, 1976, and every year thereafter as “Metropolitan Film Festival”. I urge all citizens of the Metropolitan Manila as well as all its local officials and movie organizations to celebrate the festival appropriately to encourage Filipinos to appreciate Filipino cinema and make it form part of their cultural life.

In order to insure the successful celebration of the annual festival throughout the Metropolitan Manila an Executive Committee is hereby created to take charge of its observance, composed of the following:

To further insure of the successful celebration of this annual festival, the Executive Committee is authorized to engage in fund raising campaign among all sectors of society including the local governments concerned. Such local government may donate their share of amusement tax to film welfare groups such as the “Dr. Guillermo C. de Vega Memorial Mowelfund”. Films to be shown during the Festival must center on themes depicting Philippine culture, traditions and achievements and the best picture will be conferred with the “Dangal ng Bagong Lipunan” award.

All departments, bureaus and agencies of the government are hereby directed to give their full support and assistance to the said Committee to ensure the success of the Metropolitan Film Festival.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd . ) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia