MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1542

DECLARING THE PERIOD AUGUST 8, 1976 TO AUGUST 8, 1977 AS DIAMOND JUBILEE YEAR, COMMEMORATING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY

WHEREAS, on August 8, 1901, there was organized, pursuant to Act No. 175 of the Philippine Commission on July 18, 1901, an agency known as the Insular Police Force which became the Philippine Constabulary pursuant to Act No. 2711, otherwise known as the Revised Administrative Code of March 10, 1917;

WHEREAS, since its organization, the Philippine Constabulary has been primarily discharging police law-enforcement and public safety functions;

WHEREAS, during its entire existence, the officers and men of the Philippine Constabulary have been serving with distinction both in the field of law-enforcement and in combating violence and lawlessness, and in varied aspects of public service, there having been a time in the nation’s history when they performed the duties of teacher, sanitary inspector, midwife, doctor, forester, prosecutor of law offenders, judge, and other related activities;

WHEREAS, its organizational status has gone through changes as follows: the Philippine Constabulary was transferred to and formed part of the Regular Force of the Army of the Philippines and organized as the Constabulary Division of the Army but continued to discharge its duties as the national police to preserve peace and order, pursuant to Section 18 of Commonwealth Act No. 1, as implemented by executive Order No. 11, dated January 11, 1936; on October 26, 1936, all police forces of municipalities, chartered cities and other political subdivisions and all provincial guard organizations were constituted as State Police Force pursuant to Commonwealth Act No. 88, but the status and functions of the Constabulary Division of the Army was not affected; the State Police was abolished and the Philippine Constabulary was again organized as the National Police Force and considered a bureau of the government, pursuant to Commonwealth Act No. 343, as implemented by Executive Order No. 153, dated June 23, 1938, effective February 1, 1939, the Philippine Constabulary was placed under the supervision of the Secretary of the Interior, pursuant to Executive Order No. 182, dated June 30, 1939; in the exercise of his emergency powers under Commonwealth Act No. 671, the President placed the function of preserving peace and maintaining law and order, theretofore devolving upon the Philippine Constabulary, under the Chief of Staff, Philippine Army, who exercise said function through the Military Police Command, pursuant to Executive Order No. 51, dated June 7, 1945; the function of preserving peace and maintaining law and order was transferred to the Provost Marshal General of the Philippine Army and the Military Police Command, Philippine Army was placed under the general supervision and control of the Secretary of the Interior, pursuant to Executive Order No. 100, dated March 15, 1946; effective as of July 1, 1947, twelve thousand officers and men were withdrawn from the Military Police Command of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, transferred to the Department of the Interior and constituted as the National Police Force, designated as the Philippine Constabulary, and all functions of the Military Police Command, except those of military character, were thereafter exercised and assumed by the Philippine Constabulary, in connection with which Sections 832-840 and 848 of the Revised Administrative Code were declared in full force and effect, pursuant to Executive Order No. 94, dated October 4, 1947; the Philippine Constabulary has been placed under the administrative supervision of the Secretary of National Defense and under the operational control of the Commanding General, Armed Forces of the Philippines, pursuant to Executive Order No. 308, dated March 30, 1950 and Administrative Order No. 113, dated April 1, 1950, respectively; the Philippine Constabulary has been constituted as one of the four (4) major services of the Armed Forces of the Philippines but continued to discharge its duties as the National Police Force pursuant to Section 9 (b) of Executive Order No. 389, dated December 23, 1950;

WHEREAS, in time of peace and war, the Philippine Constabulary, along with the rest of the nation’s armed forces, has distinguished itself in terms of dedication, courage, bravery, heroism and love of country;

WHEREAS, the invaluable contribution of the Philippine Constabulary, to the growth, development and progress of all aspects of the life of the Filipino people deserves the recognition, gratitude and appreciation of the entire nation;

WHEREAS, upon the promulgation of Proclamation No. 1081 on September 21, 1972, the Philippine Constabulary, being a major service of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and at the same time the National Police Force, carried the major task of suppressing violence and wanton destruction of life and property and in the restoration of peace and order throughout the nation, among its many significant accomplishments being the collection of more than half a million loose and/or unauthorized type of firearms and millions of rounds of ammunition and the arrest, detention and prosecution of subversive and criminal elements; and, in the successful accomplishment of police integration;

WHEREAS, it is fitting and proper to inculcate into the minds of the officers and men of the Philippine Constabulary, as well as all the people, the pride in its wealth of traditions, noble deeds and achievements thru appropriate celebration;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by law, do hereby proclaim the period from August 8, 1976 to August 7, 1977 as the “Diamond Jubilee Year” to commemorate the organization of the Philippine Constabulary pursuant to Act No. 175, as amended.

I call upon all government entities and instrumentalities to participate in the celebration and invite private institutions and individuals to join in making the celebration fruitful.

I hereby further declare and proclaim August 8, 1976, as the Diamond Jubilee Day in commemoration of the organization of the Insular Police Force, later named the Philippine Constabulary.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd . ) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia