MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1953

AUTHORIZING THE PHILIPPINE TUBERCULOSIS SOCIETY, INC. TO CONDUCT A NATIONAL EDUCATIONAL AND FUND CAMPAIGN DURING THE PERIOD FROM JANUARY 2 TO DECEMBER 31, 1980.

WHEREAS, the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc. complements and supports the government’s National TB Control Program, aimed at controlling tuberculosis, one of the leading causes of death in the country;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc., in undertaking its prevention, treatment and health education activities, seeks to eliminate tuberculosis as a major obstacle to the physical, social and economic well-being of our people;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc. must expand its domiciliary and dispensary programs in order to bring the benefit of its services to more areas, and to a bigger number of people;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc. can achieve its humanitarian objectives only with the participation and involvement of the community; and

WHEREAS, the attainment of the humanitarian objectives of the Philippine Tuberculosis Society Inc. will redound as the health and welfare of every Filipino;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc. to conduct a national educational and fund campaign during the period from January 2 to December 11, 1980.

I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, regardless of race or creed, to support actively, and give generously of their time and resources to the anti-TB cause, so as to hasten the control of this debilitating disease, minimize human suffering among the afflicted, and promote national strength and prosperity through a healthy citizenry free from the dangers of the disease.

Furthermore, I call upon and authorize all government institutions and government corporations to fully support this fund drive by contributing generously from their funds. This is an exception to the provisions of LOI 828, No. 2(c).

I also authorize the Ministry of Education and Culture to support this campaign thru the voluntary contribution by school children of membership fees and donations.

It is hereby reiterated that all donations and contributions to the fund campaign and its various projects and activities shall be exempt from income, gift, amusement and all other taxes, and the same shall constitute allowable deductions in full from the income for purposes of computing the maximum amount deductible under Section 30, paragraph (h), of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia