MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 2041

ESTABLISHING AS NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT COMPANY RESERVATION FOR AGRICULTURAL PLANTATION PURPOSES THE PARCELS OF LAND OF THE PUBLIC DOMAIN SITUATED IN THE PROVINCE OF AGUSAN DEL SUR.

Upon recommendation of the Minister of Natural Resources and pursuant to the authority vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by law, do hereby withdraw from sale, settlement, exploration or exploitation and reserve for the use of the National Development Company for agricultural plantation and cultivation purposes such as oil palm, coffee, cacao, rubber, or other agricultural crops, subject to private rights, if any there be, and to future boundary survey the certain parcels of land of the public domain situated in the Province of Agusan del Sur, more particularly described as follows:

Technical Descriptions

PARCEL I

A parcel of land situated in the municipalities of La Paz, Sagunto, Waloe, and Halapitan, Province of Agusan del Sur.

Beginning from a point marked “1” as shown in Annex Plan I, identical to corner 16 or Parcel I of Timber License Agreement No. 51 of Sta. Ines-Melale Forest Products, Inc. with an approximate geographic position of 8º 14’24″N and 125º 44’57″E; thence following Adgaoan River downstream in a general Northeasterly direction with a straight direct distance of about 7,700 meters to corner 2, a point identical to corner 15 of Parcel I of T.L.A. 51 of Sta. Ines-Malale Forest Products Corp.; thence following the eastern boundary of Parcel I of T.L.A. 51 of Sta. Ines-Malale Forest Products Corp. in a general Southwesterly and Southeasterly direction with a straight direct distance of 6,425 meters to corner 3, a point identical to corner 14 of Parcel I of T.L.A. 51 of Sta. Ines-Melale Forest Products Corp.; thence due West, 4,100 meters to corner 4, a point identical to corner 13 of Parcel I of T.L.A. 51 of Sta. Ines-Melale Forest Products Corp.; thence due South, 250 meters to corner 5, a point identical to corner 2 of Parcel I T.L.A. 51 of Sta. Ines-Melale Forest Products Corp.; thence due West, 2,825 meters to corner 6, a point identical to corner II of Parcel I to T.L.A. 51 of Sta. Ines-Melale Forest Products Corp.; thence S63º W, 2,300 meters to corner 7, a point on the ground; thence due North, 2,200 meters to corner 8, a point of the junction of Kabambanon Creek and Linunanan River; thence, following Linunanan River downstream in a general Northeasterly direction with a straight direct distance of 2,300 meters to corner 1, a point of beginning, containing an approximate area of THREE THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED (3,700) hectares. All bearings and distance are approximate and subject to change based on the final boundary survey.

PARCEL II

A parcel of land situated in the Municipalities of La Paz, Halapitan, Langasian, and Sagunto, Province of Agusan del Sur.

Beginning from a point marked “1” as shown in Annex Plan II, which is at the north bank of Adgaoan River at the junction of Adgaoan River and Linunanan River with approximate geographical position 8º 14’26″N and 125º 44’58” E; thence following Adgaoan River upstream in a general Northwesterly direction with a straight direct distance of 2,425 meters to corner 2, a point at the junction of Adgaoan River and Cayawan River; thence, following Adgaoan River upstream on a general North, Northwesterly and Northeasterly direction with a straight direct distance of 3,750 meters to corner 3, a point on the north bank of Adgaoan River; thence N70º E, 4,080 meters to corner 4, a point on the south bank of Suba Creek; thence following Suba Creek in a general Northeasterly direction with a straight direct distance of 5,050 meters to corner 5, a point on the south bank of Suba Creek; thence due East 2,550 meters to corner 6, a point on the ground; thence S37º E, 2,660 meters to corner 7, a point on the north bank of Adgaoan River; thence following Adgaoan River upstream in a general Southwesterly and Southeasterly direction, with straight direct distance of 4,150 meters to corner 1, a point of beginning, containing an approximate area of FOUR THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED FIFTY (4,850) hectares. All bearings and distances are approximate and subject to change based on final boundary survey.

PARCEL III

A parcel of land situated in the Municipality of Basa, Libertad, and Tudela, Province of Agusan del Sur.

Beginning from a point marked “1” as shown in Annex Plan III, a point identical to corner 5 of Parcel III of CVC Lumber Industries, Inc. License Agreement Area, with an approximate geographic position of 08º 04’47″N and 126º 02’50″E; thence, following the western boundary of Parcel III of CVC Lumber Industries License Agreement Area in a general Northeasterly and Northwesterly direction with a straight direct distance of 4,700 meters to corner 2, a point on the south bank of Saugon Creek; thence following Saugon, Creek upstream in a general Northeasterly direction with a straight direct distance of 700 meters to corner 3, a point on the south bank of Saugon Creek; thence due South, 545 meters to corner 4, a point on the ground; thence S58º E, 800 meters to corner 5, a point on the ground; thence S37º W, 2,800 meters to corner 6, a point on the ground; thence S47º E, 1,350 meters to corner 7, a point on the ground; thence N35º E., 3,750 meters to corner 8, a point on the ground; thence due East, 800 meters to corner 9, a point on the ground; thence due North, 800 meters to corner 10, a point on the ground; thence due East, 1,950 meters to corner 11, a point on the ground; thence due North, 900 meters to corner 12, a point on the ground; thence due East, 750 meters to corner 13, a point on the eastern boundary of Parcel III, CVC Lumber Industries, Inc. License Agreement Area; thence following the eastern boundary of Parcel III, CVC Lumber Industries Inc. License Agreement Area, S27º F, 4,500 meters to corner 14, a point on the eastern boundary of Parcel III, CVC Lumber Industries Inc., License Agreement Area; thence due West, 1,250 meters to corner 15, a point on the ground; thence due South, 1,600 meters to corner 16, a point on the southern boundary of Parcel III of the CVC Lumber Industries Inc. License Agreement Area; thence following the southern boundary of Parcel III of the CVC Lumber Industries, Inc. in a general Southwesterly and Northwesterly direction with a straight direct distance of 7,450 meters to corner 1, a point of beginning, containing an area of approximately TWO THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED (2,700) hectares. All bearings and distances are approximate and subject to change based on final boundary survey.

PARCEL IV

A parcel of land located in the Municipality of Tudela and Cuevas. Province of Agusan del Sur.

Beginning from a point marked “1” as shown in Annex Plan III, a point identical to corner 2 of Parcel II of CVC Lumber Industries, Inc. License Agreement Area, with an approximate geographic position of 08º 01’27″N and 126º07’47″E; thence following the southern boundary of Parcel II of CVC Lumber Industries Inc. License Agreement Area in a general Southwesterly and Northwesterly direction with a straight direct distance of 2,500 meters to corner 2, a point on the ground identical to corner 3 of Parcel II of CVC Lumber Industries Inc. License Agreement Area; thence following the western boundary of Parcel II of CVC Lumber Industries, Inc. License Agreement Area in a direction N10º E, 2,200 meters to corner 3, a point on the ground at the western boundary of Parcel II of CVC Lumber Industries, Inc. License Agreement Area; thence due East 1,925 meters to corner 4, a point on the ground on the eastern boundary of Parcel II of CVC Lumber Industries Inc. License Agreement Area; thence following the eastern boundary of Parcel II of CVC Lumber Industries Inc. License Agreement Area in a general Southeasterly and Southwesterly direction with a straight direct distance of 2,600 meters to corner, a point of beginning, containing, an area of approximately SIX HUNDRED (600) hectares. All bearings and distances are approximate and subject to change based on final boundary survey.

The said parcels of land are hereby placed under the administration and control of the National Development Company, Provided, however, That the timber and other forest products therein shall remain under the administration and control of the Bureau of Forest Development.

The above-described parcels of land are hereby segregated from all existing licenses, permits, privileges and/or franchises granted to persons and entities over and for the use, exploitation and development thereof.

For this purpose, the Bureau of Forest Development, the Bureau of Lands and other proper government agencies are hereby enjoined from issuing licenses, permits, patents, leases or titles to existing applicants and/or other interested parties over the above described parcels of land.

All laws, proclamations, orders, instructions, rules or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 9th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia