MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 2462

AUTHORIZING THE GIRL SCOUTS OF THE PHILIPPINES TO CONDUCT A NATIONAL FUND CAMPAIGN FOR A PERIOD OF ONE YEAR.

WHEREAS, the Girl Scouts of the Philippines, in its noble task of preparing the girls of our country for their responsibilities in line with national and international scouting standards, inspires every generation with the highest ideals for good citizenship, character, conduct and attainment;

WHEREAS, the Girl Scouts, through their voluntary and active participation in community development as part of their service projects, have consistently shown for the past 45 years their significant role in nation-building; and

WHEREAS, the Girl Scout Movement needs funds to continue with its laudable objectives of molding the character of our young girls in preparation for their important function of rearing future citizens and leaders of our country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Girl Scouts of the Philippines to conduct a national fund campaign for a period of one year from the issuance of this proclamation.

I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, including government officials and employees, to cooperate, assist, and wholeheartedly support this fund campaign and give generously of their means to enable the Girl Scouts of the Philippines to carry on with its character-building and youth citizenship programs. I hereby authorize the exemption from all taxes, including the amusement tax, of all donations, contributions and collections from this campaign and the same shall constitute allowable deductions in full for income tax purposes of the donors.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia