MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 2384

DECLARING THE EXISTENCE OF A STATE OF PUBLIC CALAMITY IN THE PROVINCE OF ALBAY.

WHEREAS, widespread destruction to property and loss of lives have resulted from the recent volcanic eruption of Mount Mayon;

WHEREAS, a state of public calamity exists in the said Province arising from the effects of the volcanic eruption; and

WHEREAS, to prevent the excessive increase in the prices of essential commodities due to profiteering and hoarding by those who control the supply thereof and also to enable the government and civic, relief and welfare agencies to carry out their objectives effectively, it is imperative that a state of calamity be proclaimed in the said Province;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by existing laws, do hereby proclaim and certify that a state of public calamity exists in the Province of Albay. During the existence of such a calamity, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in said Province (1) to sell or offer for sale and foodstuffs, building and construction materials and other prime necessities in life at prices exceeding those fixed or may be fixed by the authorities concerned pursuant to existing laws, and regulations issued thereunder, and (2) to aggravate the crisis by refusing, for the purpose of profiteering, to sell at the legal price, or by hiding, concealing or hoarding such goods or commodities for the same purpose.

All government agencies are hereby directed to implement and execute rescue and relief operations in accordance with existing operational plans. The National Disaster Control Coordinating Council (NDCCC) shall undertake the coordination of rescue and relief operation in the areas affected utilizing for the purpose all available and necessary materials resources, equipment and manpower of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), those of other government agencies and those that can be generated from the private sector.

The government coordinating center in authorized to call upon all ministries, bureaus, agencies or instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, as well as the private sector, to give the necessary cooperation and assistance for the successful prosecution of this proclamation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia