MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1908

AUTHORIZING THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES MEDICAL FOUNDATION TO CONDUCT A NATIONAL EDUCATIONAL AND FUND CAMPAIGN DURING THE PERIOD FROM OCTOBER 1, 1979 TO SEPTEMBER 30, 1980.

WHEREAS, the UP Medical Foundation graduates physicians who are expected to be leaders in medical education, research and service;

WHEREAS, these graduates are expected to render high quality medical care to their countrymen in the Philippines;

WHEREAS, these expectations can only be achieved if high standard of medical service, teaching and research is maintained;

WHEREAS, in order to maintain such high standard, the physical structure, teaching equipment and facilities of the UP Medical Foundation must be continuously improved;

WHEREAS, the UP Medical Foundation recognizes the need to generate additional sources of financial support to meet with the objectives of high standard medical education, research and clinical service;

WHEREAS, in raising such additional funds in the pursuit of its goals and in the implementation of programs development and expansion, the Foundation pursues these activities in support of a national effort at self-reliance; and

WHEREAS, the goals of the Foundation to graduate leaders in medical education, research and clinical service will benefit future physicians in the country who will be the recipient of such education and, therefore, the health of the nation in general.

NOW, THEREFORE I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the UP Medical Foundation to conduct a national educational and fund campaign during the period from October 1, 1979 to September 31, 1980.

I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, regardless of race or creed, to support actively, and give generously of their time and resources to the cause of our future physicians and the health of the nation and in so doing promote the national strength and prosperity through a healthy citizenry.

FURTHERMORE, I call upon and authorize all government financing institutions and government corporations to fully support this fund drive by contributing generously from their funds. This is an exemption from the provisions of LOI 828, No. 2(c).

All donations and contributions to this fund campaign shall be exempt from income, gift, amusement and all other taxes, and the same shall constitute allowable deductions in full from the income of the donors, and shall not be included for purposes of computing the maximum amount deductible under Section 30, paragraph (h), of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen hundred and Seventy-Nine.

(SGD . )FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia