MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 2369

APPROVING THE UPDATED PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN FOR 1984-87

WHEREAS, the Philippine Development Plan for 1983-1987, upon endorsement by the NEDA Board and the Cabinet, has been approved and adopted by the Batasang Pambansa under Resolution No. 66, dated January 19, 1982, and its adoption was proclaimed by the President under Proclamation No. 2166, dated February 26, 1982;

WHEREAS, pursuant to such authority, the Prime Minister issued NEDA Memorandum Order No. 1-84, dated January 18, 1984, creating an Inter-Agency Cabinet Committee to update the Development Plan with the Prime Minister as Chairman, the NEDA Director-General as Vice-Chairman, and other Cabinet members including the Governor of the Central Bank, as members;

WHEREAS, the said Inter-Agency Cabinet Committee, with the assistance of a Technical Subcommittee composed of Deputy Ministers of the different ministries and officers next-in-rank to the heads of agencies represented in the said Cabinet Committee, has in response to changed circumstances and economic challenges accordingly prepared and endorsed the attached Updated Philippine Development Plan for 1984-1987 which embodies the basic goal, strategy and policy framework of sustaining economic growth, equitably distributing the fruits of development, and attaining total human development;

WHEREAS, the living conditions and welfare of our people particularly farmers, fishermen, wage earners, and other income groups need to be raised while sustaining past economic and social gains through the implementation of productivity and rehabilitation programs for corn, rice, sugar, coconut, aquaculture, export industries such as garments and electronics, and other agri-based, forestry, and mineral industries which will generate additional incomes, raise more foreign exchange, stabilize prices, and improve access to social services;

WHEREAS, the economic recovery program of normalizing access to international credit markets, economic stabilization, and structural adjustment will further enhance self-reliance and the attainment of national goals;

NOW, THEREFORE, I FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby approve the Updated Philippine Development Plan for 1984-1987.

The National Economic and Development Authority and the Office of the Budget and Management shall continue to coordinate and monitor the Plan’s implementation by the various government ministries, agencies and/or instrumentalities, and to provide the necessary budgetary support thereto.

The private sector is hereby enjoined to lend support to the Plan by aligning and coordinating its activities thereto, as far as may be practicable in the light of its objectives and operations.

The Prime Minister, as Vice-Chairman of the NEDA, shall continue to exercise the same authority granted under Proclamation No. 2166 with regard to the implementation of the Plan and its periodic assessment and updating by all concerned.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of August, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred Eighty-Four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia