Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

PROCLAMATION NO. 1543

DECLARING THE PERIOD MAY 16-22, 1976 AS BUDGET CONSCIOUSNESS WEEK

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the Government to promote budget consciousness among officials and employees in the government service to help achieve the development goals of the New Society;

WHEREAS, budget consciousness is very vital in the promotion of better budgetary system and practices through budgetary reforms and analyses of the various budget improvement programs and their relationships with the New Society’s objectives as well as in professionalizing its ranks to enhance efficiency and effectiveness in fiscal operations and improved public administration and services which are essential prerequisites to national and regional social progress, economic development and stability;

WHEREAS, it has become imperative to generate continuing interest and awareness among the citizenry and the private sector on the government budgetary activities and needs so as to bolster government financing support for vital public services;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Association for Government Budget Administration (PAGBA), Inc. is sponsoring a national convention-seminar and workshop on May 19, 1976, during which budget experts, administrators, fiscal officers and employees involved in budget administration from all departments, bureaus and offices, including the twelve regional offices, as well as government-owned or controlled corporations and local governments throughout the Philippines will explore all possible avenues for “Redirecting Budgetary Efforts Towards the Government Budget Improvement Program.”

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JACOBO C. CLAVE, Presidential Executive Assistant, by order of His Excellency, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare the period May 16-22, 1976, as Budget Consciousness Week.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE

By the President Executive Assistant: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia