MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1629

ESTABLISHING A DAYLIGHT SAVING TIME DURING THE PERIOD FROM MARCH 28 UP TO JUNE 7, 1977.

WHEREAS, Commonwealth Act No. 91 fixes the standard time and authorizes the President of the Philippines to establish by proclamation a daylight saving time within the periods from March to June and from November to January, all inclusive; and

WHEREAS, in order to conserve power and energy during summer when day-time is longer than night-time, it is necessary to take advantage of the daylight by advancing by one hour the standard time fixed under said Act;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Commonwealth Act No. 91, do hereby proclaim a daylight saving time effective twelve o’clock midnight, March 27, 1977, to continue up to twelve o’clock midnight, June 27, 1977, and direct that the standard time fixed under Commonwealth Act No. 91 be advanced by one hour.

During said period the daylight saving time herein established shall govern the movement of all common carriers. In all statutes, orders, rules and regulations relating to the time of performance of an act by any officer or department of the government of the Philippines, or relating to the time within which any right shall accrue or determine, or within which any act shall or shall not be performed by any person in the Philippines, it shall be understood that the time shall be the daylight saving time herein established.

The public in general is hereby enjoined to give effect to the purpose and intent of this Proclamation. For purposes of astronomy and meteorology, however, the mean astrological time at one hundred and twenty degrees east longitude, Greenwich Meridian, may be used as heretofore.

The Energy Conservation Movement of the Philippines shall monitor the results of daylight saving time and recommend to the President such other measures as may be appropriate to generate maximum conservation in power and energy consumption.

All agencies and instrumentalities of the government including government owned and controlled corporations shall assist the Energy Conservation Movement in assessing and monitoring the results of this program.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia