MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1886

DECLARING SEPTEMBER 8 OF EVERY YEAR AS NATIONAL LITERACY DAY

WHEREAS, the World Conference of Ministers of Education on the Eradication of Illiteracy under the auspices of the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) held in Teheran in 1965 recommended the observance of one day in the year as International Literacy Day, to afford the member-States of UNESCO and non-governmental organizations an opportunity to draw public attention to the scope and importance of the literacy campaign;

WHEREAS, since September 8, 1967 of every year in the Philippines has been observed by various organizations in the Philippines as International Literacy Day, in conformity with the spirit of the Teheran declaration; and

WHEREAS, the problem of functional illiteracy is still paramount in the Philippines owing to various factors militating against our campaign to achieve universal literacy;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare September 8 of every year as National Literacy Day in the Philippines, which shall be an occasion for reviewing the progress that has been made and deciding on further objectives for the gradual reduction and ultimate eradication of illiteracy as a factor militating against economic, social and cultural development.

I designate the Ministry of Education and Culture, and the UNESCO National Commission of the Philippines, to provide the organizational framework within which appropriate celebrations may be made and the objectives of the observance propagated. I hereby authorize the Minister of Education and Culture to call on all governmental agencies as well as non-governmental organizations to extend support and assistance in attaining the objectives of National Literacy Day.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia