MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1659

DECLARING AUGUST 21, 1977 AS WORLD LAW DAY

WHEREAS, the Philippines will be the site of the biggest meeting on law ever yet to be organized, the Eight Conference of the World Peace Through Law Center and its affiliates (the World Association of Judges, the World Association of Lawyers, and the World Association of Law Students), which will be held in Manila from August 21-26, 1977;

WHEREAS, the Conference, which is expected to be attended by over five thousand judges, lawyers, law professors, and law students from over 140 nations, is intended to serve as a forum for discussing and devising workable solutions to some of the most serious and urgent problems facing all mankind;

WHEREAS, the Conference is expected to draw worldwide attention to the vital role that law plays and can play in the solution of such problems, particularly in forging a new international order characterized by peace, social justice, equality and friendship among all men and nations;

WHEREAS, the first day of the Conference, August 21, 1977, will be celebrated all over the world as World Law Day with the theme: “Promotion and Protection of Human Rights” with Manila as the center of festivities and the site of special ceremonies; and

WHEREAS, it is a distinct honor for the Philippines to be chosen the principal site and focal point of these significant events and activities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the 21st day of August 1977 as World Law Day. I hereby enjoin every citizen observe the day with fitting reflections, appropriate programs and activities on the significance of the occasion, particularly in all government offices, schools and other institutions.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia