MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 2173

DECLARING THE EXISTENCE OF A PUBLIC CALAMITY IN THE PROVINCES OF SURIGAO DEL SUR, SURIGAO DEL NORTE, LEYTE, BOHOL, CEBU, AND SOUTHERN SAMAR.

WHEREAS, great damage and construction of life and property were brought about by recent typhoons in certain areas in Mindanao and Visayas;

WHEREAS, to prevent excessive increase in the prices of prime commodities due to profiteering and hoarding by those who control the supply thereof and to enable the government as well as civic, relief and welfare agencies to carry out their functions, it is necessary that a state of public calamity be proclaimed in areas thus far reported to have been severely affected;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim that a state of public calamity exists in the provinces of Surigao del Sur, Surigao del Norte, Leyte, Bohol, Cebu, and Southern Samar.

During the existence of the calamity, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in said provinces to sell or offer for sale any foodstuff, building and construction materials and other prime necessities of life at prices exceeding those fixed or which may be fixed by proper authorities and to aggravate the crisis by refusing, for the purpose of profiteering, to sell at the legal price, or by hiding, concealing or hoarding such foodstuff, building and construction materials and other prime commodities for the same purpose.

The Price Control Council, with the assistance of the Integrated National Police, shall enforce the provisions of Act 4164, particularly Section 3 thereof, in all affected areas. As such implementing agency, the Council is hereby empowered to order the seizure of any commodity, material or merchandise or prime necessity, sell them to the public at the price authorized by Act 4164 and R.A No. 6361, and reimburse to the owner of the same its legal price.

In addition the Ministry of Agriculture shall immediately distribute palay and corn seeds at the subsidized price or grant palay and corn seed loan wherever necessary in order to enable farmers in the afflicted areas to replant.

The National Food Authority shall issue rice to the calamity area when needed through the MSSD/PNRC under their existing scheme of payment.

The Ministry of Public Works and Highways shall undertake the interim repair/rehabilitation of all infrastructure damaged by typhoons.

The Ministry of Transportation and Communications and the Ministry of National Defense shall endeavor to bring fuel supplies and basic commodities either by air transportation or by other means to such places in the afflicted provinces as are threatened by a supply shortage of these items.

The Ministry of Education and Culture shall make provisions for the late closing of classes, and absences of students in the afflicted areas covered by this proclamation.

All government agencies concerned are hereby directed to implement and execute rescue, relief and rehabilitation work in accordance with existing operational plans and the directive and order I have issued in connection with calamities.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia