MALACAÑANG RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 146

DECLARING CALENDAR YEAR 1967 AS ECONOMIC CENSUS YEAR

WHEREAS, Commonwealth Act No. 591 authorizes the Bureau of the Census and Statistics to prepare for and undertake all censuses of population, agriculture, industry, and commerce and to conduct studies on social and economic conditions in the country;

WHEREAS, the last economic census was undertaken by the Bureau of the Census and Statistics in 1962;

WHEREAS, it is utmost urgency that another economic census be conducted in order to have a picture of the country’s current economic situation; and

WHEREAS, Congress has set aside the necessary appropriation for the preparation of the 1967 economic census;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim calendar year 1967 as economic census year for the preparation and systematic maintenance by all establishments engaged in such economic activities as logging; mining and quarrying; manufacturing; construction; utilities (electricity, gas, water and sanitary service); commerce; transportation, storage and communication; and services (government, professional, educational, medical and health, recreational, business and personal) of their records on such major statistical information as employment, receipts, payrolls, costs, and inventories as of 1967 which the Bureau of the Census and Statistics proposes to collect sometime in the early part of 1968.

I enjoin all heads of Departments of the Government and its agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations, as well as provincial, city and municipal officials to direct all bureaus and offices under them to make available, for purposes of the 1967 economic census information campaign the services of their personnel and the use of their facilities as may be needed by the Bureau of the Census and Statistics.

I likewise enjoin industrial, economic, trade and business entities or organizations in this country to give the Bureau of the Census and Statistics unqualified support and cooperation so that the success of this nation-wide undertaking may be ensured.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia