MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 2286

WHEREAS, one of the noble objectives of the Philippines Defenders of Bataan, Corregidor and other USAFFE Fronts (PDEBACOUF), as expressed in the preamble of its constitution, is to keep alive the memories of the wartime military services of its members and those who have died in the battle fronts, in the death march and in the concentration camps;

WHEREAS, the realization of this objectives calls for the construction, establishment and installation of war memorials, like markers in those places where important battles were fought, or where significant military operations had been conducted, and shrines in those war prison camps where thousands of Filipino soldiers had been concentrated, and where so many had survived and yet so many had also died; and

WHEREAS, the Organization is in need of funds to finance all these projects, as well as to carry on with its quality program of activities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Philippine Defenders of Bataan, Corregidor and other USAFFE FRONTS to conduct a national fund drive during the period from May 6, 1983 to May 6, 1984. I, therefore, call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines and all government, semi-government agencies and private concerns to assist whole-heartedly in this campaign and give their utmost support so that the Philippine Defenders of Bataan, Corregidor and other USAFFE Fronts may be assured of adequate funds with which to carry on its projects. I authorize all government officials, national, provincial, city and municipal, to accept, for the Defenders of Bataan and Corregidor fund-raising responsibilities and urge them to give actual support and leadership in their respective communities.

All donations and contributions to the fund campaign shall be exempt from income, gift, amusement and all other taxes, and the same shall constitute allowable deductions in full from the income of the donor for purpose of computing the maximum amount deductible under Section 10, paragraph (b), of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia