MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 2466

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM DECEMBER 1 TO 6, 1985, AS “ACTUARIAL WEEK”.

WHEREAS, actuary as a profession has not gained much attention in the Philippines, but the limited number of practitioners have contributed much to the development of the insurance industry in particular and the Philippine economy in general;

WHEREAS, the Actuarial Society of the Philippines, Inc., a professional organization consisting of actuaries and other professionals working to become actuaries, will be the host of the 3rd East Asian Actuarial Conference to be held December 1-3, 1985, in Manila with the theme: “Dynamic Actuarial Responses to Change;”

WHEREAS, the conference shall culminate with the 26th annual convention of the Society which will focus on crucial issues affecting the profession;

WHEREAS, the conference, to be attended by actuaries from the Philippines, the Asia-Pacific Region and some advanced countries, will help promote the efficient exchange of information on actuarial involvements in management, marketing and supervision, in the end fostering cooperation in undertaking and resolving actuarial related problems and other issues of importance to the insurance industry; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to invite public attention to these events, as well as to the profession, that it may continue to grow and be firmly established as an important sector of the business community.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from December 1 to 6, 1985, as “Actuarial Week” under the auspices of the Actuarial Society of the Philippines, Inc.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia