MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1366-A

RESETTING THE DATE OF THE NATIONAL REFERENDUM FROM JANUARY 30, 1975 TO FEBRUARY 27, 1975

WHEREAS, the Commission on Elections in its Resolution No. 1215, dated January 12, 1975, has recommended the resetting of the date of the national referendum from January 30 to February 27, 1975 for the following reasons:

1) To give the people ample opportunity to discuss and debate the questions and the issues involved;

2) To give the Commission on Elections sufficient time to prepare and print materials explaining the questions and the issues, translate the same into the major dialects and distribute them to the barangays (citizens assemblies) early enough to afford the members thereof sufficient opportunity to read and study the same, to enable them to cast their votes intelligently and with full understanding of the issues;

3) The questions to be submitted in the referendum involve wide-ranging subjects requiring a longer period of public debate and discussion;

4) A new registration of barangay members in the cities of Manila, Quezon and Caloocan was ordered by the Commission on Elections under its Resolution No. 1214, dated January 11, 1975, a process which requires an extension of time to complete;

5) There are other pre-referendum acts needed to be performed by the Commission on Elections which require longer period;

WHEREAS, I find the reasons adduced by the Commission on Elections in its recommendation to be valid and well taken;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby reset the date of the holding of the national referendum from January 30, 1975 to February 27, 1975.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) ROBERTO V. REYES Deputy Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia