PROCLAMATION NO. 115-A

ABOLISHING SAFETY AND ACCIDENT PREVENTION WEEK AND DECLARING THE YEAR NINETEEN HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SEVEN AND EVERY YEAR THEREAFTER AS SAFETY AND PREVENTION YEAR

WHEREAS , there is indisputable evidence of a considerable rise in accident occurrence every year not only in industrial, commercial and agricultural enterprises, but especially on the highways, in schools and even in our homes, most of which are unrecorded;

WHEREAS , these accidents not only cause heavy financial losses and consequent economic dislocation among those affected and to our country at large, but also immeasurable human suffering; and

WHEREAS , there is now, more than ever as a part of our national development, an impelling and constant need for propagating safety consciousness among our people everyday of the year as a positive preventive approach to a problem that can be solved by more caution, vigilance, sobriety, exercise of common sense and respect for the law.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS , President of the Philippines, proclaim the year nineteen hundred and sixty-seven and every year thereafter, as SAFETY AND ACCIDENT PREVENTION YEAR, each month of the year to be devoted to a particular aspect of safety and accident prevention in various fields as follows:

I call upon all segments of society, including all industrial, commercial, and agricultural sectors; public and private schools; government agencies; labor management and civic organizations; to give full support, undertake maximum participation and initiative to make every Year as above-described meaningful and productive of desired results.

The Department of Labor shall organize and coordinate all activities in connection with this Proclamation. The Secretary of Labor is further empowered to make adjustments or changes in the month-to-month schedule of subject matter and other related aspects other than as described above for greater effectiveness and a more purposive Safety and Accident Prevention Year.

Proclamation No. 359, dated October 13, 1956, and Proclamation No. 32, dated May 28, 1954, are hereby revoked.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Sixty-Six.

President of the Philippines

By the President:

Executive Secretary

Source: www.cdasia.com