MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1974

AUTHORIZING THE ZARZUELA FOUNDATION OF THE PHILIPPINES, INC. TO CONDUCT A NATIONWIDE FUND CAMPAIGN DURING THE PERIOD FROM APRIL 1, 1980 TO MARCH 31, 1981.

WHEREAS, the Zarzuela Foundation of the Philippines, Inc. is a cultural organization established by a group of civic-spirited citizens and outstanding businessmen committed to the revival, formation, propagation and presentation of the most cherished forms of entertainment among the Filipinos in the Spanish period and is now a distinct feature of Filipino culture;

WHEREAS, the Foundation has taken steps towards pursuing the zarzuela revival movement in the country through successful production in line with the administration’s cultural program;

WHEREAS, the Foundation, in the pursuit of its cultural and production program, seeks to be instrumental in realizing the objectives of the “pagkakaisa” (Unity) campaign of the administration, by reaching out to and spreading the message of national unity amongst Filipinos abroad, specifically in the United States and Canada;

WHEREAS, the Foundation in pursuit of its cultural program, and jointly with the Ministries of Tourism and Foreign Affairs, has laid the groundwork for the zarzuela presentations in the United States, Canada, Mexico, key cities of ASEAN, Peking and Moscow; and

WHEREAS, to effectively carry out its noble objectives and successfully implement its cultural presentations abroad and locally, the Foundation needs the financial and moral support of the public;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Zarzuela Foundation of the Philippines, Inc. to conduct a fund campaign during the period from April 1, 1980 to March 31, 1981. I call upon all citizens and residents of the country, irrespective of nationality, race or creed, to assist in the endeavor by giving generously of their means and to actively support the campaign. I further call upon all government agencies, including the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Tourism, Trade, Public Information and the National Media Production Center, to assist the Foundation in its laudable objectives.

It is hereby reiterated that all donations or contributions made by the private entities or persons to the Foundation’s Fund Campaign shall be exempt from income and gift taxes, and the same shall constitute allowable deductions in full from the income of the donors and contributors for income tax purposes.

I also call upon and authorize all government financing institutions, government corporations and other government agencies to donate generously from their funds to the Foundation, in consideration of the fact that the zarzuela performances abroad are a major project of the Ministry of Tourism. Such donations shall be considered exceptions to the provisions of Letters of Instructions Nos. 805 and 828.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia