MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 2044

DECLARING THE EXISTENCE OF A PUBLIC CALAMITY IN CERTAIN PROVINCES AND CITIES OF MINDANAO.

WHEREAS, continuous heavy and torrential rains and overflowing rivers and streams have resulted in the inundation of large portions of Mindanao causing loss of lives, widespread destruction of public and private property, loss of homes to a great number of families, and posing imminent danger to the health of the people in the areas affected;

WHEREAS, because of the havoc caused by this unusual natural phenomenon, a state of public calamity undoubtedly exists; and

WHEREAS, to prevent excessive increase in the prices of prime commodities due to profiteering and hoarding by those who control the supply thereof, and to enable the government, as well as civic, relief and welfare agencies to carry out their functions, it is necessary that a state of public calamity be proclaimed in the aforesaid areas.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim that a state of public calamity exists in the provinces of Agusan del Norte, Agusan del Sur, Surigao del Norte, Surigao del Sur, Misamis Oriental and Davao del Norte and in the Cities of Butuan, Surigao and Gingoog.

During the existence of the calamity it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in said provinces and cities to sell or offer for sale any foodstuff, building and construction materials and other prime necessities of life at prices exceeding those fixed or may be fixed by proper authorities, and the aggravate the crisis by refusing, for the purpose of profiteering, to sell at the legal price, or by hiding, concealing or hoarding such foodstuff, building and construction materials and other prime commodities for the same purpose.

All government agencies concerned are hereby directed to implement and execute rescue, relief and rehabilitation work in accordance with existing operational plans and the directive and orders I have issued in connection with calamities.

The Price Control Council, with the assistance of the Integrated National Police, shall enforce the provisions of Act 4164, particularly Section 3 thereof, in all affected areas. As such implementing agency, the Council is hereby empowered to order the seizure of any commodity, material of merchandise or prime necessity, sell to the public at the price authorized by Act No. 4164 and Republic Act No. 6361, and reimburse to the owner of the same its legal price.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia