MALACAÑANG MANILA

GENERAL ORDERS NO. 6

June 21, 1939

COMPOSITION OF THE CENTRAL GENERAL STAFF OF THE PHILIPPINE ARMY

1. Under authority contained in section 23 of the National Defense Act, the Central General Staff of the Philippine Army shall, hereafter, comprise the Chief of Staff, the Deputy Chief, of Staff, five Assistant Chiefs of Staff, the Secretary to the General Staff, and such other officers of the Army as may from time to time be recommended by the Chief of Staff for service on the Central General Staff and approved by the President. All officers in Army Headquarters now serving on or with the Central General Staff or performing duties that are of General Staff nature, are designated as members of the Central General Staff Corps. Relief from and assignment to the Central General Staff will be accomplished upon recommendation of the Chief of Staff, when approved by the President.

2. The Central General Staff, except for the Chief of Staff, the Deputy Chief of Staff and the Secretary to the General Staff, shall be organized into five divisions, each under the direction of an Assistant Chief of Staff. To the .first division shall be assigned functions and duties applying to Strategic. War Plans and Reserve Unit Employment; to the second division, Operations, Training and Intelligence; to the third division, Supply and Industrial War Plans; to the fourth division, Personnel; and to the fifth, Budget.

3. Upon receipt of this Order, the Chief of Staff shall prepare a list of all officers now performing General Staff duties in Army Headquarters, and of such additional officers as may be recommended by him for assignment to the Central General Staff under the provisions of this Order. This list, together with a statement of the duties of each individual named thereon will be submitted for the approval of the President.

4. This Order shall take effect immediately.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). Messages of the President (Vol. 5, Prt. 1) . Manila: Bureau of Printing