MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 182

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE AND AGRARIAN REFORMS

WHEREAS, there is a pressing need to attend to the problems and demand of small farmers belonging to the Federated Movement for Social Justice and Reforms (FMSJR) from all over the country and provide solutions therefor in the most expeditious and economical manner;

WHEREAS, to the various problems and demands of the said small farmers there are existing Government agencies that can attend and provide adequate solutions;

AND, WHEREAS, these Government agencies should now be coordinated in order that their respective functions can he made to better serve the needs and solve the problems of the said small farmers without delay;

NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a body to be known as the Presidential Coordinating Committee for Social Justice and Agrarian Reforms composed of the following: the Chairman of the National Land Reform Council as Chairman; the Undersecretaries of Justice, Agriculture and Natural Resources, Public Works and Communications, and of the Presidential Agency for Reforms on Government Operations, the Dean of the U.P. College of Agriculture, the Commissioner of the Small Farmers’ Commission, the President of the Philippine Press Institute, or their duly authorized representatives, and three representatives of the Federated Movement for Social Justice and Reforms, as members. litigants, whose cases, in a number of instances, are pending before him, and who, unless respondent is suspended, may not feel free to testify”. Finally, the Supreme Court observed that “some of the charges against respondent had to do with the close personal and extra-official relations “between him and a former court stenographer under him, one Jose A. Pagunsan, in whose possession, notwithstanding his separation from the service since September 30. 1966, certain records of cases in respondent’s court have been allegedly found, thereby endangering the security integrity of the same.”

In the light of these promises, the Supreme Court issued a per curiam resolution, dated October 20, 1969, unanimously recommedning to the President of the Philippines the immediate preventive suspension of respondent Judge.

WHEREFORE, as recommended by the Supreme Court, to pursuant to the provisions of Section 67 of the Judiciary Actof 1948 as amended, the Honorable TITO V. TIZON, District Judge of the Court of First Instance of Bataan, is hereby SUSPENDED FROM OFFICE effective upon his receipt of a copy of this order, pending investigation of the charges against him.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ERNESTO M. MACEDA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 199]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.