MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 384

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS

WHEREAS, rural development is essential in achieving social, economic and political stability for our country;

WHEREAS, there is a continuing need to improve the standard of living of the low income families in the rural areas through equitable distribution of income and wealth;

WHEREAS, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank) has indicated its willingness to provide technical and financial assistance to rural development projects in the country; and

WHEREAS, there is a need for a body that shall coordinate all rural development efforts to achieve maximum results;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Coordinating Committee for Rural Infrastructure Projects which shall take charge of the identification and formulation of specific projects for submission to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development early next year. The membership of the Coordinating Committee shall be as follows:

The Committee is hereby given the responsibility of determining projects that would be submitted to the bank for technical and financial assistance.

The Committee is empowered to organize technical study teams to be composed of representatives from the various agencies herein enumerated and may call on any office or agency of the government to accomplish its tasks.

The Coordinating Committee and the technical study teams shall accomplish this task following the requirements set forth by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development in effecting loan approval, unless extended or sooner terminated by the National Economic and Development Authority.

The Deputy Director General for Programs and Projects of the National Economic and Development Authority is hereby authorized to change the composition of the Coordinating Committee when the exigencies of the service demands.

The Committee as well as the members of the Technical Study Teams are hereby authorized to get reimbursement of actual expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their duties under this project, not to exceed P300 per month upon the discretion of the Deputy Director General for Programs and Projects, National Economic and Development Authority.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1976). [Administrative Order Nos. : 349 – 438]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.