MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 184

CREATING THE COUNTERPART STAFF REQUIRED FOR THE EXECUTION OF THE ADB-SPONSORED REGIONS TRANSPORT SURVEY

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Counterpart Staff to the consulting firm that will be designated by the Asian Development Bank to undertake the Regional Transport Survey, composed of the following:

The functions of this Counterpart Staff are as follows:

1. To assist and coordinate the activities of the consulting firm in order to have an expeditious implementation of the Regional Transport Survey;

2. To assist the consulting firm in obtaining all available economic, traffic and technical data in terms of trade and commerce, travel and tourism, and general economic growth, including information on transport costs and revenues and on the organization, operations and accounting systems of the administrative agencies responsible for transport administration;

3. To provide liaison among the appropriate organizations and government agencies and offices concerned with or affected by the project;

4. To provide the consulting firm the results of and the recommendations contained in the reports on the Philippine Transport Survey;

5. To provide such facilities and administrative support and services as may from time to time be required by the foreign consultants, to the extent defined in the agreed Participation Agreement between the Participating Governments and the Asian Development Bank.

The Chairman of the Counterpart Staff is her empowered:

1. To call upon all offices and meet with all persons who may be affected by the work of the Regional Transport Group;

2. To require from the various government departments, bureaus and offices, as well as government-owned or controlled corporations, such administrative support and services as may be required, by the Regional Transport Group, and

3. To do everything necessary and expedient for the completion of the Regional transport Survey in accordance with the agreed schedule of activities.

The Chairman of the Counterpart Staff shall be responsible to the Deputy Director General (Operations), Presidential Economic Staff, Manila, for the proper functioning of his Counterpart Staff, and shall refer to the same for any matter requiring action of higher authorities.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ERNESTO M. MACEDA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 199]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.