MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 132

CREATING THE INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE ON THE ADMINISTRATION OF AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES AGREEMENTS

WHEREAS, in the administration of agricultural commodities agreements with the United States of America, the Philippine Government regularly encounters problems involving both the different government agencies and the private sector;

WHEREAS, there is a need for a specific Committee to coordinate and consult with government agencies the private sector to ensure that the policies and practices adopted will facilitate the implementation of agricultural commodities agreements;

WHEREAS, there is likewise a need for an appropriate Committee to remedy the problems in policies and practices and to take specific measures to comply with the provisions of agricultural commodities agreements;

NOW, THERFORE, I, Ferdinand E, Marcos, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Inter-Agency Committee on the Administration of Agricultural Commodities Agreements which shall serve as the government body responsible for attending to all metters pertaining to agricultural commodities agreements in consultation with other government agencies and the private business sectors concerned, and recommending to the President such other policies affecting current and future agricultural commodities agreements.

The Inter-Agency Committee on the Administration of Agricultural Commodities Agreements shall be composed of a Chairman from the National Economic Council, and a representative each from the Central Bank of the Philippines, the Development Bank of the Philippines, the Department of Foreign Affairs, the Board of Industries, the Presidential Economic Staff, and such other offices which the Committee may from time to time require, to be designated by the respective office heads,

The Inter-Agency Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any officer or employee of any department, bureau or agency of the Government as may be needed to assist the Inter-Agency Committee in the proper discharge of its functions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of July, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 199]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.