MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 82

REMOVING MR. DANIEL O. OSUMO FROM OFFICE AS MUNICIPAL JUDGE OF KIBAWE, BUKIDNON

This is an administrative proceeding against Mr. Daniel O. Osumo, Municipal Judge of Kibawe, Bukidnon, based on a report of the Provincial Fiscal of Bukidnon regarding Mr. Osumo’s continued absence from office since August, 1966.

Conducting an investigation as directed by the Department of Justice, District Judge Abundio Z. Arrieta found that the last authorized leave of Mr. Osumo was from August 8 to 28, 1966, as shown by the records of the Court of First Instance; that, from September 1, 1966 his place had been taken by a substitute; that according to his clerk and as corroborated by the Municipal Treasurer, he had not reported for duty for several months; and that, according to his clerk, he had left no address at which he could be contacted, as a result of which his whereabouts are unknown. In view thereof, the investigating Judge recommends that Mr. Osumo “be immediately separated from the service for conduct showing not only lack of respect for his superiors but also willful neglect and abandonment of the duties of his august position.”

The investigation thus shows that Mr. Osumo has abandoned his office, having absented himself for a considerable length of time without leave or notice to justify such absence. Not only does his conduct betray his utter disregard of the responsibilities of a public office indicating thereby his unfitness for his judicial position, but the best interest of the administration of justice also requires that he be speedily replaced by one capable of attending adequately to the duties of such office.

Wherefore and as recommended by the Acting Secretary of Justice, Mr. Daniel O. Osumo is hereby removed from office as municipal judge of Kibawe, Bukidnon, effective upon receipt of a copy of this order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 199]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.