MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 383

CREATING A COORDINATING GROUP FOR THE EFFICIENT IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NUCLEAR POWER PROJECT

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government is undertaking a nuclear power project, the biggest single infrastructure project thus far, with the National Power Corporation as the implementing agency;

WHEREAS, the project is of such complexity that will involve actions and decisions of a large number of other government agencies ranging from revisions of existing treaties to release of imported equipment and supplies; and

WHEREAS, a delay in the implementation of the project will cost an estimated P2.5 million per day;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Coordinating Group to assist the National Power Corporation in securing timely actions and decisions of the government agencies concerned to avoid delays, through proper anticipation of, and appropriate planning for, said actions and decisions.

This Coordinating Group shall be composed of senior officials, who can take the needed actions and trigger the required decisions, from the following government agencies:

Finance Sub-group:

Legal Sub-group:

Member

Technological Sub-group:

Heads of the above agencies are hereby requested to designate their representatives and alternate representatives, and instruct them to attend the organizational meeting at the Development Management Staff, Executive Office Building, San Miguel Annex, Malacañang, Manila, at 9 : 30 a.m. of March 9, 1976.

All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the government are hereby enjoined to cooperate with and assist the Coordinating Group in the performance of its assigned tasks, to ensure the successful discharge of the Group’s functions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1976). [Administrative Order Nos. : 349 – 438]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.