MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 216

REDEFINING THE FUNCTIONS AND ADMINISTRATIVE STATUS OF THE INFRASTRUCTURE OPERATIONS CENTER CREATED UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 113, SERIES OF 1968

The Infrastructure Operations Center (IOC) created under Administrative Order No. 113, series of 1968, as amended, shall, in addition to serving as the operations staff for the Executive Committee for Infrastructure Programs (ECIP), service other government agencies under the Office of the President involved in infrastructure program implementation and coordination like the Presidential Economic Staff and the Philippine Transport Survey Group, on matters pertinent to the formulation and implementation of national infrastructure programs and projects.

As the staff arm of the ECIP, the IOC shall be accountable operationally to the ECIP. However, as an agency created by and belonging to the Office of the President, the IOC shall be directly under the administrative control of the Office of the President and all administrative actions required for its operations and maintenance as would normally require authorization by a department head such as appointments, assignments or details to IOC, designation of key officials, and special budget authorizations, shall be subject to the approval of the Office of the President.

The IOC shall, in addition to the personnel designated under Administrative Order No. 113, series of 1968, have such personnel as may be assigned or detailed thereto from the various departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the government and such other personnel appointed therein as may be needed for the performance of its functions. All positions in the Center are hereby declared to be highly technical and/or primarily confidential in nature.

The Chief Operations Office designated under Administrative Order No. 113, is hereby redesignated as Executive Director, IOC. The Executive Director shall be responsible to the ECIP for the operations of the IOC and to the Office of the President for its administration.

Administrative Order No. 113, series of 1968, as amended, is hereby amended accordingly.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Administrative Order Nos. : 200 – 263]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.