MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 266

SUSPENDING MR. ANGEL MATONDO JR. FROM OFFICE AS ASSISTANT PROVINCIAL FISCAL OF DAVAO DEL NORTE

This is an administrative case filed by Mr. Benjamin Cendaña, Regional Manager of the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS) of Davao, against Assistant Provincial Fiscal Angel Matondo Jr. of Davao del Norte for conduct unbecoming a public officer. The case was formally investigated by a special prosecutor of the Department of Justice.

The following facts appear duly established:

In the evening of July 10, 1964, the GSIS Davao Branch held a formal affair with “Pista sa Nayon” motif at the PTA auditorium. The affair was intended solely for GSIS officials and employees and members of their families as well as special guests who had been issued invitations and tickets therefor.

About 10:30 of that evening, while the affair was going on, respondent who was drunk at the time and accompanied by a group of men who were likewise drunk, accosted the GSIS security guard then posted at the auditorium entrance and tried to force his way inside. Despite explanations given to respondent by GSIS officials that only guests with tickets were allowed to enter the auditorium, respondent insisted on going through by arguing loudly and angrily that he was a fiscal and demanded that he be allowed to enter even without a ticket. He challenged the guard and a GSIS employee, who intervened, to a fight. The unbecoming conduct of the respondent attracted many guests and when respondent succeeded in forcing himself in together with his drunk companions an atmosphere of fear and apprehension prevailed causing many people in the auditorium to leave untimely. Respondent also went in and out of the auditorium challenging everyone to fight him.

I find respondent guilty as charged.

Wherefore, and as recommended by the Secretary of Justice, Mr. Angel Matondo Jr. is hereby suspended from office as Assistant Provincial Fiscal of Davao del Norte for three (3) months without pay, effective upon receipt of a copy of this order, with a warning that repetition of similar acts will be dealt with more severely.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Administrative Order Nos. : 264 – 316 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.