MALACAÑANG RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 350

CREATING AMNESTY COMMISSIONS

Pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 124 dated February 2, 1937, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS in my capacity as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1104, dated January 17, 1973, do hereby create three (3) Amnesty Commissions with the following composition and territorial jurisdiction:

FIRST COMMISSION – for Luzon and Palawan, all provinces cities and island traditionally belonging to the said Luzon and Palawan:

The Judge Advocate General, AFP – Chairman. Two Judges of Courts of First Instance to be designated by the Secretary of Justice – Members:

SECOND COMMISION – for the Visayas, all islands traditionally comprising the said group, all provinces and cities within the said group of islands.

The Commander, Third Philippines Constabulary Zone – Chairman. Two (2) Judges of the Courts of First Instance to be designated by the Secretary of Justice – Members.

THIRD COMMISSION – for the islands of Mindanao, Sulu Archipelago, all islands traditionally belonging to the said group, all provinces and cities situated therein:

The commander, Fourth Philippine Constabulary Zone – Chariman. Two (2) Judges of the Courts of First Instance to be designated by the Secretary of Justice – Members.

The Amnesty Commissions herein created shall examine the facts and circumstances surrounding each case and may conduct summary hearings as may be necessary. The decision or resolution on any given case need not state the facts in detail but merely and briefly the grounds upon which it is based. Cases already on appeal may be passed upon by the Amnesty Commission. Any reasonable doubt as to whether a given case falls within the proclamation shall be resolved in favor of the persons applying for amnesty.

Should the position of Chairman become vacant by reason of death, incapacity, resignation or separation, the Secretary of National Defense shall designate as Chairman the succeeding Zone Commander or Judge Advocate General appointed.

Vacancies in the membership of the Commission held by the Judges of the Courts of First Instance shall be filled by the Judge of Court of First Instance designated by the Secretary of Justice.

The different Commissions herein created shall begin to function within seven days from the promulgation of this Order.

The Armed Forces of the Philippines shall make available such stenographers, employees, equipment and such other support as may be necessary.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1973 – 1979). [Administrative Order Nos. : 349 – 438]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.