MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 20

DETAILING PUBLIC INFORMATION OFFICERS OF GOVERNMENT OFFICES AND AGENCIES WITH CENTRAL LUZON DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

WHEREAS, Central Luzon Development Program was launched two months ago or on June 1, 1966, in order not only to counteract the resurgence of dissident activities but to bring about the improvement of the social and economic life of the people in Central Luzon through a balanced development program for the region;

WHEREAS, the dissemination of information on this program of government and the positive measures to implement it have been deficient due to the lack of coordination and liaison among the various information offices of the government and the lack of an effective organization to attend to this phase of the program; and

WHEREAS, there is no doubt dissemination of information on the various measures is necessary in order to neutralize the propaganda being waged by the Huks and other hostile elements, whose obvious purpose is to undermine the efforts of the government in order to serve better their own selfish ends;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the detail of the public information officers or such other officers involved in information dissemination of the following government offices and agencies for at least a three-month tour of duty with Central Luzon Development Program:

1. Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources and the different bureaus under it involved in the rural development program;

2. Department of Health, and the bureaus or offices under it involved in the rural development program;

3. Department of Public Works and Communications;

4. Agricultural Productivity Commission;

5. Agricultural Credit Administration

6. Presidential Arm on Community Development;

7. National Cottage Industries Development Authority

8. Land Authority

9. Land Bank;

10. Irrigation Service Unit;

11. National Irrigation Administration

12. Rice and Corn Administration;

13. Social Welfare Administration;

14. Social Security System;.

15. Central Bank, particularly the Rural Banks Department;

16. Rice Productivity Council, and

17. All other agencies of the government which may be called upon to participate in Operations Central Luzon.

These offices or such officers of these offices as may be chosen by the Press Secretary for this particular task shall assist in the dissemination of information on the programs and activities of Central Luzon Development Program.

In the performance of this additional duty, these offices or officers shall be under the supervision and direction of the Press Secretary or any officer who may be designated by him.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 199]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.