MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 449

ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR DRAINAGE (NCCD) TO COORDINATE AND INTEGRATE PLANS, DESIGNS, AND PROGRAMS OF INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES WITH RESPECT TO FLOOD CONTROL, DRAINAGE AND RELATED WORKS

WHEREAS, the damages to infrastructure projects wrought by typhoons and calamities accentuate the need for an administrative committee to coordinate and integrate plans, designs and programs of the different infrastructure agencies and other organizations concerned with respect to flood control and drainage requirements:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a National Coordinating Committee for Drainage (NCCD) to be composed of the following:

The NCCD shall coordinate and integrate plans, designs, and programs of infrastructure facilities requiring flood control, drainage and related works. The NCCD shall, likewise consider projects of the private sector (e.g., Housing and utility projects) insofar as drainage is concerned to require the private developers concerned to conform to the appropriate design standards and overall drainage plan for the area established by MPW.

The NCCD shall recommend to NWRC the inclusion of flood control storage in reservoir projects whenever necessary.

The MPW, which has the main responsibility for the design of flood control and drainage, shall establish, in coordination with the agencies concerned, the general design criteria, standards, and development plans for flood control and drainage, viz, maximum flood heights, flood zones, discharge requirements, specifications, flood control and drainage master plans, and related matters, and the same shall be issued through the NCCD to the agencies concerned. Heads of agencies concerned shall be responsible for compliance with such criteria, standards and development plans.

Each agency of government, especially, the MPH, NIA, PNR, NHA, and local government, shall see to it that, for every project that involves or requires drainage, the plans and designs shall indicate the provisions for drainage within and through the project areas, and for the facility that will convey the excess waters from the project area to appropriate waterways. The agencies concerned shall furnish the NCCD with detailed construction plans for review. While under review, the implementation of the project may be started. The NCCD, however, shall promptly inform the agencies concerned of any inadequacy or non-conformity of detailed construction plan with the prescribed criteria, standards and development plans, with instruction for appropriate modifications.

The cost of flood protection works and drainage facilities within and through the project area shall be funded by the implementing agency concerned, which shall also undertake the construction of the same. The cost of flood control and drainage facilities connecting the agency project to external waterways shall be funded by the MPW, which shall undertake by itself or through assignment to the implementing agency concerned the construction of the same.

The MPW shall undertake periodic inspection of the construction of the flood protection and drainage facilities. The MPW shall submit to the NCCD, report as to the compliance with respect to relevant plans, designs and specifications.

The agency concerned shall be responsible for the proper and adequate maintenance and repair of flood protection and drainage facilities within and through existing and proposed facilities under its jurisdiction. The MPW shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of other flood protection works and drainage facilities.

The NCCD is hereby authorized to issue detailed guidelines, rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this Order, to call upon any agency for assistance in pursuing its functions, and to establish a Secretariat to provide technical and administrative support. Funds for the operations of the NCCD may come from agency contributions.

The individual agency/ministry concerned shall provide funds for the above undertakings assigned to them in their respective annual budgets.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Administrative Order Nos. : 439 – 504]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.