MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 431

AUTHORIZING GOVERNMENT PARTICIPATION IN THE 11TH ASIAN ADVERTISING CONGRESS ON NOVEMBER 15 TO 18, 1978.

WHEREAS, the Philippines will be the host country for the 11th Asian Advertising Congress and the inauguration of the Asian Federation of Advertising Associations to be held on November 15 to 18, 1978;

WHEREAS, in view of the foregoing, Proclamation No. 1710 was issued on February 7 1978 declaring 1978 as the Year of Development Advertising and Communications;

WHEREAS, the concept of developmental advertising and communication is to put modern media of communications at the service of development for attaining total human development, leading to social and economic growth;

WHEREAS, the holding of the 11th Asian Advertising Congress in Manila will put the Philippines in the international limelight among all advertising and communications practitioners and contribute to the furtherance of the role of the Philippines as the leader of development communication and catalyst of regional cooperation;

WHEREAS, the holding of the said Congress will help project the progress attained by the country’s national development efforts, promote our tourism program and foster better trade relations with other countries;

WHEREAS, the whole country stands to gain from the sharing of technology and expertise in developmental advertising and the communication arts during the said Congress; and

WHEREAS, in view of the overall benefits that will be derived from the 11th Asian Advertising Congress, it is necessary that the Philippine government participate actively in its program and activities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize government participation in the 11th Asian Advertising Congress and for this purpose direct as follows:

1. A Government Steering Committee shall be organized to plan, direct coordinate and/or itself pursue the work to set up the systems and procedures for the successful participation of the government in the 11th Asian Advertising Congress.

The Steering Committee shall be composed of the following officials or their authorized representatives:

2. The Committee may call on any ministry, bureau, agency or office or instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its task.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1978). [Administrative Order  Nos. : 349 – 438]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.