MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 401

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE TO ASSIST IN THE PLANNING AND TO UNDERTAKE THE IMPLEMENTATION OF A RESETTLEMENT PROGRAM IN CONNECTION WITH THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE WATER SUPPLY DAM FOR THE METROPOLITAN CEBU WATER DISTRICT

WHEREAS, the design of a modern water system for Metropolitan Cebu is currently being undertaken for the Metropolitan Cebu Water District (MCWD) with the assistance of the National Government and with executive responsibilities assigned to the Local Water Utilities Administration (LWUA).

WHEREAS, to secure the foreseeable water demand of Metropolitan Cebu, the construction of a dam, and the necessary reforestation of the catchment area for the prevention of siltation in the reservoir, will require the consequent resettlement of residents of the catchment area.

WHEREAS, in order to guarantee the smooth implementation by LWUA of the MCWD Project, a government inter-agency participation is necessary.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby constitute and create an Inter-Agency Committee to assist LWUA in formulating plans and devising ways and means to implement a successful resettlement program for the affected residents of the catchment area of the Metropolitan Cebu Water District project.

The Committee shall be composed of the following:

The Regional Executive Director as representative from the National Economic and Development Authority

The Committee is empowered to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may need. The Regional Offices of the different agencies composing this committee which are located in Metropolitan Cebu shall participate in all manner possible in this undertaking.

The Committee is hereby empowered to create the following:

1. A policy formulating body which shall:

a) Set general operating guidelines;

b) Propose for approval of the Committee a budget for the operational and maintenance expenses of the Committee and its personnel.

2. A resettlement technical planning staff which shall:

a) Collect basic socio-economic data of the population affected by the project together with an immediate census of inhabitant in the Balamban catchment area;

b) Conduct a survey that would identify a relocation area for residents which shall be displaced from the catchment area;

c) Draw up plans for the relocation areas as far as the infrastructural facilities are concerned;

d) Plan and conduct information programs that would deal with the various problems and their solutions relating to the livelihood of the affected residents, as well as encourage the participation of schools and universities;

e) Draw up measures that would prevent land speculation within the catchment and resettlement area;

f) Make recommendation for the acquisition of land and transfer of public lands in the catchment area to the MCWD;

g) Determine possible socio-economic problems that may arise during and after the completion of the project and propose possible solutions thereto;

h) Develop a plan for the actual relocation, to include selection of settlers and transportation to the resettlement areas; and

i) Develop plans for the establishment of farming cooperatives in the new relocation areas;

j) Prepare cash flow plans for initial and long-term fund requirements necessary for the full implementation of the relocation program;

k) Prepare financing schemes including investigations of the source of funds, and recommendations for the final apportioning of the total costs according to the respective benefits;

l) Prepare a plan for the administration of the social infrastructural and agricultural development programs in the relocation areas.

3. An administrative staff which shall;

a) Be responsible to the Committee for the efficient implementation of the relocation program;

b) Directly implement – or through other agencies – carry out and  supervise all necessary measures including:

– Preparation of the relocation areas (e.g. infrastructural facilities, etc)

– Preparation of settlers for their new environment

– Staged transportation of the settlers to the new resettlement area

– Assistance to settlers and long-term administration in the new relocation areas

– Provision of a transitory food program

– Provision of agricultural extension services and pilot farms

– Educational services

– Financing and administration of funds in the long run

– Establishment and operation of farming cooperatives.

c) Provide all requested financial, technical and management assistance to the MCWD (LWUA) in the administration of that part of the Lusaran Project relative to relocation, forestry and soil conservation in the catchment area.

The Committee shall employ such administrative and professional personnel as the Committee shall need in the conduct of its day-to-day affairs.

It shall determine the contribution or share of each and all the participating agencies to a common fund to be established for the operational and maintenance expenses of the Committee and the Budget Commissioner is hereby directed to release expeditiously such funds directly to the Committee.

Members of the Committee are hereby authorized to receive reasonable transportation and representation allowances, provided, that each shall not receive more than a total of five hundred (P500.00) pesos a month.

The Committee shall perform such acts and transact such business as are necessary to implement the objectives of this Order.

The Committee shall submit quarterly reports to the Office of the President and to the Department/Agencies concerned in this undertaking.

The Committee and its staff shall operate and continue to exercise its powers until such time as its designated tasks are completed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of March in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1977). [Administrative Order Nos. : 349 – 438]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.