MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 59

CREATING THE INTER-AGENCY TECHNICAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN ECONOMIC POLICY

WHEREAS, in the conduct of foreign economic relations, the Philippine Government regularly encounters problems involving both the different government agencies and the private sector;

WHEREAS, there is necessity for a specific agency to coordinate and consult with government agencies and the private sector to insure that their positions and policies are in conformity with established foreign economic policy; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary for an appropriate agency to make thorough and continuing studies of problems affecting the country in its economic intercourse with other countries and to recommend the Philippine position in international economic negotiations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Inter-Agency Technical Committee on Foreign Economic Policy which shall serve as the government body responsible for conducting studies and research work on matters pertaining to Philippine foreign economic relations, recommending the Philippine position in international economic negotiations in consultation with other government agencies and the private business sector concerned, and recommending to the President such other policies of an economic character as would most effectively advance the national interest.

The Inter-Agency Technical Committee on Foreign Economic Policy shall be composed of a Chairman from the Department of Foreign Affairs and a representative each from the Department of Commerce and Industry, the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, the Department of Finance, the National Economic Council, the Presidential Economic Staff, the Central Bank of the Philippines and the Tariff Commission, to be designated by the respective office heads.

The Inter-Agency Technical Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any officer or employee of any department, bureau or agency of the Government and to form such Sub-committees as may be needed to assist the Inter-Agency Committee in the proper discharge of its functions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE J. LEIDO Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 199 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.