[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZyrjG25Xpyo&feature=relmfu[/youtube] FULL TRANSCRIPT:

The Vice President of the Republic of the Philippines. The Honorable President of the Senate. The Honorable Speaker of the House of Representatives. The Honorable Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. The Honorable members of Congress of the Philippines. The Honorable members of the Cabinet. Their excellencies of the diplomatic corps. Distinguished guests. My beloved countrymen:

On May eleventh, more than 10 million Filipinos decided to lead our country, towards a new millennium.

Now, they are asking, what will this new leadership do to lead our country into the new century?

Today, I stand before you with an accounting of the present and with a road map for our future.

How will we overcome the crisis enveloping our economy?

Where are we now?

Where did we come from?

And where are we headed?

I will not beat around the bush. We are now facing a severe crisis that is disrupting all of Asia.

According to experts, we have not yet reached the worst stage of the crisis.

If we ignore our current situation, our country will surely sink under the weight of a full-blown recession.

The state of our economy is critical, and the national treasury is in danger.

But it does not mean that the government is powerless. And it certainly does not mean that the Filipino people are powerless.

The people are tired of empty promises and theatrics. In the face of the severe crisis we experienced last year, what we need are quick and effective solutions. This is the great challenge we must address—all of us: the executive branch, Congress, the private sector, and the citizenry. This challenge is heavy—but I am fully confident that our combined intelligence, diligence, and capability are more significant.

But let us first make an accounting of the present. A true accounting that is perhaps long overdue.

In the first part of 1998, the growth of the gross domestic product [GDP] was equivalent to only 20 percent of the level recorded in 1997.

Our factories’ production has halved. Our industries only engaged in inventory reduction—and not the creation of products. In their fear of a recession, they only worsened the problem.

Our agricultural production declined. Rice yields decreased by 14 percent, and corn yields also decreased by 24 percent.

We often identify the phenomenon of El Niño, but the true root of the problem is the overall agricultural sector.

Our inflation rate is almost in the double digits. The interest rates charged by banks are very high, which is why many of our business owners are unable to borrow money. And banks have further tightened their lending practices, causing many businesses to close.

Due to devaluation and El Niño, our peso continues to fall. This is extremely burdensome for our countrymen who are accustomed to a hand-to-mouth existence.

Unemployment is now 13.3 percent and still growing; underemployment, 20 percent and also growing. 4.3 million Filipinos need a job. Twice that number wish they had a real, full-time job.

One might say it is still small. But how can you tell a hungry family that other families in other countries are in a worse situation?

One lost job is one hungry family, and one cold statistic I cannot agree.

Statistics claim that the number of poor people has gone down in the past decade. I wonder if the people believe these statistics.

I do not have those statistics. Poor is poor—no money, no food, no roof over their heads, no dignity, and most especially, no hope.

Not only that. The rich become even richer, and the poor become even poorer.

I wish that I could say that we shall set up a job security fund soon. But I don’t want to add to the inventory of unfunded laws and bills that now amount to P400 billion worth of promises that will never be fulfilled.

According to statistics, in the past six years, as the Philippine economy grew, the richest 10 percent got 40 percent of the national income.

And the poorest 10 percent? Less than two percent.

It is worse in the countryside, where 40 percent of Filipinos still work for one-third of wages in the city. That is why they come here. Only to find that there are no jobs, or none for which they qualify.

In the past, I thought that many foreign businessmen would naturally come to our country because our workers are skilled and willing to accept low wages. This is no longer true.

The productivity of the average Filipino worker is very low because only half of them have completed elementary school, while only thirty-three percent have reached high school.

However, the funds we can allocate for education are limited; we have a shortage of 24,000 classrooms and 4,000 teachers.

Not only in the field of education—to this day, more than thirty percent of households in the country still have no electricity. And throughout Asia, our electricity rates are second only to Japan’s.

In the field of agrarian reform, which is now on its 26th year.

Only 57 percent of target areas have been distributed, while productivity has become lower.

This does not mean that the land should have been left with the landlords, but that the farmers should not have been left to fend for themselves.

This is where we are now. Add anarchy on the peace and order front, where the only thing organized is crime, and the only thing systematic is kidnapping. The result: capital flight. Yet some officials think they can attract foreign funds with tax incentives for potential kidnap victims.

Any new President has dreams and aspirations for the country, especially for me, upon whom the Filipino masses have great expectations. But as much as I want to fulfill their expectations as soon as possible, how can I deliver when we do not have sufficient finances to spend to improve their livelihoods?

We have a P70 billion budget deficit and a consolidated public sector deficit that could go as high as P90 billion. Collection of taxes and duties are down, even as more and more tax exemptions and incentives cut deep into government revenues.

Government could borrow more. But that will only raise interest rates and worsen the economic slowdown. The result: less taxes and fewer jobs.

If high interest rates squeeze GNP by just two percent more, there will be half a million more jobless. But if we pressure the Bangko Sentral to print more money, inflation will shoot up.

From all sides, there are flaws, it is very difficult to weigh things, and our problem is truly serious. However, I see the solution at the root of the problem.

The problems we face are of such magnitude as to require nothing less than heroic and concerted action. We must move upon them as a single community, bound together by common rules that we all agree to respect and obey.

To begin with, we have to reduce the cost of governance, costs that go higher and higher with each corrupt act, with each wasteful project.

Billions of pesos are being wasted on wasteful and inutile projects, and an even larger amount is lost as if into thin air due to continuing corruption.

Business pays taxes, but mostly into the pockets of BIR agents or customs examiners instead of the national treasury.

In 1998 alone, we can save as much as P34 billion from pork barrel.

P4.6 billion went to the centennial celebration, but the Department of Social Welfare had to beg for P100 million in emergency food aid to drought victims in Mindanao, and did not get it.

The 1997 World Development Report ranks the Philippine Civil Service as among the most politicized in the world, with politics deciding appointments down to janitor. The 1992 Corruption Index ranked the Philippines as the second most corrupt country in the region.

Debt service took 27 percent of the national budget last year; P26.4 billion in the first semester of 1998 alone. The total external debt, including the private sector, is $45.4 billion or P1.9 trillion pesos.

When I assumed the presidency, I was surprised to be informed that the total public sector debt had already reached P2.3 trillion.

We are no longer talking about billions, but trillions now.

We know where we are: in an economic slowdown, deep in the Asian crisis.

We know that we don’t have much to work with.

Previous leaders have laid down both political and economic reforms that make up an enduring framework from which we can further build.

But we race against time, as an impatient public ask us: When will those reforms pay dividends for the common man?

Well, we just have to begin now. With honesty, with thrift, with efficiency.

Enough is enough.

Enough with the stealing.

Enough with the waste.

Enough with the theatrics.

We need to rack our brains, and genuine service should be the framework for our solutions.

This year, from an expected P93 billion, it has gone down to only P60 billion. The government needs to implement the necessary changes and savings to further reduce its projected deficit to only P40 billion.

In order to achieve these targets, we will resolutely pursue several major cutbacks in expenditure programs.

First, I have instructed the secretary of the budget to continue to withhold 25 percent of budget allocations, excluding salaries and wages, from the various national agencies, including the Office of the President.

Second, we will continue to withhold 10 percent from the internal revenue allotment of the local government units [LGUs].

Third, I believe that Congress shares my conviction that we have to abolish the pork barrel in the face of our fiscal position. Few congressmen are clapping. Our people ask no less.

Lastly, I will postpone the implementation this year of various programs earmarked for funding from the military camp sale proceeds, including the AFP modernization program.

We will also move quickly to dispose of the burden of government-owned corporations. I urge Congress to prioritize the bill privatizing the NAPOCOR within the first three months of the 11th session. Privatization of government shares in Pasar, Philphos, Petron, FTI, PNB, PNOC-EDC, PNCC, Meralco, and the two government-owned television stations will commence this year. The Department of Finance will put in place, within 100 days, a program to spin off or restructure the rest of the government corporations. But we will never sell government hospitals. And our government will continue to support them.

All dealings, contracts, and negotiations will be done with complete transparency and integrity, every step of the way.

Any indication of anomaly, I will immediately cancel the sale.

I repeat, just one piece of news about corruption, and I will stop any kind of auction. No matter who they are.

I have ordered an inventory of all government lands titled to departments and bureaus and their transfer to the national government. I want my officials to keep out of the real estate business and stick to public service.

But let us not forget that privatization is mainly an emergency response to an emergency situation.

It is therefore my intention to initiate institutional reform of the entire budget process. My administration has just completed its first three-year budget framework, which the national government will soon propose to Congress as our budget accord. In contrast to the current practice where only the executive decides on the initial list of programs and projects, the budget accord will involve both Congress and the executive in the selection of projects to be approved by the President. And the total of these expenditures cannot exceed predetermined, irrevocable ceilings over the three-year period.

On the financial side, I am hopeful that the Department of Finance’s action plan will succeed in making tax collection effective.

The action plan of the Department of Finance will start with an asset census, intended to establish an up-to-date and reliable database on the net worth of all tax-paying Filipinos.

We will push for a tax amnesty that will give peace of mind to delinquent taxpayers and tax credits to honest ones. Pagkatapos ng tax amnesty, I will assure you that we will apply the full force of the law against tax evaders.

I assure you that we will not only pursue these tax evaders but will surely punish them, whoever they may be.

We will establish a large taxpayers unit at the BIR. We will suspend the implementation of certain BOI exemptions granted to companies under laws and executive orders that expired in 1997.

The fiscal reforms forced upon us by the economic crisis will continue to serve us well even after the crisis is over. I will take this opportunity to establish fiscal discipline in the spending habits of government. Although we have to tolerate a certain amount of deficit this year, we will try as best as possible to pursue a balanced budget for the national government in the coming years. The consolidated deficit for the entire public sector will be limited to no more than 1 percent of the country’s GNP.

Everyone will benefit from what we do: not only the government, but the ordinary citizen as well.

In the realm of our financial system, my administration will continue to respect the independence of our Monetary Board and of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas.

However, trade does not necessarily need to suffer greatly from the continued increase in interest rates.

I support the lowering of interest rates and the acceleration of the flow of finances, especially to small businesses. However, I will ensure that the funds of government financial institutions [GFI] are not monopolized by a few corporations.

Giant corporations and powerful groups have cornered a huge chunk of the resources of government banks, whose mandate is principally to help agriculture and small and medium enterprises.

This practice will be reversed. Enough of their exploitation. These billionaires have pushed small borrowers to lending windows that charge much higher interest rates. From this time on, GFIs will truly, sincerely, service the common people’s needs.

The current crisis also highlighted the danger of over-reliance on funds coming from outside sources, so we need to strengthen our own savings, with our own capital for our projects.

On the agriculture front, which has been severely neglected, the food security of 70 million Filipinos is on the brink of being compromised.

The monopoly of rice importation by the National Food Authority has not stabilized prices, nor has it broken the cartels. Two administrations have declared sugar a sunset industry, doomed to die. Maybe. All I know is that, sunset industry or not, I cannot leave three million families who depend on sugar in the dark, with nothing to eat after the sun goes down.

Perhaps the decline of our agriculture is due to insufficient infrastructure. The number of roads connecting farms and markets is not enough.

Why would one even plant if they cannot sell their harvest?

We are condoning irrigation fees. We will provide free irrigation to our farmers. At the same time, we will launch a full-scale program based on cost-effective irrigation technologies.

We need to construct 140,000 kilometers of new roads. This will cost P484 billion.

Without graft and corruption, this will be money well spent. It could also jumpstart the economy.

Regarding our environment, we will implement a total ban on logging. We will launch a new program for reforestation. But not like in the past when massive reforestation was another excuse for massive corruption.

Traffic tells us that we need more roads and we need to finish them faster. One reason for delay of roads and other projects is the issuance of temporary restraining orders or TROs. I will not interfere with the judiciary, but I urge the Supreme Court to remind judges of the lawyer’s oath to delay no man for money.

The sale of temporary restraining orders has become too blatant.

The poor have no means to help themselves, but now, even the government is short on funds. So we must strategize to maximize.

Dole-outs are out, but basic social services are only just and right. That means basic health care, basic nutrition, and useful education for those who want it but cannot afford it.

We will speed up the program to establish one science high school in every province.  We will give education subsidies straight to deserving students and teachers without passing through the schools. That way they can choose where to study and where to teach.

All of these require funds. In the next steps, we only need courage and political will. I have already signed the executive order creating the so-called Presidential Task Force against Organized Crime. As a result, a flood of criticism was hurled at me.

One question, one answer: Are we against crime, or those who fight against crime? The task force is what I think is needed to hit crime, and hit it hard so as to put it out—decisively. Maybe there is a better way, but no one has shown me this. They only say that I am wrong but not how I can do it right and effectively.

I am tired of them. The citizens are tired as well. Tired of all the politicking. Tired of all talk, but doing nothing but criticize those fighting crime. My decision is final. The presidential task force against criminals will continue.

I propose that Congress amends the Dangerous Drug Act to eliminate the possibility of probation for all offenders. Even if they say they are sorry. The only place for a drug dealer and the addict is together in jail.

I shall propose another controversial measure. I want to devolve greater administrative control over the Philippine National Police to the local government units.  I am sure I will get hit for this also. Perhaps there is a constitutional question here. But one thing is sure, I am not abusing power. What I am doing is sharing some of my power with the local executives over the national police.

A police officer struggling with hardship is not far from the temptation to abuse their power. But I do not doubt that law enforcers will faithfully perform their duty no matter how difficult their situation may be.

But why do we still burden their situation? I believe that when our law enforcement officers receive sufficient salaries, our police will become more professional.

In crime, our answer is punishment. In rebellion, our response is negotiation.

To those who are rebelling, our desire is only to achieve societal change, and we are ready to negotiate.

However, with terrorists, we have no time for negotiations.

To our Muslim brothers and sisters, I ask for the opportunity to provide justice for many years of neglect. Let us stop the violence, and strengthen our brotherhood. While we will continue to uphold the rights of our women.

As President, I inherit not only the problems but the responsibility to finish what my predecessors have started. That includes the resolution of ill-gotten wealth cases from the Marcos era.  I will do so. We have talked of settlements but we have not precluded continuing prosecution.

Yet these cases have gone on long enough. Therefore, I order the Presidential Commission on Good Government to go forward on all ill-gotten wealth cases with all the evidence it has taken 12 long years to collect.

No more delays.

One way or another, I want these cases to end in one year, in final judgments or acceptable settlements.

After 12 years, there should now be evidence to give justice to the Filipino people. This is a clear example of justice delayed, justice denied.

Sa dakong external security naman. Effective national defense requires not just modern weaponry but better fighting men. Before we spend on expensive hardware, let us have the right kind of soldiers. It is not weapons that win wars but the men who fight them.

Until we develop a credible military deterrent, we must depend on the goodwill of our neighbors, on our treaty commitments with the United States, and on the skills of our diplomats in conveying to everyone that we want only peace, stability, and a shared prosperity.

It is said that my stand as a senator against the U.S. Bases Treaty disqualifies me as President from endorsing the Visiting Forces Agreement with the United States.

On the contrary, because I stood up for the Philippine sovereignty in 1991, now as your President, I have the moral right to stand up for Philippine security today.

On the part of governance, the government was established to serve the citizens—and not itself. Truly, we need more governance—especially to promote the welfare of the poor.

Currently, our government is excessive, but public services are severely lacking.

I will ask Congress to grant me the power to reorganize the government so that it becomes economical and efficient. The aim is not to change officials but to rationalize government operations. We are a small country, we should only have a small government. Not only on the national but also on the local level.

Regarding our electoral reforms, we do not only need peaceful elections, but also campaigns that are not excessively expensive. We must not only ensure the right of citizens to vote; we must also ensure that their votes are counted.

To achieve this, the Commission on Elections needs to be given more power to prevent and punish all types of fraud. I urge Congress to enact a law to make any electoral fraud a heinous crime. The computerization program needs to be completed before the next election. I am confident that we can do much more for the improvement of governance—but some constitutional guidelines may need to be amended. The time for amendments to our Constitution will come.

Honorable representatives of the Filipino people: Allow me to conclude this message by expressing a sincere hope.

This year—despite the heavy challenges—our economy continues to progress.

This year, despite formidable odds, we still expect some economic growth. Our gross national product is targeted to expand this year by 2 to 3 percent. While other countries in the region have registered negative GNP, we continue to have positive growth—this, I would say, is a credit to my predecessor, Former President Ramos.  We believe we can keep inflation based on 1998 prices in the single digits, at around 9.5 percent.

To conclude, my aim is to help our country escape the recession. My solutions are obvious, my proposals may be commonplace, but they were never adapted before.

In sum, they are to spend wisely and less. And by austerity and hard work generate the means to cover the shortfalls of the past, so we can have a smooth runway for a final takeoff.

Perhaps by then, six years will have passed, and someone else will take over as pilot. I am honored enough to be elected to the position of the highest responsibility, power, and trust in the land.

I have neither pretensions nor further ambition, only the sincere desire to serve, to help the least of our people. Therefore, I ask for your understanding, a little time, a little patience for the sake of our country, and above all, for our many poor countrymen.

I believe that when we are united, when we are together, we can overcome all kinds of trials. Our challenges are there; our victories are there as well.

Thank you very much.