Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 582

AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 541 DATED 17 OCTOBER 1975, ENTITLED STRENGTHENING THE SYSTEM FOR THE RECEPTION AND PROCESSING OF REBEL RETURNEES IN SOUTHERN PHILIPPINES.

The system for the reception and processing of rebel returnees in Southern Philippines, established under Memorandum Order No. 516, s-1975, is hereby strengthened by creating a National Coordinating Committee to be headed by a National Coordinator and Deputy Coordinator, as well as Regional Coordinating Committees in the field.

The National Coordinating Committee shall be composed of the following:

In the field, the structure of Regional Coordinating Committees shall be as follows:

1. The Commanders of the different military commands identified in Memorandum Order No. 516, i.e., SOUTHCOM for Region IX, CEMCOM for the four (4) Cotabato provinces and 3/4 BDE, 4TH INF DIV or the two (2) Lanao provinces – shall serve as the Regional Coordinators for the first phase of the processing, which shall involve all processing activities prior to the referral of these returnees to the appropriate civilian agencies once the future disposition of these returnees is determined, as well as the grant of amnesty to and the integration into the Armed Forces of the Philippines of those returnees who so desire it and qualify for it.

2. The Regional Commissioners or their representatives shall serve as Regional Coordinators for all activities undertaken once the returnees are referred to civilian agencies by the military commanders in order that their grievances and future status may be properly attended to.

3. Other members of the Regional Coordinating Committee will include representatives of the following agencies:

3. 1. Southern Philippines Development Administration

3. 2. Department of Social Services and Development

3. 3. Department of Agrarian Reform

3. 4. Department of Education and Culture

3. 5. Task Force on Labor

3. 6. Development Bank of the Philippines

3. 7. Department of Local Government and Community Development

The National Coordinator as the designated Project Administrator, Presidential Memorandum Order 516 (PMO 516), is hereby empowered to define rules, regulations and procedures to be followed by the different participating agencies in the implementation of this system.

All departments, bureaus, agencies, offices and instrumentalities of government, to include government-owned and controlled corporations and local government units are hereby directed to extend full cooperation to the National and Regional Coordinating Committees when called upon to do so in order that speedy integration of these returnees into society may be effected.

This Order takes effect immediately.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Manila, January 12, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff