Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 725

CREATING, AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE FOR THE RELOCATION OF FAMILIES AFFECTED BY THE MANILA WATER SUPPLY III PROJECT OF METROPOLITAN WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM

WHEREAS, among the primary objectives of the government in its program of integrated national development is the improvement of the living conditions of the people;

WHEREAS, the Manila Water Supply III Project in consonance with the above objective endeavors to provide long-terra water supply for Metro Manila towards the close of this decade, through the development of the Kaliwa River Basin;

WHEREAS, by the most optimistic estimate, the capacity of our present water supply system plus on-going MWSS Projects will be sufficient to meet only the water demand of Metro Manila until 1986, when a major water shortage looms over the Metropolitan populace;

WHEREAS, the development of the Kaliwa River Basin offers the best solution, to avert such water shortage problem by 1987 and in the succeeding years; and

WHEREAS, the full development of the Kaliwa River Basin is limited by the presence of settlers within the proposed reservoir and therefore it is necessary that these settlers be relocated to another suitable place.

WHEREFORE, there is hereby created an Inter-Agency Committee composed of the following:

The General Manager Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System

Chairman

Representative of the Minister Ministry of Public Highways

Member

Representative of the Minister Ministry of Human Settlements

Member

Representative of the Minister Ministry of Natural Resources

Member

Representative of the Minister Ministry of Agrarian Reform

Member

Representative of the Minister Ministry of Public Works

Member

Representative of the Minister Ministry of Local Government and Community Development

Member

Representative of the Minister Ministry of Public Information

Member

Provincial Governor of Rizal

Member

Representative of the Office of the President

Member

1. To formulate and adopt a work plan for the development of the resettlement site for the residents who will be displaced by the Manila Water Supply III Project, which calls for the development of the Kaliwa River Basin, to be submitted to the Office of the President within one month from the date of the Memorandum Order.

2. To set up the support activities like personnel and administrative services, by pooling the manpower and financial resources of the different agencies comprising the inter-agency committee.

3. To call on the resources of each member depending on the commitments established for implementing the projects defined in the approved development plan.

5. To establish, as it may deem necessary, a project management and monitoring group to supervise the implementation of the projects and coordinate such activities according to established priorities, as well as to monitor the progress of project implementation on the basis if the overall development plan.

6. To meet at least once a month to assess the implementation of the projects and adopt whatsoever ways and means may be necessary to overcome problems o difficulties that may arise and to inform the Office of the President of developments.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any department, Office agency or instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions and the attainment of its objectives.

The Committee shall continue to exist until dissolved or superseded.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

May 19, 1981

Source: Presidential Management Staff