Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 477

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO FORMULATE A DESIGN FOR THE INTEGRATION OF PHYSICAL FACILITIES OF ALL UNITS WITHIN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

There is hereby created a Committee which will study the present functions, work-flow and interrelationships of all units within the Office of the President with the end view of arriving at a physical design that allows for the systematic integration of facilities required by these units:

The Committee shall be composed of the following:

In performing its tasks, the Committee shall be guided by the following considerations:

1. The basic objective of his integrated design is to streamline the operations of all units within the Office of the President in order to make them more responsive to the requirements of the Presidency. However, where such integration of physical facilities shall prove to be hindrance to the efficient functioning of certain specialized units, then separate facilities are to be followed.

2. Where desirable, the Committee should consider the integration of support services for all units, to include security, records maintenance, motor pool, and other such services.

3. The Committee should consider intra-office working relationships as well as the relationships of the Office of the President with other Government agencies.

4. The establishment of an efficient intra-office and external communication system should be given priority.

The Committee is hereunder authorized to call upon all agencies and units under the Office of the President to provide the necessary administrative and technical support, information and services as may be required by the Committee for the proper execution of its assigned tasks.

The Committee shall submit its recommendations to the President through the Executive Secretary within one month from the date of this Order.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, 23 December 1974

Source: Presidential Management Staff