TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 686

PRESCRIBING ENERGY CONSERVATION MEASURES IN THIS OFFICE FOR THE INFORMATION AND STRICT COMPLIANCE BY ALL CONCERNED.

In the light of the continuing rise in the cost of fuel which calls for the institution of urgent energy conservation program, the following measures are herby prescribed for the information and guidance of all concerned:

1. Lights and air conditioning in the office shall be turned on at 8:00 A.M. and shut off at 12:00 noon , to be turned on again at 1:00 P.M . and shut off at exactly 5:00 P.M. except those units where services continue to be rendered beyond regular office hours.

2. Thermostat setting of air conditioning units is to be maintained at a temperature not lower than 78° Fahrenheit (25.5°C).

3. All air conditioners, all doors and windows are to be at all times kept close to prevent heat intake.

4. All cracks are to be caulked.

5. All air conditioners are to be checked regularly to maintain their cooling efficiency.

6. All electrical equipment like typewriters, Xerox machines, percolators, sound equipment, etc. are to be turned off when not in use and office equipment and machines are to be unplugged after office hours.

7. All unnecessary lights are to be turned off.

8. Light bulbs and diffusers are to be cleaned regularly.

9. See to it that all electrical units are in good running condition. Faulty equipment consume more power.

10. All electrical equipment are to be cleaned regularly to avoid accumulation of dust which reduces the efficiency of the equipment.

11. All defective installations are to be repaired immediately.

12. Shut off all lights, air conditioners, and other electrical equipment on non-working days.

13. If possible, avail of natural lighting and ventilation.

Engineer Timoteo Manzanero, Presidential Staff Director, buildings and Grounds Office or his representative, is hereby assigned to supervise closely and continuously the effective implementation of these Energy conservation measures which are designed to reduce officer energy consumption. He shall submit a weekly report to the undersigned on the result of the implementation hereof.

This Memorandum Order takes effect immediately.

(SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

February 5, 1980

Source : Presidential Management Staff