Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 286

CREATING AN ACTION COMMITTEE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE TABACALERA ESTATES IN ISABELA.

There is hereby created an Action Committee which shall oversee the purchase of the Tabacalera properties in Isabela by the Land Bank, their development and eventual turnover to the present tenants of these estates. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

This Action Committee shall have the following functions:

1. To work out, in coordination with the appropriate government agencies, implementing details for the development program for the area submitted to this Office by the Committee created under Memorandum Order No. 276, s. 1972;

2. To coordinate the implementation of this program in order to insure the adequate and timely delivery of services and other inputs by agencies concerned;

3. To submit monthly reports to this Office on the progress of work in the area.

In carrying out its work the Committee shall give particular regard to:

1. Consulting with the tenants on the estates to ensure that their interests are considered and their support is obtained at each phase of implementing the development program for the area;

2. The establishment of multi-purpose cooperatives on the estates;

3. The provision of adequate support services for the tenant-farmers.

All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the government, including government owned or controlled corporations, and local government instrumentalities are hereby directed to extend assistance to the Committee or any of its duly authorized members, whenever assistance is sought in connection with the work of the Committee.

It is understood that the agencies contributing and/or providing material and technical assistance to this project shall also shoulder the expenditures related to such assistance. Likewise, expenses

By the authority of the President: (Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, April 27, 1972

Source : Malacañang Records Office