Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 244

CREATING THE COORDINATING COMMITTEE ON PROJECT FEASIBILITY STUDIES.

WHEREAS, sound feasibility studies for projects properly selected to implement national goals are essential for economic development.

WHEREAS, many project feasibility studies prepared and produced under prevailing practices are insufficiently coordinated with national objectives.

WHEREAS, in spite of the large amounts of government resources devoted to their production, there still remains a shortage of acceptable project proposals for local and/or foreign funding.

NOW, THEREFORE, there Is hereby created a Coordinating Committee on Project Feasibility Studies composed as follows;

The Committee shall be charged with the following functions:          .

1. To determine and define which general project proposals shall be suitable subjects for project feasibility studies;

2: To evaluate all .feasibility study proposals along the following general guidelines:

a) Existence of reasonable prospects of follow-through financing for the project;

b) To the extent of possible maximum use of domestic talents and resources in the preparation of the study; and

c) Total cost of the feasibility study not exceeding three per cent of estimated project cost, except for such cases where study coverage extends beyond the normal definition of a project feasibility study.

3. To coordinate and correlate different proposals;

4. To review and/or evaluate relevant matters such as terms of reference, scope of work and consultancy contracts; and

5. To pass on and certify to the final acceptability of all proposals before the studies are undertaken.

In no case shall a project feasibility study be undertaken with or without employment of Consultants with the Committee’s certification.

The Committee is empowered to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, as well as local government instrumentalities for such assistance as it may need for the accomplishment of its task.

So ordered.

By the authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, July 15, 1971 Source : Malacañang Records Office