TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 646

AUTHORIZING THE PARTICIPATION OF ALL EMPLOYEES IN THE GENERAL PHYSICAL FITNESS PROGRAM OF THIS OFFICE.

In line with the pronouncement of the President that “physical fitness mist necessarily be a part and parcel of the ongoing program of human resources development”, a general physical fitness program for employees of this office shall be implemented starting March 19, 1979.

This program seeks to draw employees into a modest regimen of physical conditioning and to provide a wholesome and refreshing respite from the routine work, particularly for those who are not involved in the athletic competitions conducted by the Office of the President Athletic League (OPAL) and the Inter-Department (Ministry) Employees Athletic League (IDEAL).

The facilities of the Polytechnic University of the Philippines (PUP) shall be used for this program on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, 4:30 to 5:30 p.m.

All heads of primary units and offices are hereby enjoined to assign interested members of their respective staffs into three groups with Group A scheduled on Mondays, Group B on Wednesday, and Group C on Fridays. A list thereof duly certified by each head of unit or office and his duly designated coordinator shall be submitted to the Presidential Finance Assistant before March 19, 1979.

Employees scheduled on a particular day shall be required to report at the PUP at 4:30 p. in. except when their services in the office are badly needed on such day and time. Calisthenics en masse for about 15 minutes to be led by the officer-in-charge for the day shall be the first order of activities. Thereafter, the group shall be dispersed into different sub-groups; namely, swimming, lawn tennis, table tennis, badminton, volleyball, basketball, softball, archers, walkaton/track & field, judo and karate. Each sub-group shall have a team 1eader.

The Presidential Finance Assistant shall designate the heads of the different primary units and offices who shall alternate as officer-in-charge for the day as well as the employees who shall serve as team lenders.

The sports development staff of the Presidential Finance Assistant shall be responsible for coordinating and monitoring this program.

Strict compliance hereof, is hereby enjoined.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, February 19, 1979

Source: Presidential Management Staff