Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 506

CREATING AN INTERIM COMMITTEE TO COORDINATE THE ACTIVITIES OF AGENCIES ABOLISHED UNDER P.D. 690 AND DRAW UP THE ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE SOUTHERN PHILIPPINES DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATION AND TWO NEW REGIONS CREATED IN SOUTHERN PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, by virtue of Presidential Decree No. 690 the Mindanao Development Authority, Commission on National Integration, Special Program of Assistance for the Rehabilitation of Evacuees and the Presidential Task Force for the Reconstruction and Development of Mindanao have been abolished and their functions absorbed by the Southern Philippines Development Administration created under said decree;

WHEREAS, there is a need to ensure the continuity of programs and activities currently being undertaken as well as proposed to be undertaken by said abolished agencies until such time as the Southern Philippines Development Administration shall have become fully operational, and;

WHEREAS, the President has announced the creation of two new Regions in Southern Philippines to attend to the governmental and developmental requirements of the provinces where a sizable Muslim population is to be found;

WHEREAS, there is a need to draw up the organizational structure and operational guidelines of the Southern Philippines Development Administration and these two new Regions;

NOW, THEREFORE, there is hereby created an Interim Steering Committee, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, to coordinate the activities and operations of the above-mentioned abolished agencies and to draw up the organizational structure of the Southern Philippines Development Administration (SPDA) and the two new Regions in Southern Philippines as well as define the relationships between the SPDA and these Regions.

SECTION 1. Membership and Constitution – The Interim Committee hereby created shall be composed of two working groups, under one Coordinator.

1. Working Group for the Interim Operations of the abolished agencies:

2. Working Group to draw up the organizational structure of the Southern Philippines Development Administration and the new Regions:

SECTION 2. Functions of the Working Groups – The Working Group on the interim operations of the abolished agencies shall:

1. Draw up a list of existing and pipeline programs and projects of the four (4) abolished agencies;

2. On the basis of the list above, identify areas for integrated or complementary execution, with the end in view of merging efforts and resources under the newly-created SPDA;

3. Oversee the day-to-day operations of the abolished agencies, ensuring that current projects are undertaken and that priority pipeline activities to be commenced before actual takeover by the SPDA are also started, all preparing for a turnover to the SPDA organization;

4. Submit a fortnightly progress report on the combined activities of the abolished agencies to the Office of the President until such time as the SPDA shall have assumed the absorbed agencies; and

5. Perform such other functions as may be assigned by the Coordinator for the accomplishment of the Committee’s objectives.

The Working Group for the organizational structure the SPDA and the Regions shall:

1. Prepare a PERT-CPM schedule for the phasing-in and organization of the SPDA and the new Regional administrative bodies;

2. Draw up the by-laws of the SPDA consistent with its charter as provided by P.D. No. 690

3. Determine the operational, administrative and financial requirements of the SPDA and the Regional administration, and prepare an organizational chart, plantilla of personnel and an administrative/operations manual spelling out the functions of the different units and offices of the Administration and of the two Regional bodies;

4. Recommend, for the approval of the SPDA Administrator-Designate and the Board of Directors-Designate, a list of offices and employees of the abolished agencies to be absorbed within the Administration. The selection shall not be confined to the abolished agencies, although priority should be given to displaced personnel, chosen on the basis of merit, competence and the record of past services;

5. Determine the’ previous functions of the abolished agencies which shall not be absorbed by the SPDA and recommend the appropriate government entity to handle and take over these functions;

6. Define the specific functions, powers and responsibilities of the two new Regional administrative bodies and their relationships with the SPDA, the National Government and local government units falling within their jurisdiction;

7. Perform such other functions as may be assigned by the Coordinator for the accomplishment of the Committee’s objectives.

SECTION 3. Secretariat – The National Computer Center shall act as the Secretariat to the Interim Committee.

SECTION 4. Committee Report – The Interim Committee shall submit its report on the proposed organizational structure of the SPDA and the two new Regional Administrative bodies, with its other recommendations and implementing details, if necessary, to the Office of the President not later than ninety (90) days from the date of this Order.

SECTION 5. Funding – To accomplish the purposes of this Memorandum Order, the sum of One Hundred Fifty Thousand Pesos, (₱150,000) is hereby appropriated, chargeable against the funds of the SPDA per Sec. 8 of P.D. No. 690 to cover the various operating expenditures of the Committee and its Secretariat.

SECTION 6. Coordination – All departments, bureaus, agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations, are hereby enjoined to render the necessary cooperation and assistance for the successful prosecution and discharge of the Interim Committee’s functions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day April , in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff