Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 287

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE TO FORMULATE A DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM FOR THE BADJAOS OF OMAPOY ISLAND, SULU, AND TO COORDINATE THE IMPLEMENTATION THEREOF.

There is hereby created an Inter-agency Committee to draw up a development program for the Badjaos of Omapoy, Sulu, and to coordinate the implementation of the said development program upon its approval by the Secretary of Agrarian Reform and the Executive Secretary.

The Committee shall be made up of the following:

The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. To draw up a development program for the Badjaos of Omapoy Island, Sulu, indicating the various agencies responsible for the implementation of the different phases of this program as well as a timetable for its accomplishment.  This development program shall be submitted within 30 days from the date of this Order;

2. To coordinate the implementation of this development program by the concerned government and private sector agencies;

3. To submit monthly reports to this Office on the progress of work in the area.

In carrying out its work, the Committee is enjoined to:

1. Aim at meeting the most pressing needs of the Badjaos in the area;

2. Take cognizance of and make provision for the peculiar life-style of the Badjaos, thus making full use of native skills and resources and avoiding any cultural disorientation resulting from the untimely introduction of new skills and technology;

3. Make maximum use of private sector groups interested in working among the Badjaos, so long as the work of these groups does not conflict with the development program drawn up and the ultimate objective of obtaining the welfare of the Badjaos.

All government departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities are hereby enjoined to extend all support and cooperation to this Committee for the speedy and successful performance of its functions.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By the authority of the President: (Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, May 10, 1972

Source : Malacañang Records Office