TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 455

In view of the need to effect closer coordination and more responsive participation of all Philippine Government agencies involved in the Philippine Australian Development Assistance Program (PADAP) and to ensure that the commitments of the Philippine Government in said project re promptly fulfilled, there is hereby an inter-agency Executive Committee composed of the following:

The Executive Committee shall have the following functions:

1. Determine the specific counterpart share of the Philippine Government in implementing subject project as stipulated in the PADAP Memorandum of Understanding.

2. Assign the task carrying out these specific responsibilities to the appropriate Philippine Government agencies.

3. Formulate the policies and guidelines necessary in implementing subject program.

4. Supervise the implementation of this program to insure the effective and timely coordination of inter-agency activities related to PADAP; and

5. Perform other functions as may be necessary for the successful accomplishment of its mission.

In the execution of its functions, the Executive Committee shall be assisted by an inter-agency technical staff composed of the following:

Director, Planning Service, DPH

The Executive Committee herein organized shall submit monthly reports to the Executive Secretary.

The Executive Committee and its Technical Staff are hereby authorized and empowered to call upon all departments, bureaus agencies or instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned corporations and/or controlled corporations as well as the private sector to give the necessary cooperation and assistance for the successful prosecution and discharge of its function

Finally, the Executive Committee and its Technical Staff shall operate and continue to exercise its powers until such time as its designated tasks are completed.

Done in the City of Manila this 23rd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

By Authority of the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff