Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 831

SUPPLEMENTING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 823, CURRENT SERIES, WITH ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF CSC RESOLUTION NO. 84-034.

In the interest of the service, Memorandum No. 823, current series, “Implementing the New Guidelines on the Filing of Application For Vacation Leave as Embodied in CSC Resolution No. 84-034,” is hereby supplemented with the following additional guidelines:

1. The Personnel Office shall closely coordinate with the Cashier’s Office in the implementation of item No. 2 of said Memorandum Order No. 823, by seeing to it that the money value of unauthorized leave of absence is deducted, without unnecessary delay, from the salary of the employee concerned. Timekeepers of Primary Units are hereby required to submit a daily report, of unauthorized absences in their respective Units, to the Personnel Office not later than 11:00 A.M. every working day.

2. Employees who leave the office for a prolonged period during office hours without prior permission from the Chief or Assistant Chief of his/her Primary Unit shall likewise be deducted the corresponding money value of the inclusive time that he/she is out of the office, but this undertime shall not be deducted from his/her accredited leave credits, if there are any.

3. Notice of absence due to illness must be immediately sent to the proper chief of Primary Unit by the fastest means of communication, either by phone, by couriers or otherwise, and the sick leave application therefore containing a brief explanation of the cause of delay in filing, may be submitted later.

4. Misrepresentation by feigning illness in trying to circumvent the rule governing unauthorized vacation leave of absence shall be ground for disciplinary action, pursuant to item No. 8 of Memorandum Order No. 823,and shall be considered a grave offense due to dishonesty which shall be imposed with stiff penalty.

Strict compliance with this Order by all employees is hereby enjoined.

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, December 17, 1985

Source: Presidential Management Staff Library