TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 431

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO COORDINATE AND STANDARDIZE SURVEYING AND MAPPING ACTIVITIES IN THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT.

In consonance with the objectives of the Integrated Reorganization Plan (IRP) and in furtherance of-Section 23 (g) of Letter of Implementation No. 19 dated 31 December 1972 providing for the coordination of the activities of surveying and mapping agencies in the government and the promulgation and adoption of surveying and mapping standards there is hereby created a National Committee to Coordinate and Standardize Surveying and Mapping Activities in the National Government, composed of the heads of the following agencies or their duly authorized representative:

The Committee shall have the following functions and objectives:

1. To promote effective coordination of various surveying and mapping activities in the National Government.

2. To prepare comprehensive national and regional plans on surveying and mapping projects.

3. To recommend map and chart bases and standard, procedures, methods and equipment for various surveying and mapping activities.

4. To recommend agency or integrated projects, attain economy, prevent duplication, encourage inter-agency exchange and utilization of data, materials and instruments, and expedite completion of activities and projects in surveying and mapping.

The Committee is empowered to create such coordinating working groups as may be necessary to assist it in attaining its objectives. Agency heads may designate such technical personnel or representatives as may be necessary to this Committee.

The Committee is authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government engaged in surveying and mapping activities for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions.

Members of the Committee or their representative may be paid per diems chargeable against the appropriations of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey, in accordance with the provisions of Rep. Act No. 3847, as amended.

Periodic reports on the accomplishment of the Committee shall be submitted to this Office regularly.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, May 23, 1974

Source: Presidential Management Staff