Office of the President of the Philippines

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 199

CREATING AN AD HOC COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS TO STUDY THE EXISTING PROBLEMS ON THE AREAS OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PROSECUTION.

WHEREAS, the problem of narcotics addiction in particular and of drugs in general have worsened to the extent that the taking and using of narcotics and/or drugs have permeated into the college and high school campuses, the poverty-sticken slum areas and are even indulged in by pleasure-minded members of our society;

WHEREAS, the aggravation of the problem may be traced, to a large degree, to the ineffectiveness of law enforcement agencies and the prosecuting arm of the government;

WHEREAS, the failure of law enforcement vis-a-vis the narcotics and drug problem have been found to be caused primarily by lack of coordination among the various law enforcement agencies, and the inability of the prosecution agencies may be said to be due to the lack of stronger and more effective laws on the subject;

NOW, THEREFORE, there is hereby created an Ad Hoc Study Committee on Narcotics which shall be composed of the following members:

The Committee shall have the following duties and functions:

1. Determine the problems which beset law enforcement and prosecution with regard to narcotic trafficking.

2. Formulate the necessary corrective measures to enhance the effectiveness of law enforcement and prosecution with regard to narcotic trafficking.

3. Prepare legislation aimed at strengthening or giving more teeth to law enforcement and prosecution with regard to narcotic trafficking.

In order to perform its functions and responsibilities effectively, the Committee is empowered to call on representatives of any law enforcement and other government agencies without membership in the said Committee for technical assistance, facilities and equipment as it may need in conducting its study.

Periodic report on the status and progress of work will be submitted by the Committee to the Secretariat, Peace and Order Coordinating Council.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, September 11, 1970

Source: Malacañang Records Office