Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 780

FURTHER AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 271, AS AMENDED, PROVIDING IDENTIFICATION CARDS TO ALL OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES OF THIS OFFICE.

In line with the continuing security measures being instituted in the Office of the President, Memorandum Order No. 271, series of 1972, as amended, Providing Identification Cards (ID) to all officials and employees of the Office of the President, is hereby further amended, so as to provide all said officials and employees, including those on detail from other government agencies, with revised identification (ID) cards in lieu of those previously issued to them.

The new identification card shall be in the approved design, sample attached, and shall serve both as identification card and nameplate to be worn by the officials and employees within the Malacañang Compound.

All identification cards and nameplates previously issued to officials and employees of this Office and those on detail from other offices, are hereby revoked and accordingly should be surrendered for replacement with the revised ID cards. Henceforth, those who are on detail to this Office shall be issued ID cards for the duration of their detail only, or every twelve (12) months if their detail is without a terminal date. Color codes shall be used: red, for the regular employees; blue for those paid under the lump-sum appropriations, and yellow, for those on detail from other government agencies. The new identification cards shall be issued free of charge, except for subsequent replacements which shall be reimbursed at the cost by the employee concerned.

The Personnel Office shall keep an up-to-date register of all identification cards to be issued and shall see to it that this Order is implemented as soon as possible.

It is understood that provisions of existing Orders previously issued pertaining to the issuance and use of identification cards and nameplates that are not inconsistent herewith shall remain valid and in-force.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, March 24, 1983

Reference: Sample Revised I.D.

Source: Presidential Management Staff Library