Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

CREATING IN THE EXECUTIVE OFFICE A STAFF ARM TO BE KNOWN AS INTERNAL PERSONNEL SERVICES UNIT AND FURTHER AMENDING FOR THIS PURPOSE MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 1 DATED JANUARY 7, 1958

In order to establish an integrated personnel program in the Executive Office conducive to the promotion of good supervisor-employee relations and of individual and group efficiency; to the development of the employee in particular and of professionalism and careerism in general in this premier office of the government, an Internal Personnel Services Unit is hereby created which shall be under the direct supervision and control of the Executive; Secretary.

Its functions shall be the following:

1. To assist and advise the Executive Secretary in the implementation of the Civil Service Law and Rules and other personnel laws as well as policies regarding examinations, appointments, promotions, and other personnel transactions. These functions shall include:

(a) Recruitment, selection, and placement of personnel;

(b) Office hours; attendance and leaves of absence of personnel;

(c) Personnel discipline, primarily deportment or behavior;

(d) Employee benefits, such as, life insurance and retirement, and

(e) Reinstatements, transfers, and separations.

2. To assist and advise the Executive Secretary in the formulation, development, and implementation of office policies rules and regulations on personnel.

3. To assist the Executive Secretary in salary administration, by conducting in collaboration with the Wage and Position Classification Office, a continuing study of the position classification and pay plan for personnel in the Executive Office.

4. To administer a balanced personnel program by promoting the use of the following tools of personnel management:

(a).Performance Eating System;

(b) Merit Promotion Plan;

(c) Awards System;

(d) Employee Suggestions System;

(e) Complaints and Grievances Procedure;

(f) Counseling and Guidance programs;

(g) Health and welfare and recreation programs; and

(h) Employee development programs, such as, in-service training courses, seminars, workshops, scholarships, travels or observation tours (local or foreign), and the like.

5. To establish and maintain liaison with the Budget Commission, Wage and Position Classification Office, Civil Service Commission, Government Service Insurance System, and other agencies concerned with the administration of personnel transactions affecting personnel in the Executive Office;

6. To keep the Executive Secretary and the Civil Service Commissioner informed of activities and developments in all areas which affect the effective implementation of the Civil Service Law and Rules;

7. To keep and maintain up-to-date personnel files, reports, and statistics, and other personnel records;

8. To take charge of the preparation of the plantillas of personnel and keep them up-to-date;

9. To assist in the processing of payrolls and vouchers covering salaries, allowances, and other money claims of personnel in the Executive Office; and

10. In addition to the foregoing, to perform such other functions, duties and responsibilities as may be assigned to it by the Executive Secretary from time to time.

The Head of the unit is hereby authorized to perform the following:

1. To sign for and in behalf of the Executive Secretary, routine communications pertaining to personnel matters, such as, replies to queries regarding employment, service records, and the like, except those which may be regarded as involving controversial issues or, major office policies; and

2. To approve applications for vacation and sick leaves of absence which do not exceed thirty (30) calendar days and for which no commutation of salary is requested, except those of Chiefs of Divisions/Primary Units, and officials of similar, equivalent or higher rank.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect on January 12, 1970, and farther amends accordingly Memorandum Order No. 1 dated January 7, 1958 entitled “GOVERNING THE ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS OF THE EXECUTIVE OFFICE AND GENERAL MATTERS OF PROCEDURE THEREIN.”

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) ERNESTO M. MACEDA Executive Secretary

Manila, January 9, 1970

Source: Malacañang Records Office