Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 799

ADOPTING CERTAIN RULES GOVERNING THE GRANT OF THE 1983 YEAR-END BONUS TO OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PROPER)

The following rules are hereby adopted to govern the grant of the 1983 year-end bonus to officials and employees of the Office of the President (Proper):

RULE I – Who are entitled to the year-end bonus – The following officials and employees are entitled to the year-end bonus:

1. All officials and employees of the Office of the President (proper) regardless of their appointment status, and whether paid from regular items or lump-sum appropriations, except those who may fall under any of the disqualifications enumerated in Rule II of these guidelines.

2. The following officials and employees shall also be entitled:

a. New or reinstated employee – an employee who is newly hired or reinstated and is in the service of OP as of December 1, 1983, provided he or she has rendered 90 calendar days of active service within the calendar year 1983. New or reinstated employee with less than 90 days of active service shall be entitled only to a proportionate amount to be determined by adopting the following formula:

Number of days served x monthly rate of employee concerned divided (÷) by 90 days

Example: Crisanta Alvares was appointed Assistant at ₱950.40 per month effective November 19, 1983.

12 days x ₱ 950.40 /90 days

b. Transferred employee – an employee who transferred to the Office of the President (proper) from another government agency whose total number of days of active service in the government for the calendar year 1983 is at least 90 calendar days. An employee with less than 90 days of active service shall be entitled only to the proportionate amount as illustrated above.

c. Employee who is on leave with or without pay – an employee who is on leave (vacation, sick or maternity) with pay, except those on terminal leave, as of December 1, 1983, provided he or she has rendered a total of 90 calendar days of active service within the year 1983.

An employee who is on leave without pay but has reported for duty on or before December 1, 1983, provided he or she has rendered 90 days of active service within the calendar year 1983.

RULE II – Exemption – The following are not entitled to the year-end bonus:

1. Official or employee of the Office of the President (proper), who is on detail with a government agency that grants to him a year-end bonus equivalent to his basic monthly salary. If the amount of bonus is less than one-month pay, he shall be entitled only to the difference from this Office.

2. An employee who retired or resigned from the Office of the President (proper) effective on or before December 1, 1983, even if he or she has rendered 90 calendar days of active service within the calendar year 1983.

3. An employee who has been continuously on leave (vacation, sick or maternity) for 90 calendar days without pay and has not returned to duty as of December 1, 1983, regardless of whether he or she has rendered a total of 90 calendar days of active service within the year 1983.

Cases not covered by the foregoing rules may be submitted to the Presidential Executive Assistant through the Personnel Office, for appropriate action.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, December 6, 1983

Source: Presidential Management Staff Library