Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 796

AUTHORIZING THE TRAINING STAFF OF THIS OFFICE TO CONDUCT A REFRESHER COURSE ON THE NEW PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL SYSTEM.

It has been observed that most of our primary units or offices could not effectively comply with the regular submission of reports of rating based on the new Performance Appraisal System for lack of adequate knowledge and familiarity with the intricacies of the new method. Despite the issuance of Memorandum Order No. 699, dated September 1, 1980, still many offices cannot cope with the requirements. In answer to follow-up by the Personnel Office, many office heads reportedly complained of their lack of sufficient training in accomplishing the required forms.

There is therefore a need for a refresher course to serve as a follow-through of the previous seminar on the same subject conducted in this Office by the Civil Service Commission in 1978.

Accordingly, the Training Staff of this Office is hereby authorized to conduct a Refresher Course on the new Performance Appraisal System for two (2) groups of supervisors in accordance with the following schedules:

1. Refresher Course for supervisor – raters who attended the previous course – October 24 to 28, 1983;

2. Seminar-Workshop on the new PAS for new supervisors – October 31 to November 4, 1983

All heads of primary units or offices are hereby enjoined to send their respective supervisor-raters, if they themselves cannot attend, to the seminar. They should be relieved of their official functions in their respective units during the daily sessions of the course.

After the conduct of this course, all office or unit heads shall see to it that they comply strictly with the requirements of Memorandum Order No. 699. Otherwise, no proposals for promotion or merit increase from them shall be entertained or be given due course.

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, October 13, 1983

Source: Presidential Management Staff Library