Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 712

RESERVING THE NUMBERED PARKING SPACES WITHIN THE MALACAÑANG COMPOUND FOR CERTAIN OFFICIALS AND PROVIDING RULES AND REGULATIONS IN THE ENFORCEMENT THEREOF.

Pursuant to Section 6 of Memorandum Order No. 706 dated November 27, 1980, the available parking spaces within the Malacañang Compound have been numbered and reserved for certain officials.

For purposes of enforcing this reserved parking system, the following rules and regulations are hereby promulgated:

1. Officials assigned reserved parking spaces shall be issued Reserved Parking Cards, bearing numbers corresponding to those of the parking spaces reserved for them. Only vehicles with Reserved Parking Cards shall be allowed to pass through the parking control point in Area II. Those without these Reserved Parking Cards shall be directed by the Provost personnel to the designated parking areas outside Gate 4. Vehicles parked outside Gate 4 may be called back through the paging facilities operated by the Provost personnel in the front lobby of the Administration Building.

2. The Provost personnel shall institute measures to deal with violations of these rules and regulations. If necessary, they may tow unauthorized vehicles from the reserved parking area.

3. Holders who lose their Reserved Parking Cards shall execute an affidavit explaining such loss and if the explanation is satisfactory, replacement cards shall be issued to them.

4. Parking spaces marked “Special” may be used by special guests at the discretion of the Provost personnel. However, if such special guests have drivers, they should nevertheless be requested to park their cars outside Gate 4 and avail themselves of the paging system.

5. The Provost personnel shall enforce within the Malacañang Compound known as the Land Transportation and Traffic Code.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect January 19, 1981.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, January 15, 1981

Source : Presidential Management Staff