TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 476

PROVIDING GUIDELINES/PROCEDURES FOR TRANSACTIONS INVOLVING EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS IN THE EXECUTIVE OFFICE.

Corollary Memorandum of the President for Executive Secretary and the Commissioner of the Budget dated August 20, 1974 ordering the adoption of all measures designed to reduce government expenditures in the face of world-wide inflationary pressures and as reiterated by Budget Memorandum Circular No. 151 dated October 15, 1974 requiring a 15% outback on expenditures for the current fiscal year to channel savings to production oriented activities, the following policies and/or procedures for transactions involving the expenditures of funds are hereby adopted for the guidance of all concerned:

1. Appointments and Special Orders for travels, both local and foreign, must be coursed thru the Office of the Presidential Finance Adviser and the Accounting Office for notation and funding before it is presented for approval.

2. The requirements under Memorandum Order No. 359 dated May 20, 1973 restricting local travels and General Circular No. 127 dated November 27, 1973, of the Commission on Audit will be strictly adhered to, Expenses for travel within the Greater Manila Area will be limited to reasonable expenses for transportation only and no per diems will be allowed.

Attendance to seminars and conventions should be limited to not more than four representatives for the whole Executive Office and should be confined only to those whose present assignment or position are relevant to the purpose or topic of the seminar or convention.

The practice of granting special representation allowance to officials and employees who are authorized to travel is hereby stopped except to officials whose-rank are not lower than that of an assistant chief of division.

3. All requests for repair and/or replacement of car parts and supplies must be certified by the Malacañang Motorpool Superintendent and the waste materials replaced must be accounted for by him. Calims for reimbursement for expenses incurred under this item by individual officials and employees will not be entertained. For this purpose, all cars loaned from other government offices used in Malacañang as service car for any division or individual official must be registered with the Malacañang Motorpool.

4. Expenditures for operational expenses of the Executive Office and for military and security activities must be clearly delineated.

To avoid possible duplication and to insure efficiency and economy in operations, all requests of the Presidential Security Command and all military units under it involving the expenditure of funds, whether for travel (both domestic and foreign), supplies and materials, sundry expenses or purchase of equipment chargeable against the Office of the President must first be approved by the PSC Commanding General before it is forwarded to the Presidential Finance Adviser. Such requests must be supported by a certification as to the urgency thereof and that said expenditure is not within the amount allotted from the DND.

5. Utmost economy must be observed in the use of office supplies. For this purpose, a responsible employee must be designated by the chief of division or unit from among his staff who will keep tab of the materials issued and consumed within the division.

The practice of issuing supplies and materials from stock thru “vales” is hereby ordered to be discontinued. Requisitioning officers must anticipate the needs of their respective units for a period of at least fifteen days as supplies will be issued only on the basis of a duly approved RIV signed by the chief of division or primary unit or his duly designated assistant. Each requisition must be supported by a report showing the kind and quantities of supplies consumed from the time of the latest requisition and the actual balance on hand, per sample form attached, to justify the issuance of additional supplies.

This order takes effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, December 20, 1974

Source: Presidential Management Staff