Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 293

ESTABLISHMENT OF A SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON POWER SERVICE

There is hereby established a Special Committee on Power Service which shall study, formulate and recommend guidelines and criteria with respect to direct sale of power by the National Power Corporation to customers whose requirement is not less than 100 kilowatts, in order to encourage and maximize support for industrial development.

The Special Committee shall be composed of the following:

The Special Committee herein constituted shall, addition to the above objectives undertake the following:

1. Formulate criteria, guidelines indicating when and conditions under which direct sale of power shall be undertaken by NPC to customers whose requests are not less than 100 kilowatt hours.

2. Evaluate the effects on the organizational structure of the power industry, indicating public enterprise (in Power Corporation and the National Electrification Administration) vis-à-vis private enterprise in the areas of power generation, transmission, and distribution.

3. Draw up suggested revisions of the existing laws (specifically paragraph (g) Section 3 of Republic Act No. 6395), to implement the envisioned organizational structure of the power industry and thereby maximize the industry’s support to the development program.

4. Work out guidelines for the, ad interim implementation of Section 2, Republic Act No. 6395 in a manner most conducive to support economic development until the proper amendments to the said provision have been secured. The Special Committee shall submit its report to the Chairman of the Power Development Council for transmittal to the President within 45 days from the effectivity of this Order.

The Special Committee is authorized to call upon all government departments, bureaus, offices and agencies for such assistance as it may deem necessary in discharging its functions.

By the authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Chairman, Power Development Council

Manila, July 14, 1972

Source : Malacañang Records Office