Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 250

ESTABLISHMENT OF A MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM TASK FORCE

There is hereby established a Medical Assistance Program Task Force which shall extend medical care to all residents in a manner within the economic means of the Philippines and provide the people of the country a J practical means of helping themselves pay for adequate & medical care.

The Task Force shall be composed of the following:

The functions of this Task Force shall be as follows:

1) Extension of medical care to all residents in an evolutionary way, within our economic means and capabilities as a nation;

2) Providing the people of the country a practical means of helping themselves pay for adequate medical care.

The Chairman of the Task Force is hereby empowered:

1) To call upon all offices and meet with all persons involved in the work of the Task Force;

2) To request from the various government departments, bureaus and offices, as well as government-owned or controlled corporations, such administrative reports and ‘services as may be required, by the Task Force;

3) To tap public funds from existing appropriations, and whenever appropriate from private sources for the purpose of carrying out its objectives;

4) To negotiate and establish contracts with appropriate persons and organizations in connection with provisions of staff personnel, consultants, and resource persons;

5) To manage all funds in the name of the Medical Task Force; and

6) To perform such other functions as may be necessary (expedient)for the completion of the work for which the Task Force is created.

The Chairman of the Task Force shall be responsible to the Secretary of Health for the propoer functioning of the Task Force.

The Secretary of Health is hereby authorized to allocate within the available funds of the Department of Health such funds as are appropriate and necessary.

All government offices and instrumentalities thereof are hereby enjoined to extend all support and cooperation to the Medical Assistance Task Force in the performance of its functions.

This Order shall take effect immediately and shall be in full force until otherwise deemed by the Philippine Medical Care Commission.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of August , in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, August 25, 1971

Source: Malacañang Records Office