Malacañang Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 734

INSTITUTING A CORRESPONDENCE MOVEMENT RECORDING SYSTEM IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

In order to ensure an accurate and complete recording of the movement of correspondence within the Office of the President, a Correspondence Movement Sheet, a sample copy of which is attached, is hereby prescribed.

All heads of units and others concerned shall see to it that the Correspondence Movement Sheet is attached to every correspondence received in his unit, or duly accomplished where one is already attached to the correspondence received.

Each of the columns in the sheet shall be filled as follows:

1. Clearing Date . – In this column the date the correspondence is released from the unit shall be entered.

2. Origin/Clearing officers initials. – In this column shall be entered the name of the office unit from which the correspondence is being routed, followed by the initials of the official authorizing the routing, who may be the head of the unit or any other responsible official of the unit.

3. Routing (Sent to). – In this column shall be entered the name of the unit or official to whom the correspondence is being routed or sent.

4. File marking (Disposition). – In this column shall be indicated the kind of action expected of the unit or official to whom the correspondence is being routed, such for instance as “For action”, “For signature”, etc.

5. Signature and date received. – In this column the official or employee in the unit to which the correspondence is being routed shall acknowledge receipt of the correspondence by affixing his signature thereon, indicating the date of such receipt.

The above procedure will be repeated by each of the units from which the correspondence is routed.

This Order shall take effect immediately and strict compliance therewith is hereby enjoined.

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, September 1, 1981

Reference: Correspondence Movement Sheet

Source: Presidential Management Staff