Office of the President of the Philippines

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 188

ESTABLISHING A PERFORMANCE AWARD SYSTEM IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT.

WHEREAS, outstanding performance or achievement, as well as meritorious ideas or suggestions, of officials and employees, that contributed to efficiency, economy and other improvement of office operations, should be duly recognized and rewarded pursuant to the provisions of the Civil Service Law and Rules;

WHEREAS, such recognition may be in the form of certificates of merit or monetary awards;

WHEREFORE, there is hereby established a performance award system in the Office of the President which shall be administered in accordance with the following rules and regulations:

I-SCOPE

A. This Performance Award System shall apply to all officials and employees of the Office of the President in the supervisory and non-supervisory levels as defined in paragraphs B and C below.

B. The supervisory group shall include those who oversee, direct and are responsible for the conduct of others for the achievement of a particular task or tasks. For purposes of this Order, however, it shall include only up to Junior Presidential Staff Assistant or equivalent rank.

C. The non-supervisory group includes all other positions not classified as supervisory under the next preceding paragraph.

II-AWARDS

A. Certificates of Merit shall be given yearly for outstanding performance or achievement which shall be categorized as First Award, Second Award and Third Award in each group.

B. Monetary awards shall be given also yearly for meritorious ideas or suggestions that contributed to efficiency, economy and other improvements of office operations. These awards shall likewise be of the three categories in each group as indicated in the next preceding paragraph.

C. The yearly awards herein provided shall be given during the Christmas Party of the Office of the President or on any other appropriate occasion.

III-NOMINATION, RATING AND SELECTION PROCESS

A. Nominations for each category shall be made by the heads of units and shall be justified in accordance with the factors enumerated in paragraph C below. Nominations may also be justified on the basis of outstanding achievement.

B. Such nominations shall be submitted to a Performance Award Committee composed of a Chairman and two members, all of whom shall be designated by the Executive Secretary.

C. In rating performance, the Committee shall consider the following factors:

For Supervisors:

For Non-Supervisors

D. Nominations shall be submitted to the Committee not later than the 1st of December, and the Committee’s recommendations, to the Executive Secretary not later than the 10th of the same month.

E. An awardee shall not be disqualified for subsequent nominations.

IV-SPECIAL AWARDS

Special awards may be given, in addition to those hereinabove defined, to any official or employee of the Office of the President for such consideration as may be deemed deserving of tangible recognition.

V-GENERAL PROVISIONS

A. The Performance Award Committee shall establish the criteria for-selection for purposes of the monetary and special awards herein provided.

B. This Order shall take effect immediately.

C. Memorandum Order No, 133 dated August 15, 1969, is hereby revoked.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, July 20, 1970

Source: Presidential Management Staff