Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 130

PRESCRIBING THE ADOPTION OF STAGGERED WORKING HOURS IN THE EXECUTIVE OFFICE.

The peculiar nature and heavy volume of work handled by the Executive Office under the present development-oriented set-up makes it imperative that its various services he avail­able not only beyond the prescribed office hours on regular working days but even on Saturdays and holidays, if the essential demands of the services are to be adequately met.

For this reason, the Executive Office shall be open for official business as hereunder indicated:

Regular Working Days

From 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.

Saturdays, and holidays

From 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. ” 3:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.

Since strict observance of the above schedule cannot, for obvious reasons, be required of all officials and employees, the heads of the various units are hereby directed to adopt staggered working hours in their respective units such that part of the personnel complement shall report from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p:m., some from 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., and so on, during work-week days: She staggering must be so arranged that a number of employees shall be available for service at the scheduled hours cm Saturdays and holidays, and that no employee shall serve less than 40 hours a week:

Officials and employees who are teachers or students with classes starting at 5:30 a.m. on reek, days shall continue with the usual working hours from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., but may be asked to render extra service on Saturdays and holidays as the needs of the service may require. Meritorious eases may be granted exemption upon written application to the head of the office concerned subject to approval by the Executive Secretary.

Those authorized to render overtime service with meal allowance shall continue to do so provided that the time of service covered by a meal allowance unit shall be adjusted accordingly.

All heads of unit, except the head of the Malacañang Clinic, shall as much as possible observe the new schedule in the interest of the service.

This Order shall take effect on August 1, 1969.

By the authority of the President: (Sgd.) ERNESTO M. MACEDA Executive Secretary

Manila, July 31, 1969

Source : Malacañang Records Office