Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 133

ESTABLISHING A PERFORMANCE AWARD SYSTEM IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT.

WHEREAS, outstanding performance or achievement of officials and employees should be duly recognized and rewarded pursuant to the provisions of Section 27 of Republic Act No. 2260, otherwise known as the Civil Service Act of 1959;

WHEREAS, such recognition may be in the form of certificates of merit and cash awards;

WHEREFORE, there is hereby established a performance award system in the Office of the President which shall be administered in accordance with the following roles and regulations:

I – SCOPE

A. This Performance Award System shall apply to all officials and employees of the Office of the President in the supervisory and non-supervisory levels as defined in paragraphs B and C below.

B. The supervisory group shall include those who oversee, direct and are responsible for the conduct of others for the achievement of a particular task or tasks. For purposes of this Order, however, it shall include only up to Junior Presidential Staff Assistant or equivalent rank.

C. The non-supervisory group includes all other positions not classified as supervisory under the next preceding paragraph.

II – AWARDS

A. Certificates of Merit shall be given monthly and yearly, in addition to the following cash awards:

(1) To the outstanding officials of the month in the Supervisory Group:

(a) First Award – ₱250.00

(b) Second Award – 150.00

(c) Third Award – 100.00

(2) To the outstanding employee of the month in the Non-Supervisory Group:

(a) First Award – ₱250.00

(b) Second Award – 150.00

(c) Third Award – 100.00

(3) To the Most Outstanding Supervisor of the Year – ₱1,000.00

(4) To the Host Outstanding Employee of the Year – ₱1,000.00

The awards for the month shall be given on the first Monday of the next succeeding month during the flag ceremony, and the awards for the year, during the Christmas Party of the Office of the President, or, in either ease, on any other appropriate occasion.

III – NOMINATION, HATING AND SELECTION PROCESS

A. Nominations for each category shall be made by the heads of units and shall be justified in accordance with the factors enumerated in paragraph C below. Nominations may also be justified on the basis of outstanding achievement.

B. Such nominations shall be submitted to a Performance Award Committee composed of a Chairman and two members, all of whom shall be designated by the Executive Secretary.

C. In rating performance, the Committee shall consider the following factors:

For Supervisors:

For non-Supervisors:

D. Nominations for a particular month shall he submitted to the Committee not later than the 5th day of the succeeding month, and the Committee’s recommendations to the Executive Secretary, not later than the 20th of the month.

E. An awardee shall not be disqualified for subsequent nominations.

F. Awardees of the year shall be chosen by the Committee from among the monthly awardees. It shall submit its recommendations to the Executive Secretary not later than the 10th of December

IV – SPECIAL AWARDS

Special awards may be given, in addition to those hereinabove defined, to any official 0r employee of the Office of the President for such considerations as may be deemed deserving of tangible recognition.

By the authority of the President: (Sgd.) ERNESTO M. MACEDA Executive Secretary

Manila, August 15, 1969

Reference: Performance Rating Sheet

Source : Malacañang Records Office