Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 352

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO UNDERTAKE THE PROCUREMENT OF COMMON EDP EQUIPMENT, SUPPLIES AND MATERIALS ON BEHALF OF THE GOVERNMENT AND GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS.

In order to achieve economy in the acquisition and bring about standardization of common EDP equipment, supplies, and materials in the government, a Committee is hereby created to undertake the procurement thereof on behalf of the government and government-owned or controlled corporations.

The Committee shall be composed of:

The Committee shall take note of the specific needs on common EDP equipment, supplies and materials of the government and government-owned or controlled corporations and shall conduct the bidding and make awards, or negotiate on the basis thereof, and recommend to the participating agencies the entry into joint and/or individual contracts with supplier(s), all in-accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations.

The Committee shall be assisted by a Technical, Staff to be composed of representative each of government agency or government-owned or controlled corporation with EDP facilities.

The Committee and the technical staff shall meet at the call of the Chairman and shall submit reports to the Office of the President of its activities and accomplishments.

All government agencies and government-owned or controlled corporations shall submit to the Chairman the names of their respective representatives, and their periodic requirements for common EDP equipment, supplies and materials.

The Committee is hereby, authorized to call upon all government departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities for such services, assistance, and cooperation in fulfilling its functions and responsibilities and to enlist the services of any government official or employee in the performance of its tasks.

Done in the City of Manila this 20th day of March in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office