Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 518

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE COTABATO AND AGUSAN RIVER BASINS

In line with the government’s policy to accelerate the agricultural and socio-economic development of the major river basins of the country and pursuant to the decision of the National Water Resources Council to designate the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications as the lead agency to undertake the studies for the integrated development of the Cotabato and Agusan river basins, there is hereby created an Inter-Agency Coordinating Committee under the general guidance and overall supervision of the National Water Resources Council to coordinate the overall planning of water and related land resources development wit’ in the Cotabato and Agusan river basins. The Committee shall be composed of the following members:

The Committee shall have the.following duties and functions:

a. coordinate all plans for development of water and related land resources in the two basins;

b. prepare a comprehensive integrated plan for the development of water and related resources (including all reasonable alternatives) by June, 19 78;

c. recommend programs of priorities for all phases of development, including the collection and analysis of basic data, for investigation, planning, and’ the construction of projects;

d. foster and undertake such special studies of water and related land resources problems as necessary for the preparation of the comprehensive plan;

e. organize task forces to carry out the required plan of activities; and

f. provide technical assistance to agencies or sectors concerned with water and related development.

Heads of agencies concerned are hereby enjoined to designate their representatives to the IACC within one (1) week upon receipt of a copy of this Memorandum Order.

The Committee is hereby authorized and empowered to call upon the appropriate departments, bureaus and agencies and instrumentalities of the government, to give the necessary assistance and cooperation to ensure the accomplishment of its tasks.

Finally, the Committee shall operate and continue to exercise its authority until such time as its designated tasks are completed.

This order shall take effect immediately

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, 16 June 1975

Source: Presidential Management Staff