TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 653

For closer cooperation and more responsive participation of all Philippine Government agencies/offices involved in the implementation of the Laguna de Bay Fish Pen Development Project with external financial assistance and to ensure that the commitments of the Philippine government in the said project are promptly observed, there is hereby created a coordinating body to be known as Laguna de Bay Fish Pen Development Coordinating Committee composed of the following or their duly designated representatives:

The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. To formulate the policies and guidelines for implementing the Laguna de Bay Fish Pen Development Project;

2. To determine and assign responsibility to appropriate Philippine government agencies/offices for the implementation of the components of the Project;

3. To integrate and coordinate all activities that relate to the subject Project;

4. To approve the budget for the operation and maintenance of the Committee and Working Group; and

5. To do such other things and to transact all such business as is directly or is directly or indirectly necessary to the attainment of the objectives of the Laguna de Bay Fish Pen Development Project.

In the execution of its functions, the Coordinating Committee shall be assisted by a Working Group composed of those representatives from the Laguna Lake Development Authority, the Development Bank of the Philippines, and the Philippine Fish Marketing Authority who shall be responsible as project managers/project officers-in-charge, for their respective agency participation in the Fish Pen Development Project plush such other technical and support staff as may be required. The LLDA representative shall act as Group Leader.

The Working Group shall perform the following duties:

1. To ensure the effective and timely coordination of inter-office activities related to the various project components;

2. To execute and administer the policies and measures adopted by the Committee

3. To prepare and recommend the budget of the Committee and Working Group for the approval of the Committee;

4. To submit periodic reports on the status of project implementation to the Committee;

5. To do such things as may be necessary to facilitate project implementation and coordination;

6. To prepare the agenda for all meeting’s of the Committee and to submit for the consideration thereof policies and measures that are necessary to carry out the affairs of the Committee.

7. To provide secretariat- services and perform such other duties as may be assigned to them by the Committee from time to time.

To provide for the operation and maintenance of the Committee and the Working Group, the DBP, LLDA, and the PFMA shall contribute to a common fund out of the project funds in such amounts as may be determined by the Committee based on the budget submitted by the Working Group for the Committee’s approval. The fund shall be administered by the LLDA.

The members of the Committee and the Working Group shall be entitled to reimbursable transportation and representation allowances at such rates as may be approved by the Committee subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations applicable thereto.

All government offices, agencies and instrumentalities whose activities relate to the Project are hereby directed to provide the necessary assistance to the Committee in the form of personnel, facilities and other resources as the need arises in the implementation of the Project, the cooperation of the private sector is likewise enjoined.

The Laguna de Bay Fish Pen Development Coordinating Committee herein organized shall submit semestral reports to the Office of the President.

Finally, the Committee and its staff shall operate and continue to exercise its powers until such time as its designated tasks are completed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Presidential Management Staff