Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 504

CREATING A MAN AND THE BIOSPHERE (MAB) INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE ON ECOLOGICAL STUDIES

There is hereby created an inter-agency committee for the purpose of undertaking ecosystems studies and projects on operational level, and implementing Presidential Decree No. 354 declaring Puerto Galera and its environs as MAB Reserve for research and instruction on ecological studies and projects. The committee shall be composed of the following:

The committee shall have the following duties and functions:

a. Implement Presidential Decree No. 354 within the purview of its objectives and as a recognized member of the UN network on Biosphere Resources.

b. Identify areas of interaction requiring ecological research inputs in agencies managing and utilizing resources.

c. Identify existing expertise on operational level in the different government, academic and private entities to optimize combined capabilities in performing inter-disciplinary and interagency work.

d. Organize technical pools on interagency basis for integrated ecological studies on the monitoring of renewable and non-renewable resources.

e. Conduct baseline ecosystems studies, expand the state of knowledge on resources for the purpose of rational management accompanying development.

f. Formulate a system of incentives in recognition of the expertise and technical leadership existing in agencies undertaking collaborative projects within the MAB framework.

g. Undertake project development for ecological impact assessment and identify priority areas for action simultaneous to socio-economic development.

h. Upon clearance with the Office of the President, enter into bilateral or multilateral agreements involving ecosystems studies affecting resources.

i. Undertake training on community level in the rural areas so as to evolve an awareness of the value of resources, such as flura ad fauna, air, water and land, marine life, worldlife.

j. Provide information and technical inputs on ecological balance for the decision maker on community -national level.

k. Undertake training of scientists and researchers, particularly in field work in rural areas.

l. Utilize existing networks of human resources, and as the U.P. system, and private universities as well as funding sources such as NSDB, PCAR, and such authorities which may assist the committee in the attainment of its obj actives.

The committee shall meet at the call of the Chairman and, for the purpose of discharging its function and duties, may create sub-committees as may be necessary.

Contributions from participating agencies to finance the committee’s operations shall be worked out according to existing government accounting and auditing regulations.

All heads of departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the government are hereby requested to extend full cooperation and assistance to the committee to ensure the accomplishment of its tasks.

This order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, April 3, 1975

Source: Malacañang Records Office