Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 314-a

This Office under Memorandum Order No. 314 dated November 10, 1972 created, by authority of the President, an Inter-Agency Committee to study the reorganization of government operations in Metropolitan Manila, with the view to determine the feasibility of integrating common services within the inner metropolis. One of the panels created by the Inter-Agency Committee is the panel on police services. Dean Carlos P. Ramos of the College of Public Administration, University of the Philippines, Co-Chairman of the Inter-Agency Committee, is in charge of this panel.

Please be informed, that the following are designated to be members of the panel on police services:

Brig. Gen. Crispin de Castro

Chairman, Police Commission

Brig. Gen. Alfredo Montoya

Commander, METROCOM (P.C.)

Director Jolly Bugarin

Director, National Bureau of Investigation

Col. Jose Lukban

Retired Commissioner, Police Commission

Lt. Col. Arcadio Lozada (Ret.)

Chief of Police, Bacolod City

This panel is scheduled to be convened and organized on Wednesday, December 13, 1972 at 14:30 hours at the office of Brig. Gen. Alfredo Montoya METROCOM Comman H.Q. Camp Crame, Quezon City.

It is hoped that the panel should consider:

a. The costs and other logistic support for an integrated police command within the inner Manila metropolis.

b. Design a suitable organization, personnel requirements and area distribution for such integrated police force and. other such-related problems.

It is envisioned that the integrated police command for metropolitan Manila be coordinated and administered with other services intended to be integrated such as, those on fire, traffic, flood and drainage, water and sewage, garbage collection and disposal and others that the Inter-Agency Committee may recommend for integration.

A report on the findings and recommendations of the committee shall be submitted to the Inter-Agency Committee by January 10, 1973 for consolidation with the other reports that are expected to be submitted to this Office by the Inter-Agency Committee on or before January 31, 1973.

By Authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, December 5, 1972

Source: Malacañang Records Office