Office of the President of the Philippines

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 8

DESIGNATING THE OFFICIALS AUTHORIZED TO SIGN OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE FOR AND IN BEHALF OF THE EXECUTIVE SECRETARY

Pending the appointment and qualification of the Assistant Executive Secretaries the following officials are hereby authorized to sign official correspondence “for the Executive Secretary” on matters as hereunder indicated:

1. Mr. Mariano Serrano, Legal Adviser; and Mr. Domingo G. Flores and Miss Elisa Santillan, Presidential Staff Assistants, Legal Office.-

(a) Correspondence which are routinary in character such as simple acknowledgements, referrals and inquiries handled by the Legal Office.

(b) Certification of signatures of Presidential appointee.

2. Mr. Isaias del Rosario, Staff Secretary.-

All papers referred to him by the Executive Secretary which are routinary in character.

3. Mr. Fernando C. Santico, Presidential Staff Assistant, Administrative Division.-

(a) Applications for leave of absence of officials and employees other than those of chiefs and assistant chief of division or higher;

(b) Correspondence of routine nature and such other matters not involving final decision as transmittals of appointments to the Civil Service Commission, acknowledgements, inquiries, acknowledgements and referrals.

4. Mr. Cesar Dumlao, Financial Assistant.-

(a) Correspondence of routine nature handled by the Finance Division

(b) Payrolls, vouchers and requisitions.

5. Mr. Amando Adriano, Presidential Staff Assistant, Local Governments and Civil Affairs Office.-

Routine acknowledgements and referrals;

(a) Applications for leave of absence of local officials and employees;

(b) Certificates of Appearance of local officials and employees, when not unusual or controversial in nature.

The chief of the Records Division, Office of the Legislative Secretary, Office of the Cabinet Secretary, Building, and Grounds Division, Accounting Division and Malacañang Clinic may sign routine letters of acknowledgement, referral and inquiries on “matters coming under their respective jurisdictions.

All other matters not specifically delegated herein shall be prepared for the signature of the Executive Secretary.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila , January 5, 1966

Source : Presidential Management Staff