Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 233

CONSTITUTING A PERFORMANCE TEAM TO CONDUCT PERFORMANCE AUDIT ON THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.

Pursuant to Administrative Order No. 271, series of 1971, there is hereby constituted a Performance Team to conduct performance audit on the Civil Service Commission, to be composed as follows:

In the conduct of performance audit, the Performance Team shall be guided by the provisions of Administrative Order No. 271, series of 1971, and the Development Performance Evaluation System Operations Manual compiled pursuant thereto.

Activities related to the conduct of performance audit shall take precedence over all other duties, and for this pur­pose, all team members, except those from the Commission on Reorganization, are hereby placed under the full-time opera­tional control of their Team and Assistant Team Leaders, for the duration of the audit.

Members assigned from the Commission on Reorganization shall participate in the performance audit on a part-time basis, with the specific purpose of keeping their Team informed on the Commission’s evaluative, findings relative to the Civil Service Commission, and ensuring that the team does not duplicate aspects of organizational evaluation already accomplished by the Commission.

Transportation requirements for the performance audit shall be provided by the Civil Service Commission. Adminis­trative and technical support shall be provided by the Development Management Staff, Executive Office, and the Development Performance Evaluation System Secretariat.

Performance audit on the Civil Service Commission shall commence on May 17, 1971 and shall be conducted for a period of not more than twenty-two working days. The Final Report of the Performance Team shall be submitted to the Development Management Staff, Executive Office, not later than June 16, 1971 for transmittal to the President.

All bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the Office of the President are hereby enjoined to coop­erate with and assist the Performance Team accomplish its assigned task, consistent with the aims of the Development Performance Evaluation System.

By authority of the President

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, May 13, 1971

Source: Malacañang Records Office