TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 474

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE TO FORMULATE A PROGRAM FOR STRENGTHENING PHILIPPINE ECONOMIC RELATIONS ABROAD.

WHEREAS, the Philippines is embarking on a vigorous campaign to expand foreign exchange receipts from exports of its products;

WHEREAS, foreign investments are being; attracted into areas of national priority, to supplement domestic sources of financing;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to tap new sources of technical and financial assistance to serve as inputs for the national development effort;

WHEREAS, the close monitoring of international developments is necessary to anticipate the effect of such developments on the Philippine economy;

NOW, THEREFORE there is hereby created an Inter-Agency Committee which shall work out a program designed to strengthen the Philippine economic presence abroad by utilizing the expertise found in different government offices in the Philippines. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

The Committee is charged with the following functions:

1. To determine the specific areas of economic and commercial interest to the Philippines which can be strengthened by fielding to Philippine Embassies and Consulates abroad personnel with the necessary expertise now found in government offices throughout the country;

2. To identify the countries or posts which should be targets of this intensive Philippine economic expansion drive;

3. To create the machinery and set the guidelines for:

a.) the selection of the qualified personnel to be assigned abroad;

b.) the terms and conditions of such assignment, to include sources of funding therefor;

c) the administration of this program, to include definition of procedures to be followed; and

d) the design of procedures for the evaluation of this program and its personnel;

4. The design of a pre-assignment training program for government officials selected for foreign posts under this scheme;

5. The formulation of a Memorandum of Understanding to be entered into by all departments, bureaus, agencies, offices and instrumentalities of the government, including government-controlled corporations, who have detailed personnel under this program.

In the performance of its tasks, the Committee shall be expected to consult with other government agencies whose expertise may serve as inputs for this program.

The Committee shall submit its recommendations within one month from the date of this Order.

By Authority of the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, 19 December, 1974

Source: Presidential Management Staff