Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 781

AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 712, DATED JANUARY 15, 1981, REGARDING RESERVED PARKING SPACES WITHIN THE MALACAÑANG COMPOUND

Memorandum Order No. 712, dated January 15, 1981, Reserving the Numbered Spaces within the Malacañang Compound for Certain Officials and Providing Rules and Regulations in the Enforcement thereof, is hereby amended so as to revise the numbering of the parking spaces and to provide the corresponding reserved parking stickers with color codes and numbers, in lieu of the reserved parking cards previously issued.

The reserved parking sticker is strictly non-transferrable. If for one reason or another, an official or employee whose car is provided with a reserved parking sticker cannot use his vehicle, he cannot transfer his sticker to another one. In this case he should secure a temporary sticker from the Malacañang Provost Office to be used in his other car for parking in the space alloted to him. The list of officials and employees authorized to park in the area, including service vehicles, is enclosed.

Twenty (20) unnumbered parking spaces shall be designated in the area fronting the Administration Building for use, on a first-come-first-served basis, of Palace visitors and others authorized to enter through Gate 4 to transact official business in the offices within the Compound. However, the Provost personnel may request visitors who have drivers to park their cars/vehicles outside Gate 4 and avail themselves of the paging system.

The Presidential Staff Director, Malacañang Engineer’s Office, shall see to it that necessary facilities be installed and maintained with the parking area, such as traffic signs, parking lines, parking numbers, etc., as indicated in the enclosed schematic diagram of the parking plan.

The Malacañang Provost Officer and the Presidential Staff Director Malacañang Engineer’s Office, shall coordinate with the Presidential Staff Director, Personnel Office, in the implementation of this Order.

All existing rules and regulations on Parking and Traffic Control within the Malacañang Compound that are not inconsistent herewith shall continue to be strictly observed.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, March 24, 1983

Source: Presidential Management Staff Library