Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 814

In view of persistent reports of petty theft/robbery committed at night or during weekends in some offices, the following precautionary measures are hereby-prescribed to enhance the security of the office premises:

a. Custody of keys to Offices –

1. Each head of office shall designate one responsible subordinate who shall have custody of the key to their office. The employee so designated shall assure that all access points are locked before leaving the office every afternoon. Upon his arrival the following working day, he shall take note of and immediately report to the Provost Marshall any indications of illegal entry which could have taken place during the intervening period.

2. Duplicate keys to all offices shall be properly labelled and kept in a locked glass cabinet at the Engineer’s Office, the key of which shall be in the custody of the Director or his designated representative. In case of fire or any other emergency, and in the absence of the key custodian, the locked cabinet shall be forced open only by authorized security officers so that the keys to endangered offices can be obtained and access thereto facilitated.

3. Heads of offices may keep one key to their offices for their own personal use when coming to offices outside of regular office hours.

4. The names of persons authorized to handle a key to any of the offices shall be furnished the Provost Marshall so as to facilitate identification of those who have ready access to such offices.

b. Presence in office outside of office hours –

1. Heads of offices shall furnish the Provost Marshall with a list of their employees who are authorized to render overtime work or who are required to remain in their respective offices beyond the regular office hours because of the demands of the Service. It is understood that the authority to remain within the office premises shall exclude relatives of the employees so authorized. The list shall include the dates and approximate inclusive hours of the day such employees shall be in their respective offices.

2. The Provost Marshall shall investigate and evict from the premises, or detain if warranted, any person who is not so authorized to remain therein outside of office Incurs. The Investigation Report, copy furnished the Presidential Executive Assistant, shall be forwarded to the lead of office concerned who will institute appropriate steps to administratively discipline violators under the civil service law end rules.

c. All heads of offices and major units in this Office shall see to it that these rules are disseminated among their employees and strictly enforced in their respective offices.

This Order takes effect immediately.

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, October 19, 1984

Source : Malacañang Records Office