Office of the President of the Philippines

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 114

AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 107, DATED JULY 12, 1968, AND PRESCRIBING CERTAIN PROCEDURES IN THE FLAG CEREMONY THEREIN DIRECTED TO BE HELD.

Memorandum Order No. 107, dated July 12, 1968, directing the holding of a flag ceremony every Monday in the Office of the President is hereby amended so as to schedule the ceremony also every Friday afternoon to 4s45 o’clock.

Before the start of every ceremony, there shall be placed around the oval containing the flagpole markers designating the places of assignment of divisions and units. The Engineer’s Office shall see to this.

At least five minutes before the scheduled start of the ceremony, all officials and employees shall have already assembled in their assigned places in lines of two’s radiating from the oval. In the Flag raising ceremony, it is only when all are at their assigned places that the Flag, properly folded, shall be brought out of the building accompanied by a Guard of Honor provided by the Presidential Guard Battalion; the Flag shall be carefully unfurled and attached to the hallyard, then raised and held at a height sufficient for the unfurled Flag to float just above the ground. At this stage shall begin the playing and singing of the National Anthem; the raising of the Flag shall start at the first note of the National Anthem.

As regards conduct and behavior, quoted below for the guidance of all are pertinent provisions of Executive Order No. 137, dated January 7, 1965, further amending Executive Order No. 321 dated June 12, 1965, “Prescribing the Code of the National Flag and National Anthem of the Republic of the Philippines.”

“III. Manner of Saluting

“1. Members of the Armed Forces of the Country and those belonging to semi-military and police organizations in uniform should adopt the military salute provided in their regulations.

“2. Civilians if outdoors should stand at attention, and if wearing hats, should uncover and hold the hats over their hearts. Complete silence must be observed and no one should be allowed to walk around while the ceremony is going on.”

It should be mentioned that when one is “at attention” he shall stand straight with his hand placed firmly at the sides—not locked in frost or at the back.

It is also hereby prescribed that during the ceremony no one shall hold an umbrella or cover of any sort over his head. During inclement weather the flag ceremony will be dispensed with only when so announced; hence, it should be understood that until such announcement is made, the ceremony will be held as scheduled. If it should rain while the ceremonies in progress, it shall nevertheless continue until completed.

It is hereby reiterated that attendance in the flag ceremony is compulsory. Each head of primary or other independent unit shall see to the attendance of all those in his unit. A report form shall be prepared listing the names of all the members of the unit with succeeding columns on which to be indicated the employees’ presence in, or absence from, the ceremony held on a particular day. The absences shall be classified into “excusable” and “inexcusable.” For uniformity, the Administrative Division shall devise the form for the use of all units. Such report shall be made once a week and submitted to the Administrative Division. Inexcusable absences shall be administratively dealt with.

Please be guided accordingly.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, August 9, 1968

Source: Malacañang Records Office