TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 411

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE FOR THE REHABILITATION OF JOLO

In view of the urgency to rebuild, restructure and restore the Town of Jolo, there is hereby created an inter-agency task force to rehabilitate the Town on Jolo composed of the following:

The Task Force shall have the following specific functions:

1. Establish priorities and guidelines in rehabilitating the Town of Jolo.

2. Determine the forms of assistance required from government and private agencies to restore normal activities in the area.

3. Engage the cooperation and assistance (both financial and physical) of government and private agencies working in the area.

4. Supervise all rehabilitation activities in the Town in cooperation with SPARE, Department of Social Welfare and other government and private organizations working in the area.

5. Perform other functions as may be necessary for the successful accomplishment of its mission.

In the execution of its functions the Task Force shall consider the’ following factors:

1. The need to define new boundaries for the town of Jolo to accentuate the economic and cultural role it should play in the future;

2. Designing and implementing an efficient town plan, which may require the relocation of present facilities or services, such as the airport or the Provincial Hospital;

3. Accelerating the reconstruction of residential areas through individual housing loans and low-cost housing projects;

4. The design and implementation of a tourism complex for the area.

The Task Force herein organized shall submit weekly progress reports to the President, through the Executive Secretary.

All heads, departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the Government are hereby directed to extend full cooperation and assistance to the Task Force to insure the accomplishment of its assigned duties.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff