Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 426

STRUCTURING THE INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE FOR THE REHABILITATION OF JOLO AND SPECIFYING RESPONSIBILITIES THEREFOR

The Inter-Agency Task Force for the Rehabilitation of Jolo created under Memorandum Order No. 411, series of 1974, is hereby structured in the following manner for greater efficiency and effectivity of action:

BASIC STRUCTURE

The Inter-Agency Task Force shall consist of an Executive Committee, a Task Force Rear, based in Manila, which shall provide the planning and ‘logistical support for the rehabilitation effort, and a Task Force Forward, based in Jolo, which shall be the implementing arm for this effort.

A. EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

Functions . The Executive Committee shall define the basic objectives and policies for the rehabilitation-efforts, oversee and evaluate the implementation of all rehabilitation programs in Jolo.

Membership :

B. TASK FORCE REAR

The Task Force Rear shall be made up of the following subcomittees, functions and membership of which are described below:

1. Overall and Long-Term Planning

2. Land Inventory and Reconstitution of Land Titles

3. Physical Infrastructures

4. Housing

5. Relief, Relocation and Resettlement

6. Trade, Industry and Agriculture

7. Banking and Financial Services

8. Logistics

OVERALL AND LONG-TERM PLANNING

Functions . The Committee on Overall and Long-Term Planning shall prepare the basic physical plans for the reconstruction of the Town of Jolo, keeping in mind the role played by the town in the socio-economic development of the province of Sulu and the region as a whole.

As part of its plan, the Committee shall consider the establishment of a free trade zone or an industrial estate in the area, and shall prepare the basic designs for such a scheme.

Furthermore, a tourism complex shall likewise be planned and designed. The development of this tourism complex should consider the preservation and restoration of historical sites or monuments in the area as well as the cultivation of indigenous skills and handicrafts which can serve as attractions for visitors.

In working out the plans for the tourism complex, the Committee shall involve the GSIS, the SSS and the Philippine Veterans Investment and Development Corp., which institutions together with Ayala Corporation and other interested parties shall finance the development of this complex.

Membership:

LAND INVENTORY AND RECONSTITUTION OF

LAND TITLES

Functions . The Committee on Land Inventory and Reconstitution of Land Titles is charged with the following tasks:

1. To make an inventory of land use and ownership in and around the Town of Jolo.

2. To set up and implement a system whereby land titles lost or destroyed during the burning of the town of Jolo may be quickly reconstituted.

3. To identify land problems and take appropriate measures toward their resolution.

Membership . This Committee shall be composed of the Director of the Bureau of Lands and the Land Registration Commissioner.

PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURES

Functions . The Committee on Physical Infrastructures shall plan, program and mobilize resources for both the immediate repair of infrastructures in the town of Jolo and the longer-term upgrading or construction of existing and new infrastructures. The work of this Committee will have to conform to the master plan for the physical design of Jolo to be drawn up by the Overall and Long-Term Planning Committee.

Membership

HOUSING

Functions . The Committee on Housing shall immediately provide temporary shelter for the displaced population of Jolo. Over the medium term, relocation centers shall be set up with more substantial housing facilities as well as other social amenities and opportunities for earning a livelihood. Simultaneously, the Housing Committee shall be planning and implementing schemes for permanent low-cost housing as well as making credit available for residential lot owners.

Membership:

RELIEF, RELOCATION AND RESETTLEMENT

Functions . The Committee on Relief, Relocation and Resettlement shall:

1. Provide immediate relief assistance to the population of Jolo where & when needed.

2. Set up and administer Relocation Centers to house the displaced population of Jolo while more permanent accommodations are being prepared. These Relocation Centers shall be provided with basic social facilities and income-generating opportunities for the population to be served.

3. Establishment of permanent Resettlement Sites for that portion of the population that is not able to provide for permanent housing of its own. As in the Relocation Centers these Resettlement Sites shall be equipped with basic social facilities as well as opportunities for the population to earn a livelihood.

In the performance of its tasks, the Committee shall work closely with the other committees within the Task Force, particularly the Committees on Housing and on Physical Infrastructures. Furthermore, the Committee on Relief, Relocation and Resettlement shall extend its assistance to areas outside the Town of Jolo whenever sizeable numbers of evacuees from the town are found to have sought shelter in these areas.

Membership :

The Chairman of this sub-committee may include in its membership representatives of civic and other organizations if and when such representation is deemed desirable or necessary.

TRADE, INDUSTRY AND AGRICULTURE

Functions . The Committee on Trade, Industry and Agriculture shall plan out and organize business ventures in Jolo which shall restore the economy of the area to normalcy and accelerate the further development of the province of Sulu. This shall include the formation of agricultural, fisheries and consumers cooperatives to enhance the economic welfare of the residents of Jolo.

!n its work program the Committee shall aim at ultimately establishing a free trade zone or an industrial estate in Jolo. This zone or estate may revolve around the processing of such natural resources of Sulu as coconuts, abaca, fruits, marine products as well as the production of handicrafts, and should consider serving markets even beyond Philippine territorial waters.

Membership :

BANKING AND FINANCIAL SERVICES

Functions . The Committee on Banking and Financial Services shall ensure that credit is made readily available to the residents of Jolo for privately financed construction and business purposes. In doing so, the Committee shall take note of the unusual circumstances affecting the residents of Jolo and shall accordingly effect a modification of standard lending procedures in order to meet the pressing needs of the town.

Membership :

LOGISTICS

Functions . The Logistics Committee shall:

1. Determine the financial requirements for the entire rehabilitation effort.

2. Identify sources of financing to meet these requirements.

3. Establish an efficient disbursement and accounting system for the Task Force’s expenses

4. Mobilize the necessary financial resources

5. Mobilize transport facilities needed in support of the rehabilitation of Jolo.

Membership

C. TASK FORCE FORWARD

The Task Force Forward shall consist of Working Groups made up of representatives of agencies participating in the rehabilitation of Jolo. These Working Groups shall be under the direction and supervision of the Military Mayor of Jolo. For this purpose the Military Mayor is hereby designated Executive Director of the Task Force Forward.

The Working Groups shall have the following memberships and functions:

Relief, Relocation and Resettlement Member Agencies:

1. SPARE

2. Philippine National Red Cross

3. Department of Social Welfare

4. Department of Health (Provincial Health Officer)

5. Sulu Provincial Hospital

6. National Grains Authority

7. Dept. of Local Government and Community Development

8. Representatives of Civic Organizations

Functions:

1. Implement projects relative to relief, health and sanitation

2. Administer relief and rehabilitation centers.

3. Provide coordinate relief assistance where and when needed.

4. Identify problems relating to relief, health and sanitation and take action on such problems.

5. Monitor and coordinate relief and rehabilitation activities of the private sector.

Physical Infrastructures

Member Agencies:

1. Bureau of Public Highways

2. Bureau of Public Works

3. Office of the Provincial Engineer .

4. Area Equipment Service

5. Jolo Waterworks

6. Bureau of Public Schools

7. Jolo Power

Functions:

1. Identify projects and recommend priorities for undertaking such projects.

2. Implement projects relative to restoration, rehabilitation and extension of infrastructure projects.

3. Supervise the construction of new infrastructures necessary for the further development of the area.

Trade, Industry and Agriculture

Member Agencies:

1. Mindanao Development Authority

2. Bureau of Agricultural Extension

3. Bureau of Customs

4. Bureau of Fisheries

5. NACIDA

6. National Grains Authority

7. Bureau of Animal Industry

8. Bureau of Commerce

9. Bureau of Plant Industry

10. Bureau of Cooperatives Development

11. National Manpower and Youth Council

Functions:

1. Identify problems relative to normalization of trade, commerce, industry and agriculture and provide assistance to the private sector in overcoming such problems.

2. Screen private individuals seeking loans from government financing institutions to support trading activities.

3. Provide assistance in the organization of cooperatives.

4. Recommend areas of action for government rehabilitation efforts in trade, commerce and industry.

Banking and Financial Services

Member Agencies:

1. Philippine National Bank

2. Social Security System

3. Government Service Insurance System

4. Development Bank of the Philippines

5. Philippine Amanah Bank

Functions:

1. Implement measures to ensure availability of credit to Jolo residents.

2. Insure immediate processing of standing applications for credit.

3. Coordinate credit extension operations.

Land Inventory and Reconstitution of Land Titles

Member Agencies:

1. Bureau of Lands

2. Land Registration Commission

Functions:

1. Conduct an inventory of government and private lands.

2. Provide assistance in reconstituting land ownership documents.

3. Follow-up applications for titles, patents, etc. on file with national offices.

4. Recommend actions toward resolving land problems.

The PROD for Region IX, AFP Home Defense and other military units in the region are directed to assist and coordinate with the Task Force Forward in the implementation of all rehabilitation and development projects in Jolo.

The Task Force Forward Executive Director shall submit to the Executive Committee through the Inter-Agency Task Force Secretariat, weekly reports on the activities of the Working Groups, military and civic organizations, logistical requirements as well as such other developments relevant to assessing rehabilitation efforts in Jolo. For this purpose the Executive Director shall utilize existing channels of communicating, i.e., the Air Marshalls on commercial flights from Jolo, military radio-telephone channels (the Joint Operations Center of GHQ, AFP and the 52nd Engineer Brigade) and through commercial telegraph system.

D. SECRETARIAT

Functions : A full-time Secretariat shall be set up with the following functions:

1. To provide a communication link between the Task Force Forward and the Task Force Rear, between the Executive Committee and the various committees within the Task Force and between the Task Force and other cooperating agencies/entities.

2. To serve as the public information arm of the Task Force.

3. To serve as the Executive Committee Chairman’s staff for clearance and evaluation of proposed projects.

4. To prepare periodic reports on the activities of the Task Force and the progress of the rehabilitation effort in Jolo.

5. To handle general administrative matters for the Task Force.

6. To perform other functions that may be assigned it by the Executive Committee Chairman.

Composition . The Secretariat shall be headed by the Director of the Program Execution Monitoring Office, Development Management Staff, who shall organize and manage its day-to-day activities.

COORDINATION OF REHABILITATION EFFORTS

The Task Force is charged with overseeing and coordinating the implementation of all programs and projects related to the rehabilitation of Jolo. In this regard, all agencies of government, national and local, civilian and military, are hereby directed, to coordinate with the Task Force in the implementation of programs and projects which they may have for the rehabilitation of Jolo.

The private sector is likewise enjoined to coordinate with the Task Force with regard to any programs, projects or donations meant for the rehabilitation of Jolo.

All heads of departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the Government are hereby directed to extend full cooperation and assistance to the Task Force to insure the accomplishment of its assigned duties.

By Authority of the President: (Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, 29 April 1974

Source: Presidential Management Staff