TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 548

REQUIRING THE INSTITUTION OF FUEL, OIL AND POWER CONSERVATION MEASURES, IN THE EXECUTIVE OFFICE.

WHEREAS, in view of the recent increase of prices of crude oil and other fuel, the President issued Letter Instructions No. 328 dated October 27,1975, directing the mediate adoption of energy conservation measures and the promotion of efficient utilization of fuels and electricity in all sectors of the economy;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 1(e) of said Letter of Instructions all government offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations are directed to institute fuel, oil and power conservation;

WHEREAS, the extent to which these energy conservation measures in this Office can be carried cut depends on the degree of involvement and support of our officials and employees;

WHEREEORE, the following conservation measures are hereby instuted in this Office:

1. Electric Power Consumption –

a. Use of electric lights shall be kept to the minimum. Electric lights shall be shut off in the premises during non-office hours, that is, between 12:00 o’clock noon and 1:00 P.M., and after office hours, except in cases of offices whose functions required that they render service even during off-hours, or whenever the exigency of the service so requires to be determined by the head of office/unit;

b. Electric fans, air-conditioning units and other electrical appliances and office equipment or facilities run by electric power shall at all times be maintained in good running condition and shall be shut off whenever they are not in use, and

c. Water should be used properly. Water from faucets and other water outlets is delivered by pumps which consume energy. When not being used all water outlets should be turned off and leaks and other defects in the water system shall be reported to the Engineer’s Office for immediate repairs.

2. Gasoline consumption –

a. Service cars and other vehicles of the Office shall be used only upon written request of the head of office/unit requiring such service and for clearly necessary official purposes which shall be started in the request, and shall be provided with the required trip tickets, and

b. Gasoline allocations for official cars assigned to various units or officials of the Office shall be reduced by 10%.

The Presidential Finance Adviser shall see to the effective implementation of this Order, and for this purpose the Presidential Staff Director, Malacañang Engineer’s Office and the Malacañang Motorpool Superintendent shall submit to him monthly reports of electric power and gasoline consumption in the Office, respectively. All chiefs of office/unit shall designate a responsible official in their respective offices/ units to assist the Presidential Finance Adviser in implementing this Order.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, November 26, 1975

Source: Presidential Management Staff