Office of the President of the Philippines

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 611

RECONSTITUTING THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF LUBANG ISLAND.

In order to insure efficient and coordinated planning and implementation of the development plan of the island of Lubang originally tasked to the Presidential Task Force for the Development of Lubang Island under Memorandum Order No. 415 dated 22 March 1974, the task force group is hereby reconstituted to be as follows:

The reconstituted task force shall be directly under the Office of the President and shall have the following functions:

1. To continue the on-going projects initiated by the Task Force Group under Memorandum Order No. 415;

2. To prepare a plan to develop the resources of Lubang Island including the development of scenic and tourist spots, cottage industries, cooperatives, etc., designed to promote the Island’s social and economic development;

3. To integrate and coordinate all plans, programs, projects, and proposals of national as well as local government agencies and instrumentalities affecting the development of the island for the purpose of recommending and establishing priorities therein, and programming the utilization of funds available for the purpose;

4. To supervise the implementation by appropriate agencies of such approved plans, programs and projects;

5. To coordinate with the Budget Commission for financial availment in the implementation projects and objectives for the integrated development of Lubang Island.

6. To call upon any department, bureau, office, agency and other instrumentality of the national and local governments, including the assistance of the private sector in the form of personnel, facilities and cither resources as the need arises, in the discharge of its functions; and

7. To render monthly reports on the Task Force’s activities to the Office of the President..

In order to have initial fund for the said projects, it is hereby ordered that all outstanding balances of financial releases for the Presidential Task Force for the Development of Lubang Island under Memorandum Order No. 415 now under the custody of the National Computer Center be transferred to the Presidential Management Staff to defray expenditures required in the implementation of project developments for the area.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Reference: Memorandum to the Managing Director, National Computer Center

Source: Presidential Management Staff Library