Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 415

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF LUBANG ISLAND

WHEREAS, the Japanese Government, as a token of its gratitude to the government’s assistance in the successful and safe return of Lt. Hiroo Onoda to Japan, has generously donated to the Philippine Government 300 million yen, or an amount equivalent to over six million pesos, for the development of Lubang Island;

WHEREAS, there is a need to insure efficient and coordinated planning and implementation of the development plan of the Island and to program the optimum utilization of the amount donated;

WHEREAS, to achieve this end there is a necessity to create a task force to oversee the implementation of such development plans of the Island;

WHEREFORE, there is hereby created a Presidential Task Force for the Development of Lubang Island, to be composed of the following:

The Task Force shall be directly under the Office of the President and shall have the following functions:

1. To prepare a plan to develop the resources of Lubang Island including the development of scenic and tourist spots, cottage industries, cooperatives, etc., designed to promote the Island’s social and economic development;

2. To integrate and coordinate all plans, program, projects, and proposals of national as well as local government agencies and instrumentalities affecting the development of the island for the purpose of recommending and establishing priorities therein, and programming the utilization of funds available for the purpose;

3. To supervise the implementation by appropriate agencies of such approved plans, programs and projects;

4. To do all such things and to transact all such business as is directly or indirectly necessary, incidental to the attainment of the development program of the Island;

5. To call upon any department, bureau, office, agency and other instrumentality of the national and local governments, including the assistance of the private sector in the form of personnel, facilities arid other resources as the need arises; in the discharged its functions; and

6. To render periodic reports on the Task Force’s activities to the Office of the President.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 22nd day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff