MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 581

AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 516 DATED 16 JUNE 1975, ENTITLED SYSTEMATIZING THE RECEPTION AND PROCESSING OF FORMER DISSIDENTS IN ORDER TO FACILITATE THEIR REINTEGRATION INTO SOCIETY.

WHEREAS, as a consequence of the Government’s peace efforts in Southern Philippines, a sizeable number of rebels have returned to the folds of the law;

WHEREAS, it is felt that upon the re-entry of these former dissidents into society, measures have to be taken to channel their efforts and utilize their skills in constructive endeavors;

WHEREAS, this is an integral part of the Government’s commitment to ensure a lasting and peaceful settlement to the conflict in Southern Philippines, by building up a politically, economically and socially stable citizenry;

NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby ordered that the following machinery be established in each province and region affected by the conflict in the South for the speedy processing of rebel returnees and their expeditious reintegration into society:

1. Processing Centers shall be set up in each region and province affected by the conflict. The Regional Centers shall be as follows:

1.1 Region IX – SOUTHCOM Headquarters, Zamboanga City

1.2. Region XII – CEMCOM Headquarters, Cotabato City

The Regional Processing Centers shall be headed by the respective Commanders of the military commands indicated and shall be responsible for designating Sub-Regional Processing Centers and Provincial Processing Centers in the provinces under their jurisdiction and coordinating their activities as defined below. The Regional Processing Centers shall inform the Office of the President through the National Coordinating Committee within one week from the date of this Order regarding the designated Sub-Regional Processing Centers and Provincial Processing Centers under their jurisdiction.

2. The Sub-Regional Processing Centers and Provincial Processing Centers shall serve as the central institution to which all rebel returnees shall be referred. These Centers shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

2.1. Interview the returnees on matters that may assist the Government’s peace efforts in the South;

2.2. List whatever grievances the returnees may have;

2.3. Refer those grievances which can be handled at the local level to the appropriate agencies for action, while those which require National Government action shall be referred to the Executive Office through the National Coordinating Committee;

2.4. Recommend to the Armed Forces of the Philippines General Headquarters those returnees who are eligible for amnesty and/or integration into the AFP;

2.5. Refer to the appropriate agencies as identified below those returnees who require assistance in order to facilitate their re-integration into normal civilian life;

2.6. Submit monthly reports through the National Coordinating Committee to the Office of the President and the Department of National Defense regarding the number of returnees processed and the status of assistance extended.

3. A Monitoring Operations Center/Secretariat shall be set up to assist the National Coordinating Committee in monitoring the various activities of participating/cooperating agencies in the implementation of this Order and in disseminating information as often as necessary.

4. While the returnees are under the care of the Processing Centers, their subsistence and clothing requirements shall be met by the Centers in coordination with the Department of Social Services and Development (DSSD) and the Special Program of Assistance for the Rehabilitation of Evacuees (SPARE) of the Southern Philippines Development Administration (SPDA).

5. The SPARE of the SPDA shall be responsible for assisting those returnees who wish to return to their original residences, to the extent of providing them not only with transport but also initial resources to allow them to resume their productive lives.

6. The Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR) shall in like manner assist those returnees who wish to settle in either an existing DAR settlement or potential settlement site. In instances where groups of returnees have requested for specific areas to be proclaimed as resettlement sites, the DAR regional/provincial units shall initiate and expedite the necessary measures to implement such petitions whenever feasible. In pursuance of established resettlement procedures, the DAR shall assure that all inputs (farm extension services, farm implements, crop loans, credit facilities, etc) are made available to these settlers.

7. The Department of Education and Culture (DEC) shall attend to those returnees who wish to pursue some field of studies. Qualifying/placement exams shall be administered to the applicants to determine their suitability, aptitude and scholastic level (or revalidation of studies previously undertaken). Those who show promise shall be offered scholarships in state colleges and universities, or in private institutions if the desired courses are not offered in government schools. Applicants failing to qualify for scholarships shall be considered for shorter-term vocational courses which shall be coordinated with the National Manpower and Youth Council (NMYC).

8. The Department of Labor is tasked with two specific areas of responsibility: manpower training and job placement. Since the Department’s regional offices have not been set into full operation and until such time as its regional machinery shall have been mobilized, there is hereby established a Task Force on Labor to be composed of the following members:

This Task Force on Labor is charged with the following functions and duties:

8.1. To organize manpower training and apprenticeship geared toward the development of income producing skills in the different regional provincial centers

8.2. To undertake job placement services in the government service, private sector or in various socio-economic development projects in the area;

8.3. To seek suitable markets for the services of qualified skilled and semi-skilled workers abroad, with special mention of seaman, in view of the natural aptitude of certain returnees for the seafaring life and the heavy demand for Filipinos on board international commercial vessels;

8.4. To perform such other tasks as would be deemed appropriate for the benefit of the returnees in the area.

9. The Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP) shall serve as the focal coordinating point for those returnees who wish to enter into business for themselves. To this end, the DBP may call upon the resources of the Philippine Amanah Bank, the Philippine National Bank, the Social Security System, the Government Service Insurance System and private financing institutions to extend credit to qualified small businessmen among the returnees. For the requisite feasibility studies, MASICAP volunteers of the Department of Industry may be tapped. Furthermore, managerial skills training and technical consultancy services may be availed of through the University of the Philippines-Institute for Small-Scale Industries.

10. For purposes of this memorandum order, Presidential Assistant for National Minorities (PANAMIN) fieldmen will coordinate with officials of appropriate Processing Centers in the processing of the returnees who belong to the non-muslim Cultural Communities, After completion of all required activities at the Processing Centers, these returnees will be turned over to PANAMIN FIELDMEN for necessary services and assistances in the program of rehabilitation and integration to society. PANAMIN will share in resources support required for these returnees while at the Processing Centers.

The agencies enumerated above are hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau or instrumentality of Government, including Government-owned and controlled corporations and local government units, for any participation and assistance that may be required.

Nothing in the above enumerated provisions excludes the extension of similar services/assistance to non-returnees i.e., evacuees or other persons adversely affected by the conflict in the area. In fact, the above-mentioned agencies are hereby instructed to extend the services/assistance to all who require them.

All the above mentioned agencies shall provide funds in its annual budget. However, should sudden operational requirements be needed, all participating/supporting agencies may submit their additional financial requirements to the President through the National Coordinating Committee created under PMO 541.

All agencies enumerated above shall submit monthly progress reports on their activities to the Office of the President through the National Coordinating Committee.

This Order takes effect immediately.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Manila, January 12, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff