Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 259

CONSTITUTING PERFORMANCE TEAMS TO CONDUCT PERFORMANCE AUDITS ON THE NATIONAL IRRIGATION ADMINISTRATION, THE SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEM, THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES, AND THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE.

Pursuant to Administrative Order No. 271, series of 1971, there are hereby constituted four Performance Teams to conduct performance audits on the government agencies indicated hereunder, to be composed as follows:

To audit the National Irrigation Administration

To audit the Social Security System —

To audit the Department of General Services –

To audit the Department of Social Welfare –

Names of representatives to the various teams shall be submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat, Malacañang, by telephone not later than October 15, 1971. (Tel. Nos. of Cabinet Secretariat: PLDT 40-30-24; 47-41-86).

In the conduct of performance audits, Performance Teams shall be guided by the provisions of Administrative Order No. 271, series of 1971, and the Development Performance Evaluation System Operations Manual compiled pursuant thereto.

Activities related to the conduct of performance audits shall take precedence over all other duties, and for this purpose, all team members, except those from the Reorganization Commission, are hereby placed under the full-time operational control of their respective Team and Assistant Team Leaders, for the duration of the audit.

Members assigned from the Reorganization Commission shall participate in the performance audits on a part-time basis, with the specific purpose of keeping their respective Teams informed on the Commission’s evaluative findings relative to the agencies scheduled for audit, and ensuring that the teams do not duplicate aspects of organizational evaluation already accomplished by the Commission.

Transportation requirements for the performance audits shall be provided by the Agencies scheduled for audit. Administrative and technical support shall be provided by the Development Management Staff, Executive Office and the Development Performance Evaluation System Secretariat.

Performance Audits of the designated agencies shall commence simultaneously on October 25, 1971 and shall be conducted for a period of not more than twenty-two working days. The Final Report of each Performance Team shall be submitted to the Development Management Staff, Executive Office, not later than November 25, 1971 for transmittal to the President.

All bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the National Irrigation Administration, Social Security System, the Department of General Services, and the Department of Social Welfare are hereby enjoined to cooperate with and assist the Performance Teams accomplish their assigned tasks, consistent with the aims of the Development Performance Evaluation System.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, October 8, 1971

Source: Malacañang Records Office