MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 197

WHEREAS, there is a need to address security concerns.

NOW THEREFORE, I, GLORIA M. ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1. The Department of National Defense (DND) and the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) shall work closely with the Presidential Human Rights Committee (PHRC) subcommittee on killings and disappearances for speedy action on cases and effective reforms to avoid abuses, with regular reports to the Commander-in-Chief through the Executive Secretary as PHRC chair, and in consultation with the Court Administrator, invited as PHRC subcommittee observer.

2. The DND/AFP shall draft legislation in consultation with the Presidential Legislative Liaison Office and Congress allies for safeguards against disclosure of military secrets and undue interference in military operations inimical to national security.

3. The DND/AFP shall accelerate the recruitment, training, equipping and deployment of CAFGUs in place of transferred troups as well as investigate and, if necessary, stop and punish schemes to fraudulently collect salaries through ‘ghost’ CAFGUs.

4. The DND/AFP, Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process; Department of Interior and Local Government shall work with Local Government Units to fast-track local peace initiatives, especially local ceasefires, particularly in Bohol, Butuan and other priority areas for peace assemblies; and to work with the Union of Local Authorities, the Catholic Bishops Conference of the Philippines and other sectoral and civil society groups in advocating with Congress to concur soonest with the amnesty proclamation.

5. The DND/AFP shall report to the Commander-in-Chief and inform the troops and the public and media the implementation of the recommendations of the Davide and Feliciano Commissions, and what further measures will still be done.

DONE this 25 th day of September 2007 in the City of Manila.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2007). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111-288]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.