MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO 155

DESIGNATING THE SECRETARY OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (DTI) AS EXPORT ENFORCER

WHEREAS, R.A. 7844, otherwise known as the Export Development Act of 1994, strengthened and institutionalized the Export Development Council (EDC) to oversee the implementation of the Philippine Export Development Plan (PEDP) and coordinate the formulation and implementation of policy reforms to support said plan;

WHEREAS, Article 2 Section 7 of the Act provided the EDC with the following powers and functions, among others:

a. Identify the main bottlenecks, problem areas and constraints in all areas/sectors/activities which influence the development of exports;

b. Mandate specific departments and agencies to attend to the bottlenecks and problems constraining the development of exports in any of the areas mentioned;

c. Impose sanctions on any government agency or officer or employee thereof that impedes efficient exportation of Philippine goods;

d. Adopt such policies, rules, procedures and administrative systems for the efficient and effective exercise of its powers and functions;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 428 series of 2005 mandates the simplification of rules and regulations and the reduction of reportorial requirements to facilitate doing business and encourage more investments in the country;

WHEREAS, the Secretary of the Department of Trade and Industry chairs the EDC, with the President chairing the Council meetings at least quarterly;

WHEREAS, the EDC, in its planning workshop last March 18, 2006, agreed on the need for an Export Enforcer who shall see to the implementation of the decisions reached by the Council.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby designate the Secretary of the Department of Trade and Industry as the Export Enforcer with the power to act in behalf of the President on decisions reached by the Council, implement measures to lower the cost of doing business for exporters, call on all government agencies under the Executive Branch to implement such decisions, report on such implementation and exercise the EDC function of imposing sanctions on any government agency or officer or employee thereof, or private sector entity that impede efficient exportation of Philippine goods.

All issuances, or portions thereof, which are inconsistent with this Administrative Order are hereby revoked, amended or modified accordingly.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of July in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Six.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2006). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.