MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 94

PROVIDING MEASURES FOR THE OPTIMUM UTILIZATION OF WATER RESOURCES IN METRO MANILA

WHEREAS, the inadequate rainfall in the last quarter of 2003 which affected many parts in Luzon resulted in low water levels in Angat dam;

WHEREAS, as consequence, there is a shortfall in water supply for Metro Manila and for irrigation in Bulacan and parts of Pampanga;

WHEREAS, there is a critical need to institute measures to ensure the optimum utilization of water resources and identify and immediately develop new sources of water for Metro Manila;

WHEREAS, there is a need to actively implement water conservation measures and decisively reduce the level of non-revenue water to maximize the limited supply of water;

WHEREAS, it is equally important to minimize the pollution of our water bodies to ensure water quality and safeguard public health;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy. The Government shall adopt urgent and decisive measures to address the present water shortage in Metro Manila, Bulacan and portions of Pampanga to protect the health and well being of the population and prevent or mitigate disruptions in the production sector and irrigation of agricultural crops.

SEC. 2. The following measures are hereby adopted to mitigate the effects of water shortages:

a. The Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), with the National Water Resources Board (NWRB), the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS), and the Public Information Agency (PIA) shall undertake a massive information, education and communication campaign to encourage people to implement water conservation measures;

b. The MWSS and its Concessionaires shall actively pursue and immediately respond to all complaints of water leaks within twenty four (24) hours and shall ensure that the leaks are repaired within 3 to 5 days after receiving the complaints;

c. All Local Government Units in Metro Manila through the barangays shall monitor and report all water leaks and pilferages to the concerned Water Concessionaire;

d. The Philippine National Police shall assist the MWSS and Water Concessionaires in the enforcement of anti-pilferage measures;

e. The LGUs in Metro Manila shall expedite the grant of permits for the repair of water leaks by allowing the 2 concessionaires to apply for permits directly with the barangay concerned with a copy of the permit furnished the Office of the Mayor for recording purposes;

f. The Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), the Metro Manila Development Authority (MMDA) and other concerned government agencies shall provide immediate assistance to the MWSS and Water Concessionaires in improving water service delivery.

g. The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), in coordination with the Department of Finance (DOF), shall work for the grant of incentives for the production of goods that conserve water and establishments undertaking optimum water conservation and utilization in Metro Manila.

h. The Department of Agriculture, through the National Irrigation Authority and the Bureau of Soils and Water Management, shall continuously monitor and coordinate with the NWRB on the water requirement of irrigation systems being supplied by the Water Concessionaires.

i. The Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) shall require all multi-storey buildings, hotels, shopping centers, subdivisions, factories and related establishments to put up Sewage Treatment Facilities to protect water quality.

j. The National Power Corporation shall facilitate the agreement with the private sector for the rehabilitation and recommissioning of its desalination plant in Sucat, Parañaque.

k. The PAGCOR shall provide funding assistance of fifty (50) million pesos to the National Irrigation Authority (NIA) to set up shallow tube wells that will service about 5,000 hectares of agricultural lands in Bulacan and Pampanga.

l. The MMDA, local government units and other groups shall use treated wastewater for watering the center islands, parks, golf courses among others.

m. All government agencies and instrumentalities shall assign water marshals and shall undertake water conservation and assessment program, using as reference point, water consumption in January 2003, and submit monthly comparative report of water consumption to the NWRB.

SEC. 3. The NWRB, jointly with the MWSS, is hereby directed to identify and facilitate the development of new water sources.

SEC. 4. The DENR, through the NWRB, shall take the lead in the preparation of the detailed action plan and coordinate activities to implement this Order.

SEC. 5. All Departments, agencies and instrumentalities of Government are hereby directed to provide assistance in the implementation of this Order.

SEC. 6. This Administrative order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 24th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Four.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2004). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.