MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 33

DIRECTING THE ORGANIZATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMS TO CELEBRATE PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE DAY ON JUNE 12, 2002

WHEREAS, there is a need for the Filipino people to commemorate the heroism and self-sacrifice of our forefathers in the struggle for independence;

WHEREAS, the 104 th anniversary of the proclamation of Philippine Independence is the ideal occasion for all Filipinos to unite and rally behind the government and the country’s institutions;

WHEREAS, there is a need to properly plan, implement and coordinate all programs and activities leading to the said celebration.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Secretary of Tourism is hereby designated to take the lead in the planning, coordination, implementation and conduct of programs and activities in the celebration of Philippine Independence Day 2002.

SEC 2. All departments, bureaus, offices, national government agencies, local government units and government-owned and controlled corporations are hereby enjoined to give full support, assistance and cooperation to the Secretary of Tourism in the exercise of his responsibilities under this Order.

SEC 3. All branches of government are enjoined to participate in the Independence Day celebration as well as to enlist the participation of private sector groups and non-government organizations so that the 104 th Philippine Independence Day celebration will be a show of unity and strength during these challenging times.

Local government units together with the private sector groups and NGOs are likewise enjoined to celebrate Philippine Independence Day in their respective localities.

SEC 4. The programs and events for the Philippine Independence Day celebration shall include, to the extent appropriate, the following:

a. Pambansang Araw ng Watawat (Philippine National Flag Day) on May 28 as the kick-off ceremony for the two-week Pagdiriwang ng Malayang Filipino (Philippine Independence Day Festival) to be conducted from May 28 to June 12, 2002. A special Program on “Paggalang sa Watawat” and “Pagpapahalaga sa Pambansang Awit” may be held on June 11.

b. Raising of the national flag and wreath-laying at the Rizal monument in the Rizal Park on June 12, 2002 at about 7:00 in the morning.

This activity shall be replicated in places of national historical significance such as the Barasoain Church in Malolos, Bulacan; Aguinaldo Shrine in Kawit, Cavite; the Bonifacio Monument in Kalookan City; and the Pinaglabanan Shrine in San Juan, Metro Manila.

All other cities and municipalities around the country are enjoined to simultaneously hold similar activities on the same day and time.

c. The Philippine Independence Day Parade at the Quirino Grandstand in the afternoon of June 12 which shall be meaningful and relevant to the theme of the celebration, to be followed by a special cultural program at the same venue.

SEC 5. In support of the 104 th Philippine Independence Day celebration, all concerned government agencies and local government units are, subject to budgetary laws and issuances, authorized to allocate such amounts as may be necessary to defray expenses for the said event.

SEC 6. The release of TEN MILLION PESOS (P10,000,000.00) chargeable against the President’s Contingent Fund for FY 2002 is hereby authorized to carry out the provisions of this Administrative Order.

Fund augmentation thereon, as may be necessary, shall be sourced from any of the regular items in the 2002 General Appropriations Act or from such other sources as may be determined by the Department of Budget and Management.

SEC 7. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15 th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2002). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.