MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 162

ADOPTING AND PROMOTING THE THEME “ONE CARING AND SHARING COMMUNITY” FOR THE UPCOMING 12 th ASEAN SUMMIT

WHEREAS, on December 10 to 14, 2006, the Republic of the Philippines will host in Cebu the 12 th ASEAN Summit where all the Leaders of the ASEAN member countries and ASEAN Dialogue Partners will meet to discuss and agree on initiatives that cover key areas of cooperation;

WHEREAS, there is a need to effectively and accurately inform the public of the ASEAN-related policies, programs and objectives and the importance of the upcoming Summit to the Philippines;

WHEREAS, for its Chairmanship, the Philippines has chosen the theme – “One Caring and Sharing Community”, a theme that carries a significant meaning in moving towards one ASEAN community and in the future, an ASEAN union.

WHEREAS, promoting the theme adopted for the Summit will encourage the people to take the time to learn more about what the ASEAN means and how multilateral meetings such as these affect the nation;

WHEREAS, the task of communicating the government’s various policies, programs and objectives, including their accomplishments and performance, is a responsibility of all departments and agencies of the government, particularly in their respective jurisdictions;

WHEREAS, government-owned and controlled corporations, financial institutions and other government instrumentalities should likewise contribute in informing the people of the importance of this upcoming ASEAN Summit;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. All national government agencies, including government-owned and controlled corporations, government financial institutions and other government corporate entities, and their subsidiaries and other instrumentalities under the Executive Department, are hereby encouraged to adopt the theme “One Caring and Sharing Community” for their Yuletide events, activities and decor as they are to undertake an information dissemination campaign regarding their respective ASEAN –related activities and programs.

SEC.2. All government agencies are hereby directed to encourage the public that they serve especially private offices, malls, schools and transport hubs to adopt the theme and ASEAN SUMMIT logos in their Yuletide decor media advertisements to show that our community and country is one in extolling ASEAN and welcoming the visitors to the Summit.

SEC. 3. All government media outlets and/or stations are directed to be at the forefront in the effort to make our people aware of the upcoming Summit as they assist the various offices and agencies in the preparation and/or production of information campaign materials.

SEC.4. The Office of the Press Secretary, in coordination with Department of Foreign Affairs, shall be the central implementing and monitoring agency of this Order. The Press Secretary is instructed to undertake the following:

SEC.5. The Department of Education is instructed to issue a memorandum to all public and private schools encouraging them to adopt this theme and include the ASEAN Summit in various activities for the Yuletides.

SEC.6. The Department of Trade and Industry shall be responsible for coordinating with the business sector in furthering the letter and spirit of this AO, particularly in broadening awareness and appreciation of the Summit through private advertising, promotions and merchandising.

SEC.7. The Press Secretary is directed to coordinate with various broadcast and print media outfits, media associations and press clubs to obtain their support in propagating the theme of the upcoming Summit.

SEC.8. The Secretary of Department of the Interior and Local Government is instructed to encourage local government units to adopt this theme and undertake related measures and activities to disseminate information regarding the upcoming Summit among their respective constituents.

SEC.9. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30 th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Six.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2006). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111-288]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.