MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 2

CONSTITUTING A PUBLIC ACKNOWLEDGEMENT COMMITTEE FOR THE PARTICIPANTS OF EDSA II

WHEREAS, different sectors of society all over the country played significant roles in working for the peaceful and Constitutional transition of power from the previous administration to this administration;

WHEREAS, several individuals, organizations, communities, associations and government workers and officials have shown their unwavering courage, nationalism and patriotism through their participation in the EDSA II people power activity;

WHEREAS, it is essential that the participation of several individuals, organizations, communities, associations and government workers and officials be recognized and be made examples of acts of patriotism and nationalism;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct:

SECTION 1. Creation. – There is hereby constituted a Committee on the Public Acknowledgement of players in the transition of impeachment/resign efforts that led to the peaceful transfer of powers.

SEC. 2. Composition. – The Committee shall be composed of the Secretary of the Department of Social Welfare and Development as Chairperson and the following members:

Secretary of Interior and Local Governments – Vice Chairperson Lead Convenor, National Anti-Poverty Commission Two (2) representatives from the private sector Other sectors as may later be determined by the Committee.

The representatives of the private sector shall be appointed by the President upon the nomination by the Chairperson of the Committee.

In the performance of its duties and responsibilities, the Committee shall consult with different sectors of society and with government entities and officials who played a role in the EDSA II. The Committee shall also solicit suggestions and recommendations from as many sources as possible. The Committee shall exert all possible efforts to draw in the suggestions and recommendations on activities and contributions by civil society from other regions and provinces.

SEC. 3. Functions. – The Committee has the following duties and responsibilities:

a) Prepare the list of men and women and organizations, associations who will be accorded recognition for their participation in the peaceful transfer of power;

b) Conduct consultations and receive suggestions and recommendations on the possible awardees or people to be recognized;

c) Prepare a program for the recognition activity and coordinate with the EDSA commission for this purpose;

d) Perform such other function as may be assigned by the President.

The Committee may call upon any department, agency and government instrumentality to assist it in the performance of its duties and responsibilities.

SEC. 4. Funding. – Funds necessary for the attainment of the objectives of this Order shall be set aside by the Department of Budget and Management from the Presidential Social Fund. The Committee is also empowered to receive donations from private institutions, subject to the pertinent accounting and auditing rules and practices.

SEC. 5. Effectivity. – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 20th day of February, in the Year of Our Lord Two Thousand and One.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RENATO S. DE VILLA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2001). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.