MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 9

DIRECTING THE ORGANIZATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMS TO CELEBRATE THE PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE DAY ON JUNE 12, 2001 AND CREATING A NATIONAL COMMITTEE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE CELEBRATION

WHEREAS, there is a need for the Filipino people to commemorate the heroism and self-sacrifice of our forefathers in the struggle for independence;

WHEREAS, the 103rd anniversary of the proclamation of Philippine Independence is the ideal occasion for all Filipinos to unite and rally behind the government and the country’s institutions;

WHEREAS, there is a need to properly plan, implement and coordinate all programs and activities leading to the said celebration.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Government shall take the lead in the celebration of Philippine Independence Day with an appropriate, relevant theme to be determined by the National Committee or its Executive Committee which shall be created purposely for the event.

SEC. 2. All departments, bureaus, offices, national government agencies and government-owned and controlled corporations are hereby enjoined to participate in the celebration of Philippine Independence Day in a fitting manner consistent with their respective public service functions and in coordination with the plans of the National Committee or its Executive Committee.

Activities that promote a strong national identity and deepen the spirit of patriotism among Filipinos should be undertaken. There will be cultural festivals, theatrical presentations, symposia, historical tours and/or similar other activities in all regions.

All branches of government are enjoined to participate in the Independence Day celebration as well as to enlist the participation of private sector groups and non-­government organizations so that the 103rd Philippine Independence Day celebration will be a true show of unity and strength during these challenging times.

Towards this end, local government units together with the private sector groups and NGOs are enjoined to celebrate Philippine Independence Day in their respective localities.

SEC. 3. A National Committee is hereby created to undertake and/or conduct, in coordination with the local government units and/or agencies involved, the programs and events for the Philippine Independence Day celebration which shall include, to the extent appropriate as determined by the National Committee, the following:

a. Pambansang Araw ng Watawat (Philippine National Flag Day) on May 28 as the kick-off ceremony for the two-weekend Pagdiriwang ng Malayang Filipino (Philippine Independence Day Festival) on June 2-4 and June 9-12, instant. A special Program on “Paggalang sa Watawat” and “Pagpapahalaga sa Pambansang Awit” will be held on June 11.

b. Raising of the national flag and wreath-laying at the Rizal monument in the Rizal Park on June 12, 2001 at about 7.00 in the morning.

This activity will be particularly replicated in places of national historical significance such as the Barasoain Church in Malolos, Bulacan; Aguinaldo Shrine in Kawit, Cavite; the Bonifacio Monument in Kalookan City; and the Pinaglabanan Shrine in San Juan, Metro Manila.

All other cities and municipalities around the country are enjoined to simultaneously hold similar activities on the same day and time.

c. The Philippine Independence Day Parade at the Quirino Grandstand in the afternoon/evening of June 12 which shall be meaningful and relevant to the theme of the celebration. It will be capped by a special cultural program at the same venue.

SEC. 4. The National Committee shall be composed of the following:

MEMBERS:

Secretary of National Defense Secretary of Foreign Affairs Secretary of Finance Secretary of Public Works and Highways Secretary of Trade and Industry Secretary of Budget and Management Secretary of Transportation and Communication Secretary of Health Secretary of Science and Technology Secretary of Social Welfare and Development Secretary, Presidential Management Staff Press Secretary Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) Director-General, Philippine National Police Chief, Presidential Protocol Director-General, Philippine Information Agency Chairman, Metro Manila Development Authority (MMDA) President, Cultural Center of the Philippines (CCP) Executive Director, National Parks and Development Committee (NPDC) Governor, Province of Bulacan Governor, Province of Cavite Mayor, City of Manila Mayor, City of Kalookan Mayor, Municipality of San Juan Mayor, Municipality of Kawit, Cavite Chairman, EDSA People Power Commission President, League of Provinces President, League of City Mayors President, League of Municipalities of the Philippines President, Liga ng mga Barangay

SEC. 5. To assist the National Committee, an Executive Committee is hereby created consisting of the Chairperson, the Co-Chairperson and the Vice-Chairpersons of the National Committee, the Secretaries of Finance, Budget and Management, Public Works and Highways, the Chief of Staff of AFP, the President of CCP, the Executive Director of the NPDC, the Chairman of MMDA, and such other members as the Chairperson may designate, or the duly authorized representatives of such Executive Committee members.

SEC. 6. The National Committee Chairperson is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office or any instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations and local government units, to extend all necessary assistance to the National Committee or the Executive Committee.

SEC. 7. In support of the 103rd Philippine Independence Day celebration, all concerned government agencies and local government units are, subject to budgetary laws and issuances, authorized to allocate such amounts as may be necessary to defray expenses for the said event.

SEC. 8. The release of TEN MILLION PESOS (P10,000,000.00) chargeable against the President’s Contingent Fund for FY 2001 (RA 8760 as re-enacted) is hereby authorized to carry out the provisions of this Administrative Order.

Fund augmentation thereon, as may be necessary, shall be sourced from any of the regular items in the 2001 GAA (RA 8760 as re-enacted) or from such other sources as may be determined by DBM and the Executive Committee for the 103rd Philippine Independence Day Celebration.

SEC. 9. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and one.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RENATO C. CORONA Presidential Chief of Staff

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2001). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.