MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 172

CREATING THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL INTEGRATION (NCSI), PROVIDING FUNDS THEREOF AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the Government pursues a comprehensive peace process agenda that calls for a principled negotiated settlement with, all armed rebel groups under the Rule of Law and in accordance with the Constitutional processes;

WHEREAS, social integration, which is the process involving the management of forces, arms and ammunitions of former rebels and their transition to civilian life, is considered an integral part of the peace process and post-conflict security reform, and as essential confidence-building and peace building measure;

WHEREAS, social integration requires the convergence of efforts between and among non-government agencies (NGAs), local government units (LGUs) and other stakeholders;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Sec. 1. Creation. There is hereby created the National Committee on Social Integration (NCSI) under the Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPP) to implement the Social Integration Program (SIP) for rebel groups.

Sec. 2. Functions. NCSI shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

a. To provide over-all policy direction, as well as to manage, coordinate, monitor and evaluate the implementation of the SIP, including the amnesty program;

b. To update the policy framework and guidelines as appropriate or as the need arises;

c. To tap funding/donor agencies, both domestic and international, for technical assistance and financial support for the SIP;

Sec. 3. Composition. NCSI shall be headed by an Undersecretary of OPAPP, and shall be composed of representatives of the following government departments/agencies as members;

a. Office of the National Security Adviser

b. Department of National Defense

c. Department of the Interior and Local Government

d. Department of Justice

e. Department of Social Welfare and Development; and

f. Department of Foreign Affairs

Sec. 4. Administration and Institutional Cooperation. The OPAPP shall serve as secretariat to provide technical and administrative support to the NCSI. NCSI shall call upon other government agencies to provide the necessary support to the Program and in the fulfillment of its mandate.

Sec. 5. Policy and Operational Framework. The attached Policy and Operational Framework which shall govern the Program is hereby adopted. It may be updated by the NCSI in view of the constantly evolving nature of the program.

Sec. 6. Funding. The Office of the President, through OPAPP, shall provide the funds for the operations of NCSI.

Sec. 7. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23 rd day of March in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Reference: Social Integration Program For Former Rebels: Policy and Operational Framework

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2007). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111-288]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.