MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 246

CREATING A PHILIPPINE ORGANIZING COMMITTEE FOR THE CONDUCT OF THE PHILIPPINE PARTICIPATION TO THE WORLD EXPOSITION SHANGHAI CHINA 2010

WHEREAS , the Philippine Government, in its drive to enhance further the promotion of the Philippines and sustain its presence in the global market, has committed to participate at the World Exposition Shanghai China 2010 (Expo 2010);

WHEREAS , the Philippine participation in Expo 2010 provides an excellent opportunity to present, demonstrate and showcase to a wide audience across the world its culture and nature, its history and people, its economy and technology and how these aspects of human society interact or co-exist with each other in the process of urbanization, and social and economic development in accordance with the theme Expo 2010: “Better City, Better Life”;

WHEREAS , in addition to trade and tourism benefits, and the goodwill that will be generated from participating in Expo 2010, it will also enhance the efforts of both the government and private sectors in addressing various concerns and issues concerning modern approaches to sustainable urban development that would ensure a viable future for the society and humankind in general;

WHEREAS , there is a need to create a Philippine Organizing Committee with the Department of Tourism (DOT) as the lead implementing agency for the conduct of the Philippine participation to the World Exposition Shanghai China 2010;

NOW , THEREFORE , I , GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Philippine Organizing Committee (POC) . A Philippine Organizing Committee (POC), headed by the Department of Tourism, for the Philippine participation at Expo 2010 in Shanghai, China, is hereby created to be composed of the following:

Members:

Executive Secretary, Office of the President Secretary of Trade and Industry Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources Secretary of Budget and Management Secretary of Science and Technology Secretary of Public Works and Highways Chairperson, Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council Chairman, Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation Chairman, Metro Manila Development Authority Chairperson, National Commission for Culture and the Arts General Manager, Philippine Tourism Authority General Manager, Manila International Airport Authority Director General, Philippine Information Agency Private Sector Representatives

The Members of the Board of Advisers of the Philippine Organizing Committee may designate an alternate to represent them at the committee. They shall submit the names of their representatives and/or alternates to the POC Secretariat.

Section 2. Authority and Functions of the Philippine Organizing Committee . The Committee shall exercise the following functions and responsibilities:

a. Formulate and implement a workplan and budget for the proper implementation of the Philippine participation in Expo 2010, and to monitor and supervise all activities and programs in relation thereto;

b. Act as the coordinating body between the private sector and other government agencies/organizations to ensure that all directives subsequently issued to the said agencies for the planning, operation and management of the Philippine participation at Expo 2010 are enforced;

c. Ensure that the benefits of the Philippine participation are maximized through a concerted and cost-effective country approach;

d. Formulate an appropriate theme, concept and message of the Philippine participation in line with the over-all theme of Expo 2010;

e. Ensure the safety and protection of government properties, exhibit materials and equipment needed to complete the Philippine participation;

f. Accept or receive sponsorship and gratuitous title of funds, materials and devices essential for planning and implementation, and management subject to existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations;

g. Call on any department, bureau or office of the government, including government-owned and controlled corporations for any assistance that may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Administrative Order.

h. Enter into agreements/contracts necessary for the attainment of the objectives of this Administrative Order;

i. Undertake any or all other measures necessary for the successful participation of the Philippines in Expo 2010.

Section 3. Executive Committee . The POC, through the Commissioner-General, may create an Executive Committee composed of representatives from the government and private sectors as enumerated in Section 1 thereof.

Section 4. Secretary-General . The POC, through the Commissioner-General, shall designate an official of the Department of Tourism or the Philippine Convention & Visitors Corporation (PCVC), to act as Secretary-General for the Philippine participation in Expo 2010 who shall, among others, act as the contact person of Expo 2010 organizers, attend all activities that will be required by Expo 2010 organizers and, perform such functions that will be necessary to ensure the successful participation of the Philippines at Expo 2010 in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Bureau of International Exposition (BIE).

Section 5. The Secretariat . The Commissioner-General, through the Secretary-General, shall establish a Secretariat that shall undertake and oversee the day-to-day operation and over-all preparations of the Philippine participation in Expo 2010.

Personnel of the Secretariat shall be sourced from the various units with the DOT and PCVC who shall be provided with honoraria or allowances as may be allowed and at rates consistent with those prescribed by law.

Section 6. Funding . Funds necessary for the Philippine participation in Expo 2010, including operations of the Secretariat and sub-committees, shall come from, among others, the following sources:

a. Allocation from the Department of Tourism and its attached agencies (i.e. Philippine Tourism Authority and Duty Free Philippines) in the amount of ONE HUNDRED FIFTY MILLION PESOS (P150M);

b. Allocation from the Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation in the amount of FIFTY MILLION PESOS (P50M);

c. Allocation from the Department of Foreign Affairs in the amount of TWENTY MILLION PESOS (P20M);

d. Allocation from the Department of Trade and Industry in the amount to TEN MILLION PESOS (P10M);

e. Allocation from the Manila International Airport Authority (MIAA) in the amount of FIVE MILLION PESOS (P5M);

f. Allocation from the Department of Environment and Natural Resources in the amount of FIVE MILLION PESOS (P5M);

g. Allocation from the Department of Science and Technology in the amount of ONE MILLION PESOS (P1M)

h. Allocation from the Metro Manila Development Authority in the amount of FIVE MILLION PESOS (P5M);

i. Proceeds from sponsorships, registration and/or participation fee of exhibitors at the Philippine Pavilion, and merchandising activities; and

j. Proceeds from savings, income generated from commercial activities and donations or grants accruing from the Philippine participation in Expo Zaragoza 2008.

The financial subsidy to be given by the various members of the Philippine Organizing Committee shall be recorded in their books as subsidy to National Government Agencies. The receipt of subsidy shall be recorded by the lead implementing agency as subsidy income. The lead implementing agency shall then issue a corresponding official receipt to acknowledge subsidy.

All funds to be solicited for this purpose shall be placed in separate bank account that will be opened by the POC Secretariat as authorized by the Secretary of Tourism, with account name: Expo Shanghai 2010. A separate book of accounts shall be maintained by the POC for this project.

All savings from operations and income to be generated from commercial activities, and other donations or grants from other sources at the closing of Expo 2010, shall be held in trust by the POC as standby fund fur use in future Philippine participation in major international expositions sanctioned by the Bureau of International Expositions.

Section 7. Report to the President . Relative to the performance of its mandate, the POC, through the Commissioner-General, shall submit periodic reports to the President, and a final report within sixty (60) days after the closing of Expo 2010.

Section 8. Cessation of the Committee . The Committee shall cease to exist sixty (60) days after submission of its final report as provided in Section 7 thereof, unless otherwise ordered by the President.

Section 9. Effectivity . — This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done, in the City of Manila, this 1st day of December, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Eight.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2008). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.