MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 36

INSTITUTIONALIZATION OF THE PEOPLE’S ACTION TEAM RESPONDING ON-LINE (PATROL) PROGRAM AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, Administrative Order No. 124 provided for the creation of a Joint Commission on Street Watch program, a crime prevention and community safety undertaking;

WHEREAS, the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) is the lead government agency in the implementation of Street Watch program with the Foundation for Crime Prevention (FCP) as its private sector partner;

WHEREAS, the DILG and its partner organizations have revitalized and expanded the Street Watch program through the introduction of a barangay-based security and development program known as the People’s Action Team Responding On-Line (PATROL) program;

WHEREAS, there is a need to further strengthen the PATROL program, through a more strategic tandem between government and civil society, to manifest government’s resolve to carry out not only an anti-crime program but a broader undertaking encompassing security and development efforts;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Institutionalizing the PATROL Program. The PATROL Program is hereby institutionalized as a barangay-based security and development program, involving the active participation of the citizenry and the government through application of various strategies such as advocacy, training, organization, mobilization and monitoring.

SEC 2. Revitalizing the Joint Street Watch Commission. The Joint Street Watch Commission shall heretofore be known as the PATROL “117” Commission which shall likewise serve as policy making body and overseer of the PATROL Program. The Commission shall have an implementing arm to be headed by the Executive Director who is likewise the head of the Commission’s secretariat, to ensure the sound implementation of the program especially in the barangays nationwide.

SEC 3. Composition of the Commission. The composition of the Commission is constituted as follows:

Chairman – Secretary, Department of Interior and Local Government

President, Federation of Filipino Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Industry;President, Bankers Association of the Philippines;

President, Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry;

Executive Vice President, Foundation for Crime Prevention;

Chairman, Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster sa Pilipinas;

Four (4) representatives from the private sector who shall be appointed by the Chairman and shall represent any of the following sectors: academic, religious, media, labor, legal, youth, women, cooperatives, cultural, minority and people’s organizations.

The Commission shall be composed of members who are deemed volunteers and shall, therefore, have no corresponding compensation for services rendered to the Commission.

SEC 4. The Peace and Order Council. – The different Peace and Order Councils shall provide support to the program by actively engaging in the activities thereunder.

SEC 5. Funding. – The DILG shall provide funding of P33 Million yearly budget from the DILG Office of the Secretary Community-Based Fund, to sustain and efficiently operate the program.

SEC 6. Other Funding Source. – The Foundation for Crime Prevention (FCP), as partner of the DILG, shall generate fund sources for the PATROL program to complement government resources.

SEC 7. LGUs Support Initiative. – The LGUs are encourage to provide and extend funding support and such other support through their respective Peace and Order Councils for the effective implementation of the program.

SEC 8. Rules and Regulations. – The DILG as Chairman of the PATROL “117” Commission and Chairman of the National Peace and Order Council shall issue the necessary guidelines to effect the implementation of this Order.

SEC 9. Repealing Clause. – Any provision of Administrative Order No. 124 and/or other related issuance inconsistent with the provisions of this Administrative Order is hereby modified and repealed accordingly.

SEC 10. Effectivity. – This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3 rd day of May , in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2002). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.