MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 158

ORDERING THE FAST-TRACKING OF THE COMPUTERIZATION OF EXPORT-RELATED PROCESSES OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 7844, otherwise known as the Export Development Act of 1994, declared that it shall be the policy of the State to evolve export development into a national effort and that government shall champion exports as a focal strategy for a sustainable agri-industrial development;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Export Development Plan of 2005-2007 has identified as policy imperatives, the simplification of procedures related to exports and the implementation of digital trading systems;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 428 mandates the simplification of rules and regulations and the reduction of reportorial requirements to facilitate doing business and encourage more investments in the country;

WHEREAS, the EDC, in its meeting last 17 may 2006 identified the fast-tracking of the computerization of government agencies involved in export-related processes as one solution to reduce cost to exporters;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the fast-tracking of the computerization of all government agencies involved in export processes as listed in the annex to this Order.

Section 1. All government agencies involved in export processes as listed in the annex of this Order shall fast-track their computerization projects.

Section 2. The Export Development Council shall form and chair a Technical Working Group (TWG) to review and study the processes of government agencies, specifically those that affect the flow of export transactions and identify ways to fast-track their computerization.

Section 3. All government agencies involved in export-related processes are hereby enjoined to report and present the status of their computerization to the TWG.

Section 4. All executive Order or issuances, or portions thereof, which are inconsistent with this Administrative Order are hereby revoked, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 5. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of August, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Six.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Reference : Government Agencies

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2006). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.