MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 261

REITERATING GOVERNMENT BELT-TIGHTENING

Whereas , in challenging economic times, the government must tighten its belt and live within its means, just like the average Filipino household;

Whereas , to that end, the government is taking a series of actions to stop unnecessary and wasteful spending;

Whereas , the taxpayers deserve no less from their government and public servants;

Whereas , the government must pour all savings and revenue into programs that help the poor and the middle class;

Whereas , government-wide, a one-and-a-half reduction of Maintenance, Overhead and Operating Expenses translates to a savings of Seven Billion Pesos (P7,000,000,000.00);

Whereas , an Independence Day Parade costs more or less Thirty Million Pesos (P30,000,000.00);

Whereas , some forty thousand (40,000) Filipino workers, notably in the export industry, have been displaced by the global economic crisis;

NOW THEREFORE, I GLORIA M. ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by the power vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1 . As mandated earlier this year through Executive Order No. 782, all government agencies and instrumentalities, including all departments, bureaus, attached agencies, government-owned and controlled corporations and government financial institutions, shall reduce their respective Maintenance, Overhead and Operating Expense (MOOE) budgets by one and a half percent (1.5%). Savings from MOOE shall be allocated to emergency employment for the next six (6) months.

Section 2 . As mandated in early 2008, all government agencies and entities shall undertake electricity and fuel saving measures, including but not limited to the following: the consumption of fossil fuels shall be brought down by twenty-five percent (25%); electric consumption shall be reduced by at least ten percent (10%); air conditioners shall be turned off at 4:30 p.m. except those with 24-hour work; incandescent bulbs shall be replaced with Compact Fluorescent Lamps; twenty percent (20%) of the vehicles of the national government, including those of the government-owned and controlled corporations, shall be converted to the use of natural gas.

Section 3 . National government vehicles, including those of government owned and controlled corporations, which are not issued to an official and are not on official trip, shall be garaged in the agency office, and the keys shall be kept by guards, during weekends and holidays. All local government units are likewise enjoined to adopt the same policy. Letter of Instructions No. 991 (s. 1980) and its corresponding Guidelines embodied in Department Administrative Order No. 82-004 (s. 1982) concerning the issuance of security plates shall be strictly implemented.

Section 4 . On Independence Day, June 12, the annual parade shall be foregone. Instead a mega-jobs fair shall be organized to enable the forty thousand (40,000) workers displaced by the global crisis find employment or livelihood.

Section 5 . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in Manila on the 7th day of April in the Year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Nine.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2009). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.