MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 178

DIRECTING THE SECRETARY OF TOURISM TO LEAD THE ORGANIZATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMS IN CELEBRATION OF THE 109 th ANNIVERSARY OF THE PROCLAMATION OF PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE ON JUNE 12, 2007

WHEREAS, the heroism, patriotism and nationalism of our forebears in the struggle for independence deserve to be commemorated;

WHEREAS, the 109 th anniversary of the proclamation of the Philippine Independence is the ideal occasion for all freedom-loving Filipinos to unite and rally behind the government and the country’s institutions;

WHEREAS, the proper planning, implementation and coordination of all programs and activities leading to the celebration are urgently needed;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. The Secretary of Tourism is hereby directed to take the lead role in the planning, coordination, implementation and conduct of programs and activities in celebration of the 2007 Independence Day.

Sec. 2. The Department of Tourism, being the lead agency of this national event, shall immediately convene an inter-agency organizing task force to plan and implement effectively all programs, projects and activities related to this event.

Sec. 3. The inter-agency task force shall be composed of the Secretary of Tourism as Chair, with the Executive Director of the National Historical Institute and the Secretary of Education as Vice-Chairs. Other members of the inter-agency task force shall be designated by the Chair.

Sec. 4. All departments, bureaus, offices, national government agencies and local government units and government owned and controlled corporations are hereby enjoined to give full support, assistance, and cooperation to the Secretary of Tourism in the exercise of his responsibilities under this Administrative Order.

Sec. 5. All branches of-government are enjoined to participate actively in the 2007 Independence as well as to enlist the participation of private sector groups and non-government organizations so that the 109 th Philippine Independence Day celebration will be a show of unity and strength during these challenging times. Local government units, together with private sector groups, non-government organizations and the Philippine Embassies abroad, are likewise enjoined to celebrate the 109 th Anniversary of Philippine Independence in their respective localities and offices.

Sec. 6. The programs and events for the 2007 Independence Day Celebration shall include, to the extent appropriate, the following:

a. Pambansang Araw ng Watawat (Philippine National Flag Day) on May 28, 2007 as the kick-off ceremony for the 2007 Independence Day celebration;

b. Flag-Raising and Wreath-Laying Ceremonies at the Rizal National Monument, Rizal Park, Manila, on June 12, 2007 at around 7:00 a.m. This activity will be particularly replicated in the places of national significance such as the Barasoain Church Historical Landmark, Malolos City, Bulacan; Aguinaldo Shrine, Kawit, Cavite; Mausoleo de los Veteranos dela Revolucion, Manila North Cemetery; Bonifacio National Monument, Caloocan City; and, Pinaglabanan Memorial Shrine, San Juan, Metro Manila. All other cities and municipalities around the country are enjoined to hold simultaneous similar activities on the same day and time;

c. The Philippine Independence Day Parade at the Quirino Grandstand on June 12, 2007 shall be meaningful and relevant to the theme of the celebration, to be followed by a special cultural program on the same venue.

Sec. 7. The Department of Budget and Management is hereby authorized to release the amount of Five Million Pesos (PhP5,000,000.00), chargeable against the built-in appropriation of the National Historical Institute for FY 2007 pursuant to the approved General Appropriations Act of 2007 to defray the expenses for the activities commemorating the 109 th Anniversary of the Proclamation of Philippine Independence.

Sec. 8. In support of the 109 th Philippine Independence Day celebration, all concerned agencies and local government units are, subject to budgetary laws and issuances, authorized to allocate such amounts as may be necessary to defray expenses for the said event.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28 th day of May, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2007). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111-288]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.