MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 127

PROVIDING FOR AN INCREASED INFORMATION CAMPAIGN BY GOVERNMENT AGENCIES IN ALL GOVERNMENT OWNED AND CONTROLLED MEDIA OUTLETS REGARDING THEIR POLICIES, PROGRAMS AND OBJECTIVES, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the government has numerous policies and programs that are aimed at improving the quality of life of the people and ensuring the growth of the nation as a whole;

WHEREAS, these policies and programs, including the accomplishments and performance, of the various agencies of the government are not being proactively and adequately communicated to the people, thereby creating a gap between public perception and reality in the field;

WHEREAS, there is a need to effectively and accurately inform the public of the significant policies, programs and objectives of the various departments and agencies of the government in order to bring governance closer to the people;

WHEREAS, promoting public awareness on the policies, programs and objectives of the government will also encourage the people to take an active role in the formulation and implementation of other policies and programs that affect them;

WHEREAS, the task of communicating the government’s various policies, programs and objectives, including their accomplishments and performance, is a responsibility of all departments and agencies of the government, particularly in their respective jurisdictions;

WHEREAS, government-owned and controlled corporations, financial institutions and other government instrumentalities should likewise contribute in informing the people of their own programs, policies and objectives;

WHEREAS, the task of communicating the government’s programs need not be costly in view of the government’s various media outlets and stations at its disposal;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. All national government agencies, including government-owned and controlled corporations, government financial institutions and other government corporate entities, and their subsidiaries and other instrumentalities under the Executive Department, are hereby directed to undertake increased information dissemination campaign regarding their respective policies, programs and objectives, including their accomplishments and performance, in order to bring government closer to the people.

Section 2. All government agencies are hereby directed to primarily utilize government media entities and stations in such information dissemination campaign.

Section 3. All government media outlets and/or stations are directed to assist the said agencies in the preparation and/or production of said information campaign program.

Section 4. The Office of the Group Head for Mass Media is hereby directed to supervise the preparation and implementation of a media program geared towards increased public awareness.

Section 5. For purposes of this Administrative Order, all national government agencies, including government-owned and controlled corporations, government financial institutions and other government corporate entities, and their subsidiaries and other instrumentalities, are hereby exempted from the provisions of Administrative Order No. 103, Section 1 (a) (4) in their utilization of government media outlets and/or stations in such information dissemination campaign.

Section 6. Local government units are strongly urged to adopt similar measures to disseminate information regarding their policies, programs and objectives, including their accomplishments and performance, using inexpensive and efficient means of information dissemination.

SECTION 7. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 16th day of August, Two Thousand and Five.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2005). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.