MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 142

MANDATING THE AMBASSADOR-AT-LARGE FOR COUNTERTERRORISM TO ORGANIZE A COUNTER-TERRORISM EXPERTS’ CONFERENCE

WHEREAS, the Philippines is the Chair of the Counterterrorism Task Force of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation;

WHEREAS, the Philippines announced at the meeting of the leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations with the President of the United States at the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Leaders Meeting in Busan, Korea that the Philippines would host a Counter Terrorism Experts’ Conference (CTEC) in 2006;

NOW, THEREFORE, I GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order that:

SECTION 1. Conference Organizer. – The Ambassador-at-Large for Counterterrorism shall organize the 2006 Counter-Terrorism Experts’ Conference.

SECTION 2. Oversight Officials. – In carrying out his task, The Ambassador-at-Large for Counterterrorism shall be guided by the Cabinet members and officials constituting the National Security Council Cabinet Group, which is responsible for formulating the Philippine policy in substantive issues related to Counter-Terrorism. He may also receive guidance from private individuals and organizations.

SECTION 3. Assisting Officials. – In carrying out his task, The Ambassador-at-Large for Counterterrorism shall be assisted by representatives of the members of the National Security Council Cabinet Group and the Secretary of Tourism.

SECTION 4. Authority and Functions. – The Ambassador-at-Large for Counterterrorism shall have the following authority and functions relative to the CTEC:

4.1. Implement the work program once approved by the National Security Council Cabinet Group and supervise and monitor all activities in relation thereto;

4.2. Call upon any office, agent, employee, agency or instrumentality of the national or local government for any assistance that may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Administrative Order;

4.3. Recognize the support and cooperation of the business sector and non-governmental organizations in hosting the meetings participated by the private sector;

4.4. Conclude agreements and contracts necessary for the attainment of the objectives of this Administrative Order, including contracts for service, in accordance with bidding rules;

4.5. Create a Secretariat that shall be responsible for the substantive arrangements of the CTEC, including proper coordination with all parties and committees and completion of the conference deliverables as embodied in the CTEC concept paper.

SECTION 5. Office. – The Secretariat shall be located at the premises of National Security Council.

SECTION 6. Funding. – Funding of no more than Php 5,000,000 for the operating expenses of the Ambassador-at-Large for Counterterrorism shall be drawn from funds as identified by the Secretary of Budget and Management, subject to the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

SECTION 7. Administrative Guidelines/Orders. – Upon recommendation of the Ambassador-at-Large for Counterterrorism, the Executive Secretary shall adopt such administrative guidelines or orders as may be necessary to achieve the objectives of this Administrative Order.

SECTION 9. Effectivity. – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 6th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Six.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2006). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.