MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 85

CREATING A PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE REFORM COMMISSION TO CONDUCT A REVIEW OF THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE AND RECOMMEND MEASURES AIMED AT INSTITUTING REFORMS THEREIN

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the State to promote peace and order, ensure public safety and further strengthen local government capability aimed towards the effective delivery of basic services to the citizenry through the establishment of a highly efficient and competent police force that is national in scope and civilian in character;

WHEREAS, by virtue of the Department of the Interior and Local Government Act of 1990 (Republic Act [R.A.] No. 6975), the Philippine National Police (PNP) was established to, among others, enforce all laws and ordinances relative to the protection of lives and properties and maintain peace and order and take all necessary steps to ensure public safety;

WHEREAS, a number of problems affect the PNP underscored by the recent escape of detention prisoners and reported negative incidents involving police officers;

WHEREAS, there is a need to conduct a review of these problems affecting the PNP aimed at instituting reforms at all levels of the PNP.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation. – There is hereby created a Philippine National Police Reform Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, which shall review the various problems affecting the Philippine National Police (PNP) and recommend measures aimed at instituting reforms in the PNP.

SECTION 2. Composition. – The Commission shall be composed of the following:

SECTION 3. Powers and Functions. – The Commission shall have the following powers and functions:

a. Conduct a review and assessment of the problems affecting the organization, function and operation of the PNP;

b. Possess all the powers of an investigative body under Section 37, Chapter 9, Book I of the Administrative Code of 1987, including the power to summon witnesses, administer oath, take testimony or evidence relevant to the investigation and to issue compulsory processes to produce documents, books, records and such other matters, in the performance of its functions;

c. Engage the services of resource persons, professionals and other personnel which may be necessary to carry out its functions;

d. Call upon any department, bureau, office, agency and instrumentality of government as it may require in the discharge of its functions;

e. Recommend comprehensive short-term and long-term policies, strategies and programs aimed at instituting reforms in the PNP;

f. Perform any and all acts as may be necessary and appropriate to implement this Order, subject to the approval of the President.

SECTION 4. Tenure and Turnover of Records. – The Commission is hereby given ninety (90) days from its constitution to conclude its review and submit to the Office of the President, through the Executive Secretary, its findings and recommendations together with the complete records of its review.

SECTION 5. Secretariat. – The Department of Justice (DOJ) shall establish a Special Secretariat for the technical and staff support of the Commission. For this purpose, the Secretary of Justice is hereby authorized to detail any personnel from the DOJ to assist the Commission.

SECTION 6. Funding. – Funding for the operation of the Commission shall be sourced from any available funds in coordination with the Department of Budget and Management.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

City of Manila, SEP 19 2003

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2003). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1- 110-A ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.