MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 250

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF PERFORMANCE BONUS FOR FY 2008

WHEREAS , the government is cognizant of the economic difficulties which may arise as a result of the global financial crisis;

WHEREAS , despite these economic challenges, government personnel have discharged their duties with dispatch and provided quality service to the Filipino people;

WHEREAS , their commendable effort enabled government agencies to attain efficiency in government operations which contributed to the generation of savings;

WHEREAS , it is the policy of the government to improve the economic welfare of government personnel;

NOW THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order:

SECTION 1. All personnel of the government who are employed by National Government Agencies (NGAs) and Government Owned or Controlled Corporations (GOCCs) including Government Financial Institutions (GFIs), whether hired on permanent, temporary, casual or contractual basis, and who have rendered at least four (4) months of service as of November 30, 2008, are entitled to receive a one time grant of a maximum of Ten Thousand Pesos (P10,000.00) each as Performance Bonus (PerB).

SECTION 2. Government personnel who have rendered less than four (4) months of service as of November 30, 2008 shall also be entitled to PerB on a pro-rated basis as follows:

Length of Service

Percentage

3 months but less than 4 months

40%

2 months but less than 3 months

30%

1 month but less than 2 months

20%

Less than 1 month

10%

SECTION 3. The PerB shall be granted to all government personnel who have not received an additional year-end benefit in FY 2008 over and above the benefit authorized under R.A. No. 6686, as amended by R.A. No. 8441.

SECTION 4. Funds needed to implement this Order shall be charged against the following:

a. For national government agencies except the Constitutional Offices/Fiscal Autonomy Group (CFAG), the amount required shall be charged against:

1.) Additional funds to be released by the DBM to cover P7,000.00 for each government personnel, chargeable against savings from unreleased appropriations under the FY 2008 budget which shall be pooled by DBM for the purpose; and,

2.) Savings in the respective agency allotment for the remaining P3,000.00 for each government personnel. In the event that the agency savings is insufficient to cover in full the remaining P3,000.00 per employee, partial implementation of the benefit herein authorized shall be made, provided that said partial implementation shall be uniform for all positions, subject to the limitations set forth under Section 2 of this Order.

b. For agencies belonging to the CFAG, the amount required shall be charged against their available savings; and

c. For GOCCs and GFIs, the amount needed shall be charged against savings from their respective approved corporate budget. GOCCs and GFIs which do not have adequate or sufficient resources may partially implement the benefit herein authorized, provided that the partial implementation shall be uniform for all positions.

SECTION 5. Payment of this benefit shall be made not earlier than December 15, 2008.

SECTION 6. The implementing rules and regulations covering this Order shall be issued by the DBM.

SECTION 7. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 10th day of December in the Year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Eight.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2008). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.