MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 29

RENAMING, RECONSTITUTING AND EXPANDING THE FUNCTIONS OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMITTEE TO BE HENCEFORTH KNOWN AS THE PRESIDENTIAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, Administrative Order No. 101, dated December 13, 1988, created the Human Rights Committee;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order No. 15, dated October 14, 1992, increased the membership of the committee to include representatives from the Department of the Interior and Local Government, Department of Foreign Affairs, Department of Health and Department of Social Welfare and Development to effectively and efficiently monitor the Philippine human rights situation, address human rights problems and advise the President on the proper measures that should be taken without delay;

WHEREAS, there is a need to reconstitute the committee and redefine its function to implement the goal of the government to protect human rights and promote their observance by all, pursuant to the Constitutional policy that, “(T)he State values the dignity of every human person and guarantees full respect for human rights”.

NOW THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Human Rights Committee established under A.O. No. 101, dated December 13, 1988, as amended shall be renamed and henceforth be known as the “Presidential Human Rights Committee.”

SEC. 2. The Presidential Human Rights Committee shall be composed of the following:

The Secretary of Justice as Chairperson; the Chief Presidential Legal Counsel, Representatives of the Department of the Interior and Local Government, Department of National Defense, Department of Foreign Affairs, Department of Health, Department of Social Welfare and Development, Lead Convenor, National Anti-Poverty Commission, and two representatives of private human rights groups organized nationally, to be nominated by said groups and appointed by the President, as members; and the Chairman of the Commission on Human Rights, Chairman of the Senate Committee on Justice and Human Rights and House of Representatives Committee on Civil, Political and Human Rights, as observers.

SEC. 3. The Committee shall serve as the primary advisory body to the President in effectively addressing urgent human rights concerns/issues in the country.

SEC. 4. The Committee shall co-operate and coordinate with concerned government and private agencies, entities and groups in the implementation and performance of the following functions and duties:

a. To assess and monitor all aspects of the human rights situation in the Philippines, to include civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights;

b. To assist victims of human rights violations and their families, especially victims of enforced or involuntary disappearances; and

c. To perform such other functions and duties as may be directed by the President and/or necessary to meet the objectives of the Committee.

SEC. 5. The member-agencies shall designate a permanent and alternate representative to render continuing support and extend help necessary to carry out the functions and duties of the Committee.

SEC. 6. The Committee, through the Chairperson, is authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government, including government owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions.

SEC. 7. The Committee shall have a Secretariat which shall be located in the Department of Justice. The Secretariat shall provide staff support to the Committee.

SEC. 8. The initial amount of Five Million Pesos (Ph5,000,000.00) for the year 2002 which is necessary to carry out the provisions of this Administrative Order will be sourced from the President’s Contingency Fund. Thereafter, such amount necessary for this purpose shall be incorporated in the General Appropriations Act for the Department of Justice.

SEC. 9. If any provision of this Administrative Order is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions not affected thereby shall continue in full force and effect.

SEC. 10. All orders, rules and regulations inconsistent with this Administrative Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 11. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2002). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.