MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 45

DESIGNATING THE OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT TO OVERSEE, SUPERVISE AND IMPLEMENT AGREED DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

WHEREAS , there exists a vital need to promote, accelerate and implement various socio-economic programs;

WHEREAS, in the joint statement of the President and the Vice President on July 2, 2002 the Overseas Filipino Investment Bond, the Housing Program for Overseas Filipino Workers [OFWs] and Others, and the establishment of an integrated steel plant in Mindanao were identified as vital programs;

WHEREAS , the establishment of a Seafarer’s Welfare Program is another vital program;

WHEREAS , there are other socio-economic programs, particularly those involving the development of Mindanao, that may hereafter be agreed to be covered within this Administrative Order;

WHEREAS , under Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987, the President has the continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Mandate. The Office of the Vice President [OVP] shall oversee, supervise and implement all the aforementioned programs. The OVP shall be the representative of the Government in the oversight and supervision of such programs until their completion. The concerned government agencies institutionally in charge of the relevant projects under the aforementioned programs shall be placed under the oversight and supervision of the OVP with respect to the relevant projects to ensure smooth, timely, effective implementation under the agreed programs.

SECTION 2. Powers and Functions. Pursuant to its mandate, the OVP shall exercise the following powers and functions:

a. Advise the President in matters concerning the aforementioned programs, and provide analyses and recommendations on policies and operational issues, particularly those relative to Mindanao development.

b. Review all aspects related to the aforementioned programs, recommend short and long term measures and appropriate actions to address policy, institutional implementation, and operational issues and concerns, particularly those relative to Mindanao development. The OVP shall therefore oversee and supervise the implementation and completion of all relevant projects under the aforementioned programs.

c. Call upon any agency of the government for such assistance as may be necessary to address problems affecting the relevant projects.

d. Promote foreign and local investment opportunities related to the aforementioned programs, and as necessary, prioritize relevant projects under the aforementioned programs in cooperation with national government agencies, local government units, and other stakeholders.

e. The OVP shall be actively assisted by all Presidential appointees, on areas that may be appropriate, to promote and accelerate the socio-economic development of the people of Mindanao.

f. Elected officials in areas affected by the aforementioned programs shall continue to perform their functions relative to the socio-economic projects covering their respective areas of responsibility as provided by law. They are enjoined to extend full support and cooperation to the OVP under this mandate.

g. Perform all other functions that the President may direct.

SECTION 3. Technical and Administrative Support. The OVP is authorized to formulate the organizational structure of its secretariat and engage the services of consultants, as may be approved by the President.

SECTION 4. Funding. Funding shall be taken from such available resources as may be determined by the Department of Budget and Management. Appropriations for the succeeding years shall be incorporated in the budget proposal for the OVP.

SECTION 5. Repealing Clause. All executive issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Administrative Order are hereby revoked, amended, or modified accordingly.

SECTION 6. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25 th day of November in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2002). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.