MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 133

STRENGTHENING THE POWERS OF THE SECRETARY OF FINANCE OVER THE BUREAU OF CUSTOMS

WHEREAS, the Bureau of Customs performs a major role in the collection of revenues for the government;

WHEREAS, the Bureau of Customs is under the control and supervision of the Department of Finance pursuant to the Administrative Code of 1987;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 47 dated December 8, 1998, provides that the Secretary of Finance shall have the power to review, reverse, revise, modify or set aside decisions of the Bureau of Customs, subject to the Civil Service Law, regarding the Bureau’s personnel appointments, promotion, assignment, transfer, detail, suspension and such other personnel action concerning them;

WHEREAS, the Tariff and Customs Code, as amended, likewise authorizes the Secretary of Finance to approve the assignment or transfer of any employee of the Bureau of Customs to any port, service, division or office within the Bureau;

WHEREAS, there is a need, in the exigency of public service, to make the Bureau of Customs a more flexible and highly responsive organization to carry out the revenue objectives of government;

WHEREAS, the President of the Philippines has the continuing power to reorganize the National Government in accordance with Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended by Presidential Decree No. 1772 and the Administrative Code of 1987;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Strengthened Authority. – The Secretary of Finance shall have the power to transfer, detail and assign or reassign presidential appointees of the Bureau of Customs, notwithstanding the specific designation, Group assignment, office or station stated in their respective appointments, as the best interest of the service may require, in accordance with the existing organizational set-up of the Bureau; Provided, that such transfer, detail, or assignment shall not affect the tenure of office of the concerned officials nor result in the change of status, demotion in rank and/or deduction in salary, and shall be made only in accordance with civil service laws, rules and regulations.

SECTION 2. Repealing Clause. – All executive orders, administrative orders, proclamations, rules and regulations or parts thereof that are inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 3. Effectivity. – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of December in the year of Our Lord Two Thousand and Five.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2005). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.