MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 32

PROVIDING FOR ADJUSTED OFFICIAL WORKING HOURS IN ALL DEPARTMENTS, BUREAUS, OFFICES AND OTHER AGENCIES UNDER THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF THE GOVERNMENT, INCLUDING GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS, DURING THE MONTHS OF APRIL AND MAY OF THE YEAR 2002

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the State to encourage and promote domestic tourism;

WHEREAS, tourism has been identified as one of the largest contributors to the country’s gross domestic product and a major contributor to the growth and development of the national economy;

WHEREAS, knowledge and awareness on the part of our citizens of our country’s various natural, historical and cultural heritage can make a significant contribution to the nation’s goals of national unity and socio-economic, cultural and educational development;

WHEREAS, as front liners in the public service, government employees could best encourage the promotion of domestic tourism by imparting their own experiences to the public;

WHEREAS, to enable government employees to visit the various domestic tourism destinations in the country and for them to convey the knowledge and experience they have gained during their travels, the Secretary of the Department of Tourism recommends the adjustment of their official working hours during specific regular working days of the week in the summertime.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. During the months of April and May of the year 2002, employees of all departments, bureaus, offices and other agencies under the executive branch of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, shall have the option not to report for work on Mondays or on Fridays provided that during said period:

(a) such employees shall report for work four (4) consecutive days of each workweek, except on holidays;

(b) such employees shall render not less than ten (10) hours of work a day, exclusive of meal periods, either from Tuesday to Friday or from Monday to Thursday of each workweek, except on holidays; and

(c) the head of the concerned department, bureau, office, agency or government-owned or controlled corporation shall ensure that at least half of its workforce shall report for work on Mondays and the other half on Fridays to assure the efficient delivery of basic governmental services to the public. The concerned department, bureau, office, agency or government-owned or controlled corporation must have a full or complete workforce on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays.

SECTION 2. This Administrative Order shall not cover the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Philippine National Police, the Philippine Coast Guard, government hospitals and health centers and other government agencies involved in providing health, safety, police, security, protection and other emergency services.

SECTION 3. All concerned departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and government-owned or controlled corporations are directed to promulgate the appropriate rules and regulations for the efficient implementation of this Administrative Order.

SECTION 4. The Department of Budget and Management is hereby directed to issue the necessary guidelines, rules and regulations to provide for adjustments in the wages or compensation, including PERA, ADCOM and payment for overtime services, of government employees affected by the implementation of this Administrative Order.

SECTION 5. The legislative and judicial branches of the government, the constitutional commissions and the private sector are encouraged to adopt the above mentioned official working hours during the months of April and May of the year 2002.

SECTION 6. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.

City of Manila, March 18, 2002.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2002). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.