MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 279

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE FOR THE PREVENTION OF FILIPINOS BEING USED AS DRUG COURIERS BY INTERNATIONAL DRUG TRAFFICKING SYNDICATES

WHEREAS, the State is mandated to promote the welfare of Filipinos overseas pursuant to Republic Act No. 8042, otherwise known as the Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act of 1995;

WHEREAS, it is of critical importance that the State safeguard public interest and protect overseas Filipinos from the tactics of international drug trafficking syndicates;

WHEREAS, the State recognizes the hazardous menace of illegal drugs and international drug traffickers to society;

WHEREAS, there is an alarming increase in die number of Filipinos who have been enticed, duped, and subsequently recruited to act as drug couriers by international drug trafficking syndicates;

WHEREAS, many of the Filipinos recruited as drug couriers have been apprehended by police authorities and are now facing stiff penalties, with some of them meted with death sentences by foreign courts;

WHEREAS, there is a need to conduct an intensive and unrelenting campaign against drug syndicates responsible for victimizing the Filipino as drug courier;

WHEREAS, the fight against illegal drugs is a gargantuan task where all available government resources should be utilized and concerned law enforcement agencies must’ coordinate closely and act jointly to ensure the implementation of a holistic and unified anti-drug program that will address the problem of drug couriers;

WHEREAS, the Administrative Code of 1987 provides that the President has the continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Executive Branch of the government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of a Task Force – There is hereby created an Inter-Agency Task Force for the prevention of Filipinos being used as drug couriers, otherwise known as Drug Couriers Task Force (TFDC).

Section 2. Composition – The Task Force shall be composed of the following:

Section 3. Functions – The TFDC shall:

Section 4. Assistance – The TFDC is hereby authorized to call upon all other agencies and instrumentalities of the Philippine government as well as non-government organizations, whose assistance and support may be deemed necessary to the effective dispatch of the functions of the TFDC. The departments, agencies and instrumentalities called upon by the TFDC for assistance are hereby directed to extend their full cooperation.

Section 5. Funding – The Office of the President shall provide the initial budget from the Contingent Fund, for the operations, administration and programs of the TFDC. The budget for the succeeding years shall be included in regular budget of the Office of the President.

Section 6. Separability Clause – Should any part or provision of this Administrative Order be held unconstitutional or invalid, the other parts or provisions hereof shall not be affected and shall continue to be in full force and effect.

Section 7. Effectivity – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 8th day of February, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Ten.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2010). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.