MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 230

CREATING A TASK FORCE FOR AN INTEGRATED REHABILITATION AND RESTORATION PROGRAM IN THE ISLAND OF PANAY

WHEREAS , typhoon “Frank” has devastated Panay Island comprising the provinces of Iloilo, Capiz, Aklan and Antique and other parts of the country, resulting in the great loss of lives and injuries, the displacement of thousands of families, and extensive damage to properties, crops and infrastructure in these areas;

WHEREAS , there is a need to coordinate the rehabilitation and restoration efforts among the concerned local government units and national agencies; and

WHEREAS , the creation of a special body that would facilitate the coordination and implementation of plans, programs and projects for area-wide rehabilitation and restoration;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Panay Island Rehabilitation and Restoration Task Force . — There is hereby created a Task Force designated as the Panay Island Rehabilitation and Restoration Task Force (hereafter referred to as “Task Force”) to undertake integrated rehabilitation efforts and restoration activities in the damaged provinces and cities in Western Visayas.

SECTION 2. Composition . — The Task Force shall be chaired by the Secretary of Justice, who is also the Cabinet Officer for Regional Development (CORD) of Region VI, and shall be composed of the following as members:

a. Chairman of the Regional Development Council of Region VI;

b. Governors and City Mayors of affected provinces and cities;

c. Chairman of the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council;

d. Department of Agriculture;

e. Department of Social Welfare and Development;

f. Department of Public Works and Highways;

g. Department of Environment and Natural Resources;

h. Department of Budget and Management;

i. Department of Transportation and Communications;

j. Department of Energy;

k. Department of Education;

l. Department of Trade and Industry;

m. Department of Labor and Employment;

n. Department of National Defense;

o. Department of the Interior and the Local Government; and

p. Private Sector representatives designated by the Chairman.

Concerned agencies organizations, as may be determined by the Chairman of the Task Force, may be designated as ex-officio members.

SECTION 3. Powers and Functions . — The Task Force Panay shall have the following powers and functions:

a. Develop area-wide rehabilitation and restoration programs and projects;

b. Undertake broad-based consultations with concerned agencies and People’s Organizations (POs)/NGOs to insure that their needs, concerns and ideas are considered in the formation of rehabilitation and restoration programs and the corresponding projects to be undertaken;

c. Establish priorities based on the identified programs and projects;

d. Access funds, services and other resources from existing government programs and projects, where feasible;

e. Allocate resources and coordinate fund release and other resources based on the identified priorities;

f. Evaluate and monitor the implementation of the projects;

g. Evaluate the effectiveness of the implementation of the projects;

h. Submit progress and other necessary reports to the President, copy furnished the Executive Secretary and the Chairman of the National Disaster Coordinating Council (NDCC);

i. Call on any government agency or instrumentality for any support requirement; and

j. Perform such other functions and responsibilities as the President may direct.

SECTION 4. Executive Director . — The Executive Director of the Task Force shall be the Presidential Assistant for the Western Visayas. He shall manage and supervise the day-to-day implementation of the plans, programs and projects of the Task Force and prepare progress reports to the President, through the Chairman of the Task Force.

SECTION 5. Staff Support . — The support staff may be detailed from government agencies/offices, including local government units of the typhoon-damaged provinces and municipalities. A consultant may be contracted as needed by the Task Force.

SECTION 6. Role of Municipal Mayors . — The Municipal Mayors shall act as advisers to their respective Governors and render assistance in the implementation of the programs and projects of the Task Force in their respective cities/municipalities. They shall also monitor and submit independent reports and recommendations on the Task Force programs and projects in their respective cities/municipalities.

SECTION 7. Implementation of Task Force Projects . — The programs and projects of the Task Force shall be implemented by concerned national agencies and/or local government units depending upon the nature, size and location of the program or project. Where their participation is feasible, the local government units and other organizations, such as the Parents-Teachers associations, local school boards and cooperatives, shall be tapped to assist or participate in the implementation of the programs and projects of the Task Force.

SECTION 8. Relationship with the Office of the President and the National Disaster Coordinating Council . — The Task Force shall operate directly under the Office of the President. The National Disaster Coordinating Council shall assist and support the Task Force in the accomplishment of its mission.

SECTION 9. Funding . — The administration and operation of the Task Force shall initially be funded from the Office of the Secretary of Justice and other available sources, including from the departments and corporate agencies.

SECTION 10. Effectivity . — This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th day of July in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Eight.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2008). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.