MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 95

AMENDING ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 34, S. OF 2002, PROVIDING FOR THE REVIVAL OF CABINET OFFICERS FOR REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

WHEREAS, on May 2, 2002, the Cabinet Officers for Regional Development (CORD) was revived by A.O. No. 34;

WHEREAS, there is a need to amend Section 2 of A.O. No. 34, s of 2002 to delineate the specific functions, duties and responsibilities of the CORD.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Section 2 of A.O. No. 34, s of 2002, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 2. Functions, Duties and Responsibilities of the CORD – The CORD shall perform, among others, the following functions, duties and responsibilities:

a) Assist in articulating the region’s concerns and perceptions in the Cabinet, with other Departments, the Office of the President and concerned agencies;

b) Assist the President in the speedy, efficient and orderly resolution of problems in government operations in his/her assigned region:

b.1. By determining grievances or concerns that need to be addressed immediately;

b.2. By following up the actions of concerned government agencies;

b.3. By informing the people in the area of the results on actions taken by the government;

c) In coordination with the Regional Development Councils (RDC) and other local special bodies, assist in defining priorities and projects in the region;

d) Monitors government projects and programs at the regional level i.e. – those accomplished and not accomplished, and the reasons why they were not accomplished immediately;

e) Insure that all programs, projects and activities of the national government in the region are well implemented, and information thereon fully disseminated to the people through various mechanisms and strategies;

f) Check on public information aspect of any project and/or program;

g) Be prepared to report on high-impact matters/concerns and the measures taken by the government to address them for public information purposes;

h) Identify and clarify issues and concerns affecting peace and order and security, thru the Regional Peace and Order Council (RPOC) and the Cabinet Oversight Committee on Internal Security (COC-IS) sub-national levels;

i) Monitor the conduct of government forces/agencies involved in Peace & Order and security matters;

j) Undertake regular visits for the purpose of conducting consultations with local officials and the private sector in his/her region of assignment;

k) Act as Lead Convenor during Presidential regional meetings;

l) Submit reports as necessary of his/her activities to the President through the Executive Secretary;

m) Perform such other functions as may be assigned by the President.”

SEC. 2. All other provisions of A. O. No. 34, s. of 2002 shall remain unchanged, valid and existing.

SEC. 3. Effectivity – This amendment shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 27th day of February in the year of our Lord, two thousand four.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2004). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.