MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 62

CREATING THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENTIAL CHIEF OF STAFF AND DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS

WHEREAS, the Office of the President is the seat of power of government in the country and the Office where policies and decisions affecting the country emanate;

WHEREAS, in view of the critical nature of the Office of the President, there is a need to ensure that all internal policies, systems, procedures and activities are coordinated and responsive to the requirements of the Presidency to enable her to perform her functions effectively and efficiently;

WHEREAS, the Office of the President is committed to the implementation of the government’s reform agenda directed at reducing poverty, accelerating economic growth and improving the quality of life of the Filipino people;

WHEREAS, there is a need for a mechanism that will coordinate the activities, operations, systems and processes directly affecting the Presidency, to ensure the effective and efficient delivery of staff support services to the President and to enhance the President’s communications strategy aimed at generating increased public awareness and participation;

WHEREAS, Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of Executive Order No. 292, series of 1987, otherwise known as the “Administrative Code of 1987,” provides that the President shall have continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and the Constitution, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Office of the Presidential Chief of Staff. There is hereby created in the Office of the President a support staff in the Private Office called the Office of the Presidential Chief of Staff (OPCS). It shall assist the President by providing direct services to the President in the management of her day-to-day activities and requirements, and provide inputs in the President’s decision-making. As direct support staff to the President, the OPCS shall have the primary function of supervising and ensuring an efficient and responsive day-to-day operational support to the Presidency to enable the President to focus on more important national concerns. This includes:

1.1 Managing the day-to-day schedule of the President. The OPCS shall determine and recommend to the President the activities which shall be personally attended by the President. Relatedly, it shall coordinate with all concerned offices and agencies and ensure adequate preparation, both substantive and administrative, in die conduct of Presidential activities;

1.2 Providing the President with strategic planning functions;

1.3 Providing coordination of the policy formulation process at the President’s level;

1.4 Ensuring the monitoring and evaluation of programs and projects being undertaken by the Government; and

1.5 Ensuring greater participation of the citizenry in the government’s reform agenda by enhancing the President’s public communications systems.

SECTION 2. Organizational Set-up and staff Complement. The OPCS shall be under the direct supervision of the President. It shall be headed by the Presidential Chief of Staff, who shall have the rank and emoluments of a Cabinet Secretary, and shall be assisted by one (1) Senior Deputy Chief of Staff and two (2) Deputy Chiefs of Staff, all with the rank of Undersecretary, three (3) Assistant Secretaries, and such number of Directorial and other Administrative staff as may be deemed necessary by the Presidential Chief of Staff, upon the approval of the President.

SECTION 3. Coordinating Mechanism in the Office of the President. (a) The OPCS shall coordinate the operations of the following offices, without diminution of their respective powers and functions: (a) the Appointments Office; (b) the Office of the Presidential Assistant for Socials; (c) the Office of Protocol Affairs; (d) the Correspondence Office; and the (e) Internal House Affairs Office.

(b) The OPCS shall have supervision over the President’s National Security Briefing Room, which shall be responsible for providing regular situationer reports to the President on real time basis.

(c) The OPCS shall coordinate, for the specific purpose of formulating and implementing the President’s public communications programs, the following offices: (a) the Office of the Press Secretary; and (b) the Office of the Presidential Spokesperson.

(d) The OPCS shall coordinate closely with the Presidential Management Staff as the primary government agency directly responsible for providing substantive staff assistance in the Presidential exercise of overall management of the development process.

(e) To ensure close coordination, the outputs of the Presidential Advisers and Assistants shall be submitted to the President through the Executive Secretary, copy furnished the OPCS.

SECTION 4. Assistance. – The OPCS may call upon any agency of the Government for such assistance as may be necessary in the performance of its functions. All heads of departments, agencies, bureaus, offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations are hereby enjoined to render full assistance and cooperation to the Presidential Chief of Staff and provide such information and data as may required to carry out his functions.

SECTION 5. Funding Support. The funds to support the operations of the OPCS shall be sourced from the existing budget of the Office of the President. Fund requirements of the OPCS for the succeeding years shall be included in the budget of the Office of the President.

SECTION 6. Repealing Clause. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Administrative Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

City of Manila, FEB 12 2003

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2003). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1- 110-A ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.