MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER No. 183

DIRECTING THE USE OF ENERGY EFFICIENT LIGHTING/LIGHTING SYSTEMS (EELs) IN GOVERNMENT FACILITIES (PALIT-ILAW Program)

WHEREAS, under Section 2 of R.A. No. 7638, otherwise known as the “Department of Energy Act of 1992”, it is declared the policy of the State to ensure a continuous, adequate, reliable, and economic supply of energy through, among others, the judicious conservation, renewal and efficient utilization of energy, to keep pace with the country’s growth and economic development and to rationalize, integrate, and coordinate the various programs of the Government towards self-sufficiency and enhanced productivity in power energy without sacrificing ecological concerns;

WHEREAS, the conservation and efficient utilization of energy is one of the major strategies of the Government to realize energy self-sufficiency and reduce environmental impacts of energy generation and utilization as instituted in the Philippine Energy Plan (PEP) and the National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Program (NEECP);

WHEREAS, Administrative Order Nos. 103, 110 and 126 mandate a ten per cent (10%) reduction in energy consumption in all government offices, including the designation of an Energy Conservation Officer;

WHEREAS, the use of energy efficient lighting systems (EELs), through the Palit-Ilaw Program, aims to promote lighting efficiency considering that lighting is used by all government facilities and EELs are the easiest to install/retrofit among other energy efficient equipment and fixtures;

WHEREAS, the adoption of EELs as a standard lighting system in government facilities will contribute to the realization of energy savings as well as pollution prevention and overall environmental improvement.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the adoption of energy efficient lighting/lighting systems in government.

SECTION 1. Mandatory Use of EELs. All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Philippine Government, including National Government Agencies, State Universities and Colleges, Government Owned and Controlled Corporations, Government Financial Institutions, and other Government Entities are hereby mandated to use EELs in all buildings and facilities, as well as in all projects financed by the Government, such as housing and school building projects.

1.1   The Energy Conservation Officer (ECO) of each government entity/agency shall, within one month from the effectivity of this Administrative Order, formulate a phased-in lighting replacement program in their respective existing facilities to be submitted to the DOE; unless the concerned government entity/agency already uses EELs in which case it shall submit a compliance report to the DOE. The phased-in lighting replacement program shall be implemented within one year from the effectivity of this Administrative Order.

SEC. 2. Cooperating Agencies. The Department of Energy (DOE), through the Energy Utilization Management Bureau (EUMB), shall take the lead in implementing this Administrative Order and shall take appropriate measures and necessary actions to ensure compliance with the same. The DOE shall be supported by the following government agencies and other agencies as may later be identified:

2.1. The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) shall provide complementary policies and activities to ensure that lighting products meet the specifications under the Philippine National Standards (PNS) as well as applicable Minimum Energy Performance Standards (MEPS) for consumer protection.

2.2 The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) shall facilitate the approval of necessary funds for the implementation of this Administrative Order and, through the Government Policy and Procurement Board (GPPB) and Procurement Services, allow only energy efficient lighting products for government procurement, with exceptions provided for under the Guidelines for Energy Conserving Design of Buildings.

2.3 The Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), through the Environmental Management Bureau (EMB), shall promulgate/implement policies consistent with proper lamp waste management.

2.4 The Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) shall integrate the use of EELs in planning and development for government buildings/facilities and other infrastructure development projects.

2.5 The Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), pursuant to its general supervision over the local government units (LGUs), shall strongly encourage the LGUs to contribute to the objective of this Administrative Order by using EELs in their facilities.

2.6 The Philippine Information Agency (PIA) shall include energy efficiency and conservation in lighting in its media campaigns.

SEC. 3. Implementation. The DOE is hereby authorized to issue additional implementing rules and regulations (IRR) from time to time, as may be necessary, to implement this Administrative Order.

SEC. 4. Use of Savings. Savings generated from the use of EELs may be utilized as follows in accordance with Administrative Order No. 110 as amended by Administrative Order No. 110-A and its IRR:

4.1 For Government entities that failed to attain the required minimum ten percent (10%) savings, the use of its savings shall be limited to only fifty percent (50%) of its accumulated savings in electricity consumption (in kWh) or petroleum products (in liters);

4.2 For government entities that have attained ten percent (10%) savings or more may be allowed to use one hundred percent (100%) of its accumulated savings in electricity consumption (in kWh) or petroleum products (in liters); and

4.3 Upon verification and recommendation of EUMB, part of the generated savings can be utilized to finance improvements in energy efficiency.

SEC. 5. Failure to follow the directives of this Administrative Order within 30 days from effectivity thereof shall subject concerned officials to administrative sanctions pursuant to existing laws, rules and regulations.

SEC. 6. Repealing Clause. All orders, circulars, rules and regulations and other issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Administrative Order are hereby amended, modified or repealed accordingly.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9 th day of July, in the Year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2007). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111-288]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.