MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 99

DIRECTING THE ORGANIZATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMS TO CELEBRATE PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE DAY ON JUNE 12, 2004

WHEREAS, it is appropriate to commemorate the heroism, patriotism and nationalism of our forefathers in the struggle for independence;

WHEREAS, the 106 th anniversary of the proclamation of Philippine Independence is the ideal occasion for all Filipinos to unite and rally behind the government and the country’s institutions;

WHEREAS, there should be proper planning, implementation and coordination of all programs and activities leading to the celebrations.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Secretary of Tourism is hereby designated to take the lead in the planning, coordination, implementation and conduct of programs and activities in celebration of Independence Day 2004.

Sec. 2. The Department of Tourism, being the lead agency of this national event, shall immediately convene the inter-agency organizing task force to plan and implement effectively all programs, projects and activities relating to the Independence Day 2004 celebration.

Sec. 3. The inter-agency task force shall be composed of the Secretary of Tourism, as Chairman, with the Executive Director of the National Historical Institute and the Secretary of Education, as Vice-Chairmen. Other members of the inter-agency task force shall be designated and/or appointed by the Secretary of Tourism.

Sec. 4. All departments, bureaus, offices, national government agencies and local government units and government-owned and controlled corporations are hereby enjoined to give full support, assistance and cooperation to the Secretary of Tourism in the exercise of his responsibilities under this Order.

Sec. 5. All branches of government are enjoined to participate in the Independence Day celebration as well as to enlist the participation of private sector groups and non-government organizations so that the 106 th Philippine Independence Day celebration will be a show of unity and strength during these challenging times.

Local government units together with private sector groups and NGO’s are likewise enjoined to celebrate Philippine Independence Day in their respective localities.

Sec. 6. The programs and events for the Philippine Independence Day celebrations shall include, to the extent appropriate, the following:

a. Pambansang Araw ng Watawat (Philippine National Flag Day) on May 28 as the kick-off ceremony for 2004 Independence Day Celebration.

b. Raising of the national flag and wreath-laying ceremonies at the Rizal National Monument in the Rizal Park on June 12, 2004 at about 7:00 in the morning.

This activity will be particularly replicated in places of national historical significance such as the Barasoain Church in Malolos, Bulacan; Aguinaldo Shrine in Kawit, Cavite; Mausoleo de los Veteranos de la Revolucion, Manila North Cemetery; Bonifacio Monument in Kalookan City; and Pinaglabanan Memorial Shrine, San Juan, Metro Manila.

All other cities and municipalities around the country are enjoined to hold simultaneously similar activities on the same day and time.

c. The Philippine Independence Day Parade at the Quirino Grandstand in the afternoon of June 12 which shall be meaningful and relevant to the theme of the celebration, to be followed by a special cultural program at the same venue.

Sec. 7. In support of the 106 th Philippine Independence Day celebrations, all concerned government agencies and local government units are subject to budgetary laws and issuances and are authorized to allocate such amounts as may be necessary to defray expenses for said event.

Sec. 8. The release of TEN MILLION PESOS (P10,000,000.00) chargeable against the President’s Contingent Fund for FY 2004 RA 9206; as reenacted is hereby authorized to carry out the provisions of this Administrative Order.

Fund augmentation thereon, as may be necessary, shall be sourced from any of the regular items in the FY 2004 RA 9206, as reenacted or any applicable government appropriations or from such other sources as may be determined by the Department of Budget and Management.

Sec. 9. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Four.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2004). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.