MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 248

WHEREAS, in these trying times for the expatriate Filipino worker, the government should not sit idly and do nothing;

WHEREAS, it is now payback time for the government;

WHEREAS, the heroic efforts of the expatriate Filipino workers should not go unreciprocated;

NOW THEREFORE I, GLORIA M. ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. A program of full reciprocity for the heroic efforts of the expatriate Filipino workers shall be carried out to help those who might return home from their host countries that are now being buffeted by an economic crisis whose depth and scope is still unraveling.

Section 2. The Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) and the Overseas Workers’ Welfare Administration (OWWA) shall take the lead in carrying out the government’s payback program for the expatriate Filipino workers.

Section 3. The first component of this reciprocity program shall be the setting up of a Filipino Expatriate Livelihood Support Fund in the amount of P250 million to be financed by OWWA and supported by government lending institutions. Displaced expatriate workers can access the Fund to help capitalize startup businesses, finance further studies and training, or serve as seed money for any appropriate economic undertaking.

Section 4. DOLE to draft the implementing guidelines immediately.

Section 4. The rules and mechanics of accessing this money shall be simple and hassle-free. Returning expatriate workers shall not be subjected to irrational rules and red tape.

Section 5. The DOLE and the OWWA shall coordinate with the government’s economic and investment agencies to identify start-up businesses that the returning expatriates can engage in.

Section 6. The second component of the reciprocity program shall be the full government support in helping the returning expatriate Filipino workers find remunerative jobs.

Section 7. Help desks that would match the skills, training and experience of the returning expatriate Filipino workers with local jobs available shall be set up by the DOLE/OWWA in all provinces to make the services easily accessible.

Section 8. A steady stream of online information about domestic job vacancies also be made available to the returning expatriate workers for free.

Section 9. For returning expatriate Filipino workers who want to cross over to other countries that are in need of their skill and talent, the Philippine Overseas Employment Administration shall carry out a marketing blitz to expand the market for expatriate Filipino workers.

DONE in the City of Manila on this 4 th day of December in the Year of Our Lord Two Thousand and Eight.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2008). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.