Malacañang Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 104

PROVIDING FOR CABINET GROUPS TO ENABLE THE GOVERNMENT TO ADDRESS MAJOR CONCERNS IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ADMINISTRATION’S 10-POINT AGENDA

WHEREAS, the President of the Republic of the Philippines is committed to the implementation of the Government’s development and reform agenda directed at reducing poverty, accelerating economic growth and improving the quality of life of the Filipino people, which is outlined in a Ten (10)-Point Agenda that will be pursued by her administration in the next six (6) years;

WHEREAS, there is a need for the President to meet the Cabinet, not always as a whole but in smaller related Cabinet Groups, for the effective and efficient discussion and implementation of the President’s 10-Point Agenda;

WHEREAS, Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of Executive Order No. 292, series of 1987, otherwise known as the “Administrative Code of 1987,” provides that the President shall have continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and the Constitution, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of Cabinet Groups. – The following Cabinet Groups are hereby constituted as related Cabinet Groups:

1.1. National Anti-Poverty Commission Cabinet Group

The NAPC Cabinet Group shall be composed of the following:

Secretary-General, National Anti-Poverty Commission

Secretary, Department of Agriculture

Secretary, Department of Agrarian Reform

Secretary, Department of Education

Secretary, Department of Environment and Natural Resources

Secretary, Department of Health

Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment

Secretary, Department of Social Welfare and Development

Director-General, Technical Education and Skills Development Authority

President, Philippine International Trading Corporation

Chairman, Commission on Higher Education

1.2. National Security Council Cabinet Group

a. The National Security Council Cabinet Group shall be composed of the following:

National Security Adviser

Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local Government

Secretary, Department of Justice

Secretary, Department of National Defense

Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs

Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process

Presidential Adviser for Constituency Affairs

Chairman, Mindanao Economic Development Council

b. The Cabinet Oversight Committee on Internal Security [COC-IS] created under Executive Order No. 21 issued on June 19, 2001, as amended by Executive Order No. 138 issued on October 21, 2002 and Executive Order No. 151, issued on December 9, 2002, is hereby dissolved.

1.3. National Economic and Development Authority Cabinet Group

The National Economic and Development Authority Cabinet Group shall be composed of the following:

Director-General, National Economic and Development Authority [NEDA]

Chairman, Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council

Secretary, Department of Budget and Management

Secretary, Department of Finance

Secretary, Department of Trade and Industry

Secretary, Department of Tourism

Secretary, Department of Energy

Secretary, Department of Public Works and Highways

Secretary, Department of Science and Technology

Secretary, Department of Transportation and Communications

Presidential Adviser for Jobs Generation

Presidential Adviser on New Government Centers

Chairman, Metropolitan Manila Development Authority

Chairman, Commission on Information and Communication Technology

SECTION 2. Meetings; Presiding Officer; Secretariat. – The different Cabinet Groups constituted herein shall meet upon call of the President who shall preside at all meetings thereof.

The Cabinet Secretariat, headed by the Secretary to the Cabinet, shall serve as the common secretariat of the Cabinet Groups and shall submit forthwith to the Executive Secretary, a copy of the executive summary and minutes of meetings conducted by the different Cabinet Groups.

SECTION 3. LEDAC Matters. – For the Legislative-Executive Development Advisory Council [LEDAC], the Political Adviser shall have oversight over the NEDA Secretariat, which was designated under Section 4 of RA 7640 to provide secretariat and staff support to the LEDAC. The President shall designate the Cabinet Members who shall attend specific LEDAC meetings.

SECTION 4. Repealing Clause. – Executive Order Nos. 21, (s. 2001), 138 (s. 2002) and 151 (s. 2002) are hereby repealed or modified accordingly. All other executive issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Administrative Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 5. Effectivity. – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

City of Manila, 7 September 2004

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2004). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.