MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 174

CREATING THE NATIONAL COUNCIL ON FOOD SECURITY AND JOB CREATION

WHEREAS , Article II, Section 9 of the Constitution provides that the State shall free the people from poverty through policies that provide adequate social services, promote full employment and improve the quality of life for all;

WHEREAS , Section 2 of RA 8435, otherwise known as the Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Act of 1997, declares that the State shall enable those who belong to the agriculture and fisheries sector to participate and share in the fruits of development and growth, and that the State shall ensure the availability, adequacy, accessibility and affordability of food supplies for all times;

WHEREAS , in the pursuit of the mandate provided by the Constitution and existing laws, the national government is committed to ensure the attainment of sustainable food security at all times;

WHEREAS , Section 2, Chapter I, Title IV, Book IV of the Administrative Code of 1987 mandates the Department of Agriculture to plan, formulate, execute, regulate, and monitor programs and activities relating to agriculture, food production and supply;

WHEREAS , Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III, of the Administrative Code of 1987 vests upon the President of the Philippines the continuing authority to reorganize her office.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Organization and Composition of the National Council on Food Security and Job Creation. – The National Council on Food Security and Job Creation, herein referred to as the Food and Jobs Council, is hereby constituted, and shall be composed of the following:

SEC 2. Functions and Responsibilities of the Council:

1. To design, adopt, and monitor a comprehensive National Food Security and Job Creation Plan in consonance with the Medium and Long-Term Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Plan, as provided for in Republic Act 8435;

2. To serve as an inter-agency Council to oversee and to supervise various cross-cutting plans, programs, and policies related to food security, such as but not limited to the following:

2.1. Optimization of the agrarian reform communities for food productivity; 2.2. Efficient transportation of food within various production centers in the country; 2.3. Conservation of marine resources, soil fertility and other natural endowments necessary for food production; 2.4. Increasing the role of local government units in food production; 2.5. Defining the strategic role of our trading partners in providing food for the country, as well as markets for our agricultural products.

3. To serve as a coordinating forum for various policies, laws, rules and regulations that need to be devised, amended or proposed, in order to attain food security; and

4. To generate and mobilize resources from domestic and foreign resources, for the implementation of the National Food Security and Job Creation Plan, as well as rationalize the use and the equitable distribution of additional resources to the LGU’s.

SEC 3. Organization of the National Secretariat. – The National Agricultural and Fisheries Council (NAFC) shall be the National Secretariat of the Council.

SEC 4. Inter-Agency Coordination. – All concerned departments and their attached agencies, LGUs, government-owned and controlled corporations and other instrumentalities of the government are hereby directed to cooperate and give their full support to the Council to ensure effective performance of their functions.

SEC 5. Administrative and Implementing Guidelines. – The Council shall adopt administrative guidelines as may be necessary to implement this Executive Order.

SEC 6. Effectivity. – This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30 th day of JANUARY, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand three.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2003). [Executive Order Nos. : 101 – 200 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office .