MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 194

CREATING A PUBLIC-PRIVATE SECTOR TASK FORCE TO COORDINATE PHILIPPINE PARTICIPATION IN THE POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION OF IRAQ

WHEREAS, the Philippines, as a member of the United Nations, desires to contribute to the immediate humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people and has for this purpose created a Task Force to coordinate such assistance;

WHEREAS, the Philippines also desires to contribute to the multinational effort for the long-term reconstruction and development of Iraq;

WHEREAS, there is a need to coordinate Philippine public and private sector participation in such reconstruction and development efforts in order to rationalize and make more effective such participation;

NOW THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the creation of a Public-Private Sector Task Force for the Reconstruction and Development of Iraq.

SECTION 1. Composition. – The Task Force shall be composed of the following government officials and representatives from the private sector as follows:

SECTION 2. Role. – The Task Force shall coordinate public and private participation in the multinational effort for the reconstruction and development of post-war Iraq. In particular, it shall develop and implement an action plan to maximize and enhance this participation, including:

(a) providing representation on behalf of the Philippine Government and the private sector with the Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance (ORHA), national and multilateral agencies and with international firms involved in the reconstruction and rehabilitation of post-war Iraq;

(b) assisting the participation of Philippine companies in the rehabilitation and development of the Iraqi infrastructure‑public works, highways, transportation, information and communications, energy, agriculture‑and public services such as education, sanitation, civil administration and other service industries;

(c) evaluating Philippine companies and other entities for the purpose of ensuring that the performance of services to be provided are of the highest quality;

(d) developing procedures to expedite deployment of Philippine manpower and other services in the fulfillment of contracts;

(e) and such other actions relevant to Philippine private sector participation in the reconstruction and development of Iraq.

SECTION 3. Executive Committee. – An Executive Committee composed of Undersecretaries of Foreign Affairs and Labor, the Administrator of the Philippine Overseas Employment Administration, the Executive Director of the Philippine Overseas Construction Board, the Executive Director of Office of Muslim Affairs, and the private sector representatives is hereby created. The Task Force may authorize the Executive Committee to act on urgent matters on its behalf.

SECTION 4. Secretariat and Offices. – The Task Force shall set up a Secretariat which shall provide technical and administrative support to the Task Force. The Secretariat shall be based in Manila and shall be supervised by an Executive Director to be appointed by the President. The Task Force shall likewise establish an office in Kuwait under the oversight of the Philippine Ambassador. It may appoint additional officers and staff and may establish other offices abroad as may be necessary to fulfill its mandate.

SECTION 5. Funding. – To carry out the provisions of this order, the release of Ten Million Pesos (P10,000,000.00) from the Contingent Fund is hereby authorized as seed fund. The Task Force may also source additional funds from the private sector to support the implementation of its plans and programs as may be necessary.

SECTION 6. Separability Clause. – If for any reason any part of provision of the Order shall be held unconstitutional and invalid, other parts of provisions hereof which are not affected thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SECTION 7. Repealing Clause. – All executive orders, proclamations, memorandum orders or memorandum circulars inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 8. Effectivity. – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon its signing.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of April in the year Our Lord, Two Thousand and Three.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2003). [Executive Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.