MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 564-A

AMENDING CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF EXECUTIVE ORDER 564 AND REDEFINING THE MECHANISMS TO INSTITUTIONALIZE THE “PRESIDENT’S PRO-PERFORMANCE SYSTEM”

WHEREAS , Executive Order (EO) No. 564 s. 2006, entitled “Restructuring the Infrastructure Monitoring System” was issued by the President to restructure the Regional Project Monitoring and Evaluation System in the Infrastructure Monitoring Task Force Projects Performance Tracking System (Pro-Performance System) of the Presidential Management Staff;

WHEREAS , it is necessary to institutionalize the “President’s Pro-Performance System” in order to ensure the diligent delivery and fast-tracking of the government’s projects, in measurable terms with transparency and thorough documentation, especially those identified under the President’s 2006 State of the Nation Commitments;

WHEREAS , there is vital necessity to ensure delivery of government’s programs and projects with transparency especially foreign-assisted projects;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the amendment of Executive Order 564 to redefine the organizational, operational and administrative mechanisms under the Infrastructure Monitoring Task Force Projects Performance Tracking System (Pro-Performance), without prejudice to maintaining its goals, objectives, scope and coverage.

Section 1. Implementing Structure — The Infrastructure Monitoring Task Force Performance Tracking System shall simply be called the Pro-Performance Tracking System. A Pro-Performance Team shall be created to implement this Pro-Performance System. The Pro-Performance team shall be composed of a Steering Committee, Independent Support Groups, a Pro-Performance Coordination Office, to be supported by the reorganized monitoring units of the Presidential Management Staff (PMS) and designated monitors of the Office of the President and line agencies.

1.1. Steering Committee . A Steering Committee composed of relevant officials, heads of agencies and private sector and civil society representatives shall be established for a transparent implementation of the President’s Pro-Performance System with the following membership:

Chairperson — Private sector representative

Vice-Chairperson — Director General, PMS

Members:

Representative, Non-Government Organization

Representative, Business and Youth Sectors

Representative, Media

Representative, Church/Religious Sector

Representative, International Development Organization (of Filipino descent)

1.2. Independent Groups. Independent bodies such as the Procurement Transparency Group of the Government Procurement Policy Board and advocacy groups shall assist the Steering Committee.

1.3. Secretariat. The monitoring units of the PMS shall be reorganized as the Pro-Performance Coordination Office, which shall act as the Secretariat of the Pro-Performance system to coordinate its implementation.

1.4. Support Monitors. The monitoring support for the Pro-Performance Team shall be extended by the monitoring units of the Office of the President, the Cabinet Secretary, the National Economic and Development Authority, the Super-Region Champions and other relevant line agencies.

1.5. Concerned Agencies and Super Region Champions. Regular project monitoring and evaluation shall be undertaken by the concerned government agencies and instrumentalities in coordination with the respective Super Region Development Champions.

Section 2. Monitoring System Integration — The Regional Project Monitoring and Evaluation System and the Overseas Development Assistance Monitoring System shall be consolidated and integrated to form the President’s Pro-Performance Tracking System. As such, the National Computer Center shall assess, evaluate, redesign and establish the Information Strategic Systems Plan for the Pro-Performance Tracking System within two (2) months from the effectivity of this Order. Moreover, the system must be ISO-compliant within one (1) year upon data initialization.

Section 3. Operations Manual — The Secretariat shall prepare the Pro-Performance System Operations Manual within 30 days from the effectivity of this Order. The same shall be approved by the Steering Committee.

Section 4. Reports — The Secretariat through the Steering Committee shall submit monthly progress reports with photo-documentation to the Office of the President and reports required by the President from time to time.

Section 5. Funding and Equipment — Initial operations budget One Million Pesos shall be made available by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM). For the continuous office operation, the DBM shall establish a Trust Fund out of the one percent (1%) of total project cost of the monitored projects to be sourced from the contingency fund component. The proceeds shall defray operational and administrative expenses, including out-source of information and communication technology equipment and systems, monitoring, advocacy and legal consultancy requirement, including intelligence information sourcing and evaluation; subject to government accounting and auditing rules and procedures.

Section 6. Separability Clause — All orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this EO, including EO 376 s. 1989, EO 93 s. 1993, EO 553 s. 2006 and EO 564 s. 2006 are hereby revoked or modified accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity — This EO shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 1st day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2007). [Executive Order Nos. : 501 – 600]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.