MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 283

CREATING A MADRASAH DEVELOPMENT COORDINATING COMMITTEE

WHEREAS , pursuant to Article 2, Section 17 and Article XIV, Section 2(4) of the Constitution, the State is mandated to encourage non-formal, informal and indigenous learning systems, as well as self-learning, independent, and out-of-school programs, particularly those that respond to community needs;

WHEREAS , the Philippine Muslim community operates indigenous and burgeoning educational institutions called madrasahs that complement the educational system of the national government;

WHEREAS , further madrasah development is hampered by resource constraints, impeding the system’s realization of its potential as a viable complementary educational system for Muslim Filipinos;

WHEREAS , grants, loans, donations and other endowments from bilateral or multilateral institutions are available for madrasah development as support for the education of Muslim Filipinos;

WHEREAS , a mechanism to allow the local madrasah system to take full advantage of these development opportunities will provide more educational opportunities for Muslim Filipinos;

WHEREAS , the provision of adequate educational opportunities for Muslim Filipinos shall tremendously contribute to the sustainability of the government’s efforts to enhance lasting peace and equitable development in Mindanao.

NOW THEREFORE I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of the Madrasah Development Coordinating Committee. There is hereby created the Madrasah Development Coordinating Committee (MDCC), hereinafter referred to as the Committee, which shall be responsible for the effective management of available financial assistance to the madrasah system from local, bilateral and multilateral institutions, including activities related thereto.

Section 2. Composition of Committee. The Committee shall be composed of the Executive Director, Office on Muslim Affairs (OMA) as Chairman, the Presidential Assistant for Education (PAE) as Co-Chairman, and representatives to be designated by the President, from the Departments of Education (DepEd), and the Interior and Local Government (DILG), the Commission on Higher Education (CHED), the Mindanao Economic Development Council (MEDCo), the Technical Skills Development Authority (TESDA), as members. Two (2) representatives from the madrasah education system shall also be appointed by the President as members of the Committee.

Section 3. Committee Advisory Council. An MDCC Advisory Council is hereby created to perform oversight functions over the Committee, to be composed of representatives from the Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPP), the Office of the Governor, Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM), the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP), the National Economic Development Authority (NEDA), the Official Development Assistance (ODA) Office and two (2) representatives from the madrasah academe. All representatives shall be appointed by the President.

Section 4. Functions of the Committee. The Committee shall have the following functions:

4.1 Identify possible sources of and receive financial assistance for madrasah development;

4.2 Promulgate standard procedures for the judicious management/use/distribution/disposition of these assistance opportunities;

4.3 Endorse noteworthy proposals for funding to relevant local/bilateral/multilateral institutions;

4.4 Coordinate madrasah-related researches, studies and programs/projects undertaken by government, or private individuals/institutions;

4.5 Fasttrack and monitor the implementation of government education programs in Mindanao vis-a-vis the Comprehensive Mindanao Education Program and/or the Edukasyon para sa Kapayapaan at Kaunlaran sa Mindanao Program; and

4.6 Submit a quarterly report of its activities and accomplishments to the President and to the MDCC Advisory Council.

Section 5. Committee Meetings. The Committee shall meet at least once every three months, or as often as necessary in the pursuit of its functions. Attendance to meetings of respective members of the MDCC and the Advisory Council shall be charged to their respective agency budgets.

Section 6. Funding. An initial fund of P1,000,000 from the President’s Contingent Fund is hereby allocated for the operations of the MDCC during its first year. Funds for operations in subsequent years shall be included in the General Appropriations Act.

Section 7. Relation to ARMM Government. This Order does not preclude the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) from establishing a similar system, pursuant to relevant provisions of Republic Act (RA) No. 9054.

Section 8. Relation to DepEd, CHED and TESDA. The MDCC shall not interfere with the regular programs and monitoring functions of the DepEd, CHED and TESDA.

Section 9. Repeal Clause. All executive issuances, orders, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with any provision of this Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 10. Effectivity . This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18 TH day of February in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Four.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2004). [Executive Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.