MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 344

CREATING THE OFFICE OF THE POLITICAL ADVISER IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, DEFINING ITS MANDATE AND RESPONSIBILITIES, AND CREATING THE OFFICE OF POLITICAL COALITION AFFAIRS AND THE OFFICE FOR CONSTITUENCY AFFAIRS

WHEREAS , the task of enacting legislation, as well as coordinating political support for the Government’s national agenda for growth, stability and good governance involves coordination not only between the Legislative and Executive Branches of Government, but also between the Government and the various political parties, and between the Government and the various basic sectors of society and other relevant constituencies;

WHEREAS , there is a need for an office in the Office of the President to coordinate and streamline the functional operations of the offices and agencies charged with legislative liaising, and party and constituency relations;

WHEREAS , under Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987, the President has the continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and the Constitution, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Office of the Political Adviser. – There is hereby created the Office of the Political Adviser [OPA] under the Office of the President, to be headed by a Political Adviser, who shall have the rank and emoluments of a Cabinet Secretary, to coordinate the legislative and political coalition liaising and constituency building efforts of the Office of the President.

SECTION 2. Coordinating and Oversight Mechanism. – The OPA shall have oversight over the following offices, without diminution of their respective powers and functions: (a) the Presidential Legislative Liaison Office [PLLO]; (b) the Office of Political Coalition Affairs, created under Section 3 hereof; and (c) the Office for Constituency Affairs, created under Section 4 hereof.

SECTION 3. Office of Political Coalition Affairs. – There is hereby created the Office of Political Coalition Affairs [OPCA], headed by an Executive Director, which shall address the requirements and objectives of the Office of the President towards the participation and support of the various political parties and groups behind the development and implementation of the administration’s program of government.

The Political Affairs Office in the Office of the President is hereby merged with the OPCA and shall be re-engineered in accordance with Section 5 hereof.

SECTION 4. Office for Constituency Affairs. – There is hereby created the Office for Constituency Affairs [OCA], headed by an Executive Director, which shall directly address the requirements and objectives of the Office of the President towards the participation of the basic sectors and constituencies in the development and implementation of the administration’s program of government.

SECTION 5. Organizational Structure. – The Executive Director of the OPCA and the OCA, in coordination with the Political Adviser, shall formulate and establish the organizational structure and staffing pattern of their respective offices, composed of such administrative and technical personnel as may be deemed necessary to efficiently and effectively carry out the functions and duties prescribed herein, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management.

SECTION 6. Abolition of Legislative Secretariat. – The Legislative Secretariat in the Office of the President is hereby abolished, and its functions, duties and responsibilities are hereby transferred to the PLLO. Its personnel and budget shall be retained in the Office of the President.

SECTION 7. Funding. – The funds to support the operations of the OPA, OPCA and OCA shall be sourced from the existing budget of the Office of the President. Fund requirements for the OPA, OPCA and OCA for the succeeding years shall be prepared in accordance with the regular government budget procedures and shall be included in the budget of the Office of the President.

SECTION 8. Repealing Clause. – All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 9. Effectivity. – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

City of Manila, AUG 09 2004

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2004). [Executive Order Nos. : 301 – 400]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.