MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 620-A

EXPANDING THE COMPOSITION OF THE URBAN TRIANGLE DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION AND CLARIFYING ITS STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS, THEREBY AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 620, SERIES OF 2007

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 620 dated May 4, 2007, created the Urban Triangle Development (TriDev) Commission and aims to rationalize and speed up the development of the East and North Triangles and the Veterans Memorial area of Quezon City, as a well-planned, integrated and environmentally balanced, mixed-use development model;

WHEREAS, there is a need to guide and improve the allocation, utilization, management and development of the national government’s land resources, as well as to ensure their optimum use, under the principles of economic growth and efficiency, social equity and justice;

WHEREAS, the emerging and projected developments in the area necessitate a comprehensive plan for urban development, business development and marketing that integrates the highest and best use of the properties under a re-planned, mixed-use scheme;

WHEREAS, the composition of the Tri-Dev Commission can be strengthened by expanding its membership and clarifying its scope of responsibilities, to enable it to carry out its mandate more effectively.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Coverage. The following areas shall be covered by the proposed Quezon City Central Business District (QC-CBD):

a. East and North Triangles; b. Veterans Memorial Medical Center Area; c. Ninoy Aquino Parks and Wildlife.

SECTION 2. Expanding the Composition of the Urban Triangle Development Commission. The Urban Triangle Development (TriDev) Commission is hereby expanded to be composed of the following:

a. Chairman of the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC), and to sit as Chairman of the Tri-Dev Commission; b. A representative from the Office of the Mayor of Quezon City, as Co-Chairman; c. General Manager of the National Housing Authority, as member; d. A representative from the Office of the President as member.

SECTION 3. Functions of the Tri-Dev Commission. The Commission shall have the following powers and purposes.

a. Oversee the preparation of the Master Development Plan for the 250 hectare area of the QC-CBD, for the purpose of transforming this into a well-planned, integrated and environmentally balanced, mixed-use development.

For this purpose, the TriDev Commission shall be tasked to:

1.) Formulate plans and programs mutually beneficial to all concerned, for the development components, processes, and strategies, as well as determine the best use of the properties covered by EO 620, in line with the development objectives of the proposed QC-CBD, subject to the proprietary rights of the respective owners.

2.) Review, evaluate and/or integrate already available urban development plans from the national government and the Quezon City local government, including the World Bank Study on the “ Preparation of a Comprehensive Framework Plan for the Development of a Central Business District in Quezon City .”

3.) Form a Technical Working Group who shall provide the Tri-Dev Commission with the needed technical assistance in the preparation of the Master Development Plan, as well as in executing implementation strategies needed to support all stages of the QC-CBD project.

b. Manage, control and direct the implementation of the Master Development Plan, including the following:

1.) Formulate deal structures and enter into agreements with owners of properties in the QC-CBD area, without prejudice to their proprietary rights, including between and among Commission members;

2.) Recommend the issuance of executive orders, proclamations and other issuances for the re-planning, re-classification or reversion of the properties for mixed-use development.

3.) Formulate a viable resettlement program for qualified informal settler families in the 250-hectare QC-CBD project area.

4.) Monitor and manage the implementation of the different QC-CBD sub-projects, in accordance with the approved Master Development Plan.

5.) Vest the Chairmen of the Commission with the responsibility and the power to ensure that all agreements for the implementation of the Master Development Plan conform to the overall developmental thrusts of the National Government.

SECTION 4. Fund for Socialized Housing Program. All revenues representing the share of the National Housing Authority as land owner of properties within the QC-CBD area, from the sale, lease, joint venture and other schemes, shall be used solely for Socialized Housing Programs. A separate Trust Fund shall be established for this purpose.

SECTION 5. Support from other Agencies. All departments, bureaus, offices, government agencies and instrumentalities of the national government are hereby mandated to provide the necessary support and expertise in facilitating the implementation of the Master Development Plan for the QC-CBD.

SECTION 6. Initial Funding. The Tri-Dev Commission shall, for its initial costs of operations, have such funds as may be approved by the Office of the President, upon the recommendation of the Department of Budget and Management.

SECTION 7. Repeal. All other executive orders, proclamations, issuances, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order, are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SECTION 8. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately, upon its publication in a national newspaper of general circulation.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of September in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2007). [Executive Order Nos. : 601-700]. Manila : Malcañang Records Office.