MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 788

PROMOTING A YOUTH NATIONAL SERVICE

WHEREAS, we must tackle many challenges at once to keep our economy and way of life going strong;

WHEREAS, on the part of government, we must live within our means and run a lean, efficient government. This includes continued fiscal prudence and efforts to work towards a balanced budget. All the while, we must also simultaneously invest in key programs for our people: economy, environment, education;

WHEREAS, On the part of the people, now is the time for pulling together and focusing on family and the community. We must initiate a new era of volunteerism and community spirit. This should include the government, religious and civic groups and non-governmental organizations harnessing our people to engage in coordinated volunteer activities. We should focus on initiatives such as cleaning up our environment, building parks and planting trees and bringing comfort to the poor through food banks and bringing the dignity of literacy to adults who cannot read;

WHEREAS, During these trying times, the Philippine spirit, and commitment to caring should prompt each of us to count our blessings and give back to those who are less fortunate. Our nation needs us all pulling in the same direction. Volunteering time, skill and resources is a noble undertaking we should all take seriously;

NOW THEREFORE I, GLORIA M. ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. A youth national service targeting 18 to 24 year-olds is hereby promoted. This national service shall be composed of a National Service Corps and a Youth Conservation Corps.

Section 2. The National Service Corps shall be like a domestic “Peace Corps.” it shall be geared to the unemployed or underemployed skilled youth or college graduates, it shall focus on their contributions to education and community service programs. Such youth shall be recruited to undertake a two-year national service commitment with a modest stipend.

Section 3. The Youth Conservation Corps (YCC) shall be composed of the unskilled or less-educated youth. They shall focus on environmental and infrastructure projects. Such youth shall be recruited to likewise undertake a two-year national service commitment with a modest stipend. The current program known as Out of School Youth Serving Towards Economic Resiliency (OYSTER) shall be subsumed into the YCC.

Section 4. The funding for the national service shall initially come from the savings of all the national agencies, including government owned and controlled corporations, of one and a half percent (1.5%) of their maintenance, operating and overhead expenses and from the Road User’s Tax. Thereafter, it shall be supplemented by specific provisions in the annual national budget submitted to Congress.

Section 5. The national service shall be coordinated by the National Youth Commission. The National Service Corps shall be implemented by the Department of Education and the Department of Social Welfare and Development. The YCC shall be implemented by the Philippine National Police with the support and assistance of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources and the Department of Public Works and Highways.

Section 6. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila on the 30 th day of March, in the Year of Our Lord Two Thousand and Nine.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2009). [Executive Order Nos. : 701-830]. Manila : Malcañang Records Office.