MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 495

CREATING A CHARTER CHANGE ADVOCACY COMMISSION AND DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS

WHEREAS , Charter change is a public commitment and incorporated in the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan for 2005 to 2010;

WHEREAS , the Consultative Commission to Propose the Revision of 1987 Constitution, created pursuant to Executive Order No. 453, s. of 2005, as amended, has submitted to the President on 16 December the proposed amendment to the 1987 Philippine Constitution, who in turn endorsed the same to the House of Representatives;

WHEREAS , there is a need for advocacy on the shift from presidential form to a parliamentary form of government, from a unitary structure of government to autonomous territories/federal states, and the liberalization of the economy;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation and Mandate . – There is hereby created a Charter Change Advocacy Commission (hereinafter referred to as the “Commission”) which shall be tasked to advocate the shift from presidential form to a parliamentary form of government, from a unitary structure of government to autonomous territories/federal states, and liberalization of the economy, as embodied in the proposed amendment of the 1987 Constitution submitted by the Consultative Commission to Propose the Revision of the 1987 Constitution.

SECTION 2. Composition of the Commission . – The Commission shall be composed of not more than fifteen (15) members. The members of the Commission shall choose from among themselves their officers.

The members of the Commission who shall be invited by the President shall include former members of the Consultative Commission and representatives from the academe and private sector organizations who can articulate the issues involving Constitutional reform.

SECTION 3. Organizational Support . – The Presidential Management Staff (PMS) shall be the Secretariat of the Commission. The PMS may call upon any agency in the government to provide assistance as may be necessary in the performance of the Commission’s functions.

The Office of the Press Secretary (OPS) and the Philippine Information Agency (PIA) are hereby tasked to conduct the information and education campaign (IEC) on the issues regarding Charter change.

SECTION 4. Funding Support . – The initial amount of Five Million Pesos (P5,000,000.00) is hereby appropriated for the operational expenses of the Commission to be sourced from available funds in the Office of the President, subject to usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations. A portion of the budgetary appropriation shall be allocated for the per diems, travel expenses and other representation expenses of the members of the Commission.

SECTION 5. Timeframe . – The Commission shall cease to exist after eight (8) months from the time of its creation, unless otherwise extended by the President of the Philippines.

SECTION 6 . Repealing Clause . – All orders rules, regulations and issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby repeals or modified accordingly.

SECTION 7 . Effectivity . – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.

DONE , in the City of Manila this 23rd 23day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Six.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2006). [Executive Order Nos. : 401-500]. Manila : Malcañang Records Office.