MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 682

DESIGNATING CALAPAN CITY AS THE REGIONAL CENTER OF REGION IV-B OTHERWISE REFERRED TO AS THE MIMAROPA REGION

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the Government to promote regional development in order to spur and accelerate economic growth in the countryside and thereby, attain sustainable national development;

WHEREAS, the designation and development of Regional Center in every region does not only foster efficient and effective delivery of government services, but likewise facilitate the establishment of new center of government thereat that can induce economic activities and jumpstart the growth and development in the countryside;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to designate a Regional Center for Region IV-B otherwise known as the MIMAROPA Region, to foster better coordination and promote efficiency in the delivery of the services by the Regional Offices of the area, and allow the development of a new government center in the region.

WHEREAS, the Regional Development Council IV-B, in its Resolution dated 30 August 2007, has favorably endorsed the designation of Calapan City as the Regional Center of the MIMAROPA Region;

WHEREAS, the President, under Administrative Code of 1987 and other existing laws, has the authority to designate the Regional Center for every region under her continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Executive Branch;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Designation of the Regional Center of Region IV-B. The City Of Calapan in Mindoro Oriental is hereby designated as the mandated Regional Center of the Regional IV B. In line with this, the Provincial Government of Mindoro Oriental and City Government of Calapan shall jointly identify, develop, maintain and administer the specific and appropriate site for said Regional Center within the boundaries of Calapan City.

SECTION 2. Funding. The funding for the development, maintenance and administration of the Regional Center and site may be drawn from internally generated funds of the concerned LGUs, national government, and from other funding sources which may include private and business sector through schemes allowed under existing laws.

SECTION 3. Catalyst for New Government Center. The development and operation of said Regional Center shall be directed toward evolving it into a new center of government that will induce economic activities and spur development in the Region. For this purpose, the NEDA Regional Office IV-B, in coordination with the Office of the Presidential Adviser for New Government Centers, the pertinent Local Government Units, the concerned government agencies and instrumentalities, and private sector, shall formulate an overall program and strategy to achieve this objective. Such program and strategy shall be submitted to the Regional Development Council IV-B for its adoption and inclusion in the regional investment priority plan of the MIMAROPA Region.

SECTION 4. Transfer of Regional Offices in the Regional Center. All the Regional Offices in Region IV-B shall immediately relocate in the above mandated Regional Center, starting with the establishment of their satellite offices in the area within six (6) months from the effectivity of this Order, and their full transfer within eighteen (18) months thereafter. For this purpose, the Regional Offices shall adopt and implement the respective relocation plan which should incorporate measures to address possible concerns of employees affected by the transfer.

SECTION 5. Roles of the Government Agencies. All heads of Departments, Agencies and Bureaus, including Government-Owned-and-Controlled-Corporations and Government Financial Institutions, are hereby directed to provide support to the above transfer of the Regional Offices, and to the development of the Regional Center in Calapan City as well as to its promotion as the new center of government in MIMAROPA Region.

SECTION 6. Reportorial Requirement. The Regional Development Council IV-B, through the NEDA Regional IV-B, shall submit regular status report to the Office of the President, copy furnished the Office of the Presidential Adviser for New Government Centers and the Presidential Management Office, on the compliance by the concerned Regional Offices and their respective Departments and Head Offices with this Order, and the progress of the implementation of the above program and strategy for the new center of government.

SECTION 7. Repealing Clause. All Orders and issuances or any part thereof, which are deemed inconsistent with this Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, 22 nd day of November, in the Year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2007). [Executive Order Nos. : 601-700]. Manila : Malcañang Records Office.