MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 674

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE FILM EXPORT SERVICES OFFICE

WHEREAS, it is government policy to maximize the country’s comparative advantage as a location site for international movie and television making to generate Income, promote tourism, and enhance the image of the country abroad;

WHEREAS, enhancing linkages and collaboration with foreign film producers and film bodies will also facilitate the promotion of locally produced films in global festivals and markets; and

WHEREAS, to encourage foreign movie and television makers to produce their films in the country, it is expedient to integrate, simplify and streamline the requirements for foreign producers interested in doing location shooting in the country.

NOW THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of a Philippine Film Export Services Office. There is hereby created a Philippine Film Export Services Office (hereinafter referred to as the “Office”), under the Film Development Council of the Philippines (hereinafter referred to as the “FDCP”). The Office shall be under the administrative and technical supervision of the FDCP. It shall be composed of the Executive Director of the Office, and representatives from me following agencies:

1. Department of Tourism

2. Department of Trade and Industry

3. Department of Interior and Local Government

4. Department of National Defense

5. Bureau of Customs

6. Bureau of Internal Revenue

7. Bureau of Immigration

8. Cinema Evaluation Board

9. Film Academy of the Philippines

10. Private sector representatives, one each from the movie and television industries

Section 2. Functions. The Philippine Film Export Services Office shall facilitate the institutionalization of a One-Stop-Shop System for Foreign Film/Television Production. It shall also undertake the following:

Section 3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Executive Director. The Executive Director of the Office shall be the head of the Secretariat. He shall exercise the following duties and responsibilities:

Section 4. Annual Report. The Office shall, within three months after the end of every fiscal year, submit its annual report to the President, through the FDCP.

Section 5. Initial Fund. To carry out the provisions of this Executive Order, the release of the initial sum not exceeding TEN MILLION PESOS (10,000,000.00) is hereby authorized chargeable against the FDCP Special Fund accrued from amusement tax rewards, under Republic Act No. 9167. Thereafter, the budget of the Office shall be integrated in the annual budget of the FDCP.

Section 6. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila this 30 th day of October in the year of Our Lord, 2007.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2007). [Executive Order Nos. : 601-700]. Manila : Malcañang Records Office.