MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 356

RENAMING THE BUREAU OF NON-FORMAL EDUCATION TO BUREAU OF ALTERNATIVE LEARNING SYSTEM

WHEREAS , it is a declared State policy, “to protect and promote the right of all citizens to quality basic education and to promote the right of all citizens to quality basic education and such education accessible to all by providing all Filipino children in the elementary level and free education in the high school level. Such education small also include alternative learning system for out-of-school youth and adult learners.” (Section 2 of R.A. 9155, The Governance of Basic Education Act of 2001)

WHEREAS , Section 12.1 Rules XII of R.A. 9155 stipulates that “the alternative Learning System is a parallel learning system to provide a viable alternative to the existing formal education instruction, encompassing both the non-formal and informal sources of knowledge and skills”;

WHEREAS , the Department of Education, through the Bureau of Non-formal Education is mandated to ensure that all learning needs of marginalized learners are addressed;

WHEREAS , one of the most important initiatives in Non-formal Education in the Philippines in the last 10 years is the Alternative Learning System (ALS), which is a major component of basic education with a clearly defined role within the overall educational goals;

WHEREAS , the ALS will respond to the need of a more systematic and flexible approach in reaching to all types of learners outside the school system;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Bureau of Non-formal Education is hereby renamed to Bureau of Alternative Learning System (BALS).

SEC. 2. The Bureau of Alternative Learning System shall have the following functions:

a. Address the learning needs of the marginalized groups of the population including the deprived, depressed and underserved citizens;

b. Coordinate with various agencies for skills development to enhance and ensure continuing employability, efficiency, productivity, and competitiveness in the labor market;

c. Ensure the expansion of access to educational opportunities for citizens of different interests, capabilities, demographic characteristics and socio-economic origins and status; and

d. Promote certification and accreditation of alternative learning programs both formal and informal in nature for basic education.

SEC. 3. Funds necessary to carry out the provisions of this Executive Order shall be taken from the present funds available in the Department of Education and shall thereafter be included in the General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 4. All orders, issuances, rules and regulations, or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 5. This Executive Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of September in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and four.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2004). [Executive Order Nos. : 301 – 400]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.