MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 446

TASKING THE SECRETARY OF LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT TO OVERSEE AND COORDINATE THE IMPLEMENTATION OF VARIOUS INITIATIVES FOR OVERSEAS FILIPINO WORKERS (OFWs)

WHEREAS , the provision of opportunities for employment is among the priorities of the Administration under its 10-point Agenda for Governance;

WHEREAS , the development of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), which comprise about 98% of the country’s business establishments, is one of the major strategies of the Administration to create jobs, generate higher incomes and bring about more balanced economic growth and social equity;

WHEREAS , the remittances of Overseas Filipino Workers (OFWs), recognized as the country’s “modern-day heroes”, constitute a critical flow of foreign currency into the Philippine economy;

WHEREAS , the channeling of remittances to national savings or domestic investments, particularly in SMEs, can lead to greater capital accumulation and multiplier effects;

WHEREAS , the synchronization of existing programs for OFWs that are being implemented by different government agencies can lead to a synergy that can most effectively and efficiently serve the current development objectives of government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Lead Agency . – The Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) shall be the lead agency in the implementation of various initiatives for Overseas Filipino Workers (OFWs). The Secretary of Labor and Employment is hereby tasked to oversee and coordinate these initiatives.

SEC. 2. Support Agencies . – The DOLE Secretary shall coordinate, integrate, design and endorse appropriate actions to implement the general work program for OFWs with the following:

a. Secretary, Department of Trade and Industry b. Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs c. Secretary, Department of Finance d. Governor, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas e. Presidential Adviser for Overseas Filipino Communities

SEC. 3. Establishment of a Technical Working Group . – There shall be a Technical Working Group (TWG), established and maintained to provide administrative and technical support to the DOLE Secretary. The TWG shall consist of the representatives from the core agencies of the DOLE and the support agencies, as well as other concerned agencies. There shall be organized four (4) sub-groups, which shall act as quick response teams for issues/queries in their respective areas of responsibility.

These sub-groups will focus on the following:

Bank-related initiatives :

SME-related initiatives :

OFW and labor-related initiatives :

Information Dissemination and OFW Response Monitoring :

SEC. 4. Functions . – The DOLE Secretary, with the help of support agencies, shall be tasked with the following functions:

a. Design an overall framework or general work program in support of the objectives identified in various government agencies and multi-sectoral institution for the OFWs; b. Consider the proposals submitted as well as adopt policies/initiatives recommended by the TWG; c. Endorse to the Legislative and Executive Development Advisory Council (LEDAC) the appropriate actions/recommendations that require legislation to implement the general work program; and d. Perform such other functions as may be necessary and appropriate to achieve its objectives.

SEC. 5. Functions of the TWG . – The TWG are tasked with the following functions:

a. Formulate recommendations in addressing problems and issues related to the objectives of the various initiatives for OFWs; b. Assess and evaluate available OFW remittance statistics/indicators as inputs to the development and implementation of the remittance profiling survey project; c. Coordinate various incentive programs being offered by the local private banks for OFWs through private sector institutions such as the Bankers’ Association of the Philippines (BAP) and Association of Bank Remittance Officers, Inc. (ABROI); d. Evaluate and coordinate with the GFIs in exploring the possibility of opening in OFW savings window that will provide more savings incentives for OFWs; e. Coordinate short-term and long-term actions/plans identified; f. Endorse to the DOLE Secretary the appropriate proposals/plans identified; and g. Perform such other functions as may be necessary and appropriate to achieve its objectives.

SEC. 6. Meetings . The DOLE Secretary shall meet with the support agencies at least once a month or as the need arises.

SEC. 7. Funding . The DOLE and the support agencies shall cost-share the operations, according to their respective mandates and roles under the Overseas Financial Investors Program, and/or as may be agreed upon among themselves. Funding for coordination and implementation of various initiatives for OFWs by individual agencies shall also be drawn from their respective appropriations.

SEC. 8. Reportorial . The DOLE Secretary shall submit the Status Report of operationalization and initial undertakings within 30 days from the effectivity of this Order. Thereafter, the quarterly Reports of Accomplishments shall be submitted to the Office of the President.

SEC. 9. Abolition and Repeal . All other orders, rules and regulations and other issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 10. Effectivity . This Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12th day of July in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2005). [Executive Order Nos. : 401 – 500]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.