MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 131

DECLARING OPEN TO DISPOSITION FOR SOCIALIZED HOUSING PURPOSES CERTAIN GOVERNMENT-OWNED LANDS DEFINED UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7279, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND HOUSING ACT OF 1992, AND PROVIDING FOR DISPOSITION THEREOF

WHEREAS , under Republic Act No. 7279, otherwise known as the Urban Development Housing Act of 1992 (UDHA), government-owned lands which have not been used for the purposes for which they have been reserved or set aside for the past ten (10) years from the effectivity of UDHA including government-owned idle lands and alienable lands of the public domain – and are suitable for socialized housing – shall be subject to disposition in favor of UDHA beneficiaries or for socialized housing purposes;

WHEREAS , mass housing has been reaffirmed by this government as a centerpiece program in its poverty alleviation efforts pursuant to Executive Order No. 20 dated 28 May 2001;

WHEREAS , mass housing may be effected, among others, through the regularization of land tenure of informal settlers on government-owned lands which have not been used for the purposes for which they have been reserved or set aside for the past ten (10) years from the effectivity of UDHA including government-owned idle lands and alienable lands of the public domain and are suitable for socialized housing; and

WHEREAS , through numerous laws and executive issuances, the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC) has been identified as the sole lead agency in the implementation of the government’s shelter/housing program.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines do hereby declare and order:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Certain Government-Owned Lands under UDHA as Available for Disposition to Qualified UDHA Beneficiaries or for Socialized Housing Purposes . Lands owned by the Government or any of its subdivisions, instrumentalities, agencies or government-owned or controlled corporations such as but not limited to military reservations, lands reserved for government offices, facilities and other installations, and other land assets which have not been used for the purposes for which they have been reserved or set aside for the past ten (10) years from the effectivity of UDHA as well as government-owned idle lands and alienable lands of the public domain which are suitable for socialized housing are hereby declared open to disposition to qualified UDHA beneficiaries or for socialized housing purposes: Provided, that other lands defined under Section 5 of the UDHA whose use or purpose has ceased to exist and identified as suitable for socialized housing shall be subject to this provision.

SEC 2. Designation of the National Housing Authority (NHA) as Lead Agency in the Disposition Program . The NHA, under the supervision of HUDCC, shall take the lead in the disposition of the lands in the preceding section: Provided, that disposition activities shall include the preliminary stages of identification and evaluation of lands suitable for disposition under this Order.

The HUDCC is hereby directed to submit immediately an updated list of government-owned lands suitable for socialized housing purposes.

The HUDCC shall make recommendation for the President relative to the disposition of the lands subject hereof.

All government agencies, instrumentalities, subdivisions or government-owned or controlled corporations which HUDCC may call upon to participate in the disposition program pursuant to the provisions of this Order are hereby directed to give full cooperation and support to HUDCC.

SEC 3. Regular Reporting to the Executive Secretary . The HUDCC shall make regular reports to the Executive Secretary for purposes of monitoring the status of implementation of the provisions of this Order.

SEC 4. Funding for the Implementation of the Provisions of this Order . The initial funding requirements for the implementation of this Order shall be sourced from HUDCC and the subsequent funding requirements shall be incorporated into its budget.

SEC 5. Amendatory Clause . All previous issuances inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order shall be deemed revoked or amended accordingly.

SEC 6. Separability Clause . In the event any provision hereof are declared null and void by any competent court or tribunal, the other provisions hereof unaffected thereby shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC 7. Effectivity Clause . This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1 ST day of October, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2002). [Executive Order Nos. : 101-200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.