MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 753-A

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 753, SERIES OF 2008, WHICH CREATED THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON MINDANAO RIVER BASIN REHABILITATION AND DEVELOPMENT

WHEREAS, in response to devastation caused by flooding brought about by Typhoons Frank in the Lower Cotabato River Basin covering the provinces of North Cotabato, Sarangani, South Cotabato and Sultan Kudarat and the City of Cotabato in Region XII, and parts of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, Executive Order No. (EO) 743, s. 2008 was issued on 24 July 2008, creating the Task Force on Cotabato Flood Control;

WHEREAS, on 29 September 2008 the Presidential Task Force on the Mindanao River Basin Rehabilitation and Development was created by virtue of EO 753, s. 2008;

WHEREAS, there is a need to harmonize EO 743 and EO 753;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Gloria M. Arroyo, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby integrate the Task Force on Cotabato Flood Control into the Presidential Task Force on the Mindanao River Basin (MRB) and amend EO 753 to include certain provisions of EO 743 which are not inconsistent with the former, as follows:

Section 1 – Mandate of the Task Force on the Mindanao River Basin Rehabilitation and Development. – The Task Force shall:

a. Coordinate the formulation and implementation of the MRB Relief, Rehabilitation and Long-Term Development Plan;

b. Integrate flood control efforts in the areas of ARMM and Region XII that were flooded by Typhoons Frank and Cosme;

c. Ensure that public funds for the rehabilitation and development of the MRB shall be spend judiciously and effectively through efficient prioritization of programs and consistent monitoring of projects;

d. Serve as clearing house for all proposals related to the development of the MRB;

e. Upon consultation and evaluation, approve appropriate requests;

f. Notify the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) of its approval as bass for the release of funds.

Section 2 Functions. – The Task Force shall have the following powers and functions:

a. Generate proposals from implementing agencies for the rehabilitation and development of the MRB;

b. Identify and package the rehabilitation and long-term interventions for the MRB affected areas;

c. Decide on important interventions that need to be immediately implemented or acted upon;

d. Spearhead and coordinate all courses of action to ensure cohesiveness in objectives and coordinated action to improve the implementation of flood control repair, construction works and other rehabilitation and development initiatives in the MRB;

e. Work with concerned national agencies (such as the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)) and the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) for the important interventions that need to be implemented for flood control and other projects pertaining to the rehabilitation and development of the MRB;

f. Work with the Regional Development Councils (RDCs) of the ARMM and Region XII on common or overlapping project activities related to flood control and other rehabilitation and development initiatives in the MRB;

g. Negotiate, apply for, receive and accept grants and donations of funds needed for the relief, rehabilitation and development of the areas affected by the disaster;

h. Conduct resource mobilization activities, such as, but not limited to:

(i) Enjoining the concerned local government units to pass ordinances appropriating local resources for identified interventions;

(ii) Requesting funds from the National Disaster Coordinating Council;

(iii) Ensuring inclusion of rehabilitation plans of Regional Line Agencies in their annual operational plans or realign funds, if necessary;

(iv) Conducting special Official Development Assistance pledging sessions to be spearheaded by the RDCs and the Regional Disaster Coordinating Councils of Region XII and ARMM;

(v) Enjoining Congress to include a special purpose fund for rehabilitation and development in the General Appropriations Act of Fiscal Year 2009 and beyond.

i. Regularly monitor the status of programs, projects and activities related to Cotabato flood control in the areas flooded by Typhoons Frank and Cosme, as well as the other rehabilitation and development projects in the MRB to ensure their prompt and efficient execution;

j. Recommend action to improve the implementation of flood control repair and other related rehabilitation and development initiatives in the MRB;

k. Coordinate and consult with concerned national and local government officials, both elective and appointive, as well as accredited non-governmental organizations in the prosecution of programs and projects;

l. Formulate policies, plans and programs of the MRB with regard to flood control funds or funds for similar purpose that may be allocated for the MRB flood conrol and rehabilitation and development;

m. Mobilize the assistance and support of any government agency or instrumentality as well as civil society and the donor community to address identified gaps and requirements in the MRB; and

n. Perform other activities pursuant to the orders of the President.

Section 3 Powers and Functions of the Executive Director of the Secretariat. – The Secretariat of the Task Force shall have the following powers and functions:

a. Administer and manage the day-to-day affairs and operations of the Task Force;

b. Coordinate the activities of agencies and instrumentalities in the implementation of projects;

c. Coordiante and liaise with accredited non-government organizations, international agencies and other groups or individuals involved in flood control;

d. Initiate the conduct of studies on flood control and related environmental and hydrological studies to minimize the adverse effects to lives, properties and livelihood of residents in the MRB that may be caused by similar floods;

e. Work with the DPWH and other concerned agencies on engineering and other related plans for the MRB;

f. Monitor the implementation of projects and programs in connection with the rehabilitation and development of the MRB;

g. Report to the Task Force, which shall meet at least monthly, on the status, situation and developments concerning projects and programs;

h. Act as the Head of the Secretariat of the Task Force; and

i. Perform such other functions as may be assigned by the President of the Philippines.

Section 4 Reportorial Requirements. – The Task Force shall submit quarterly reports to the Presidential Management Staff on the work being done by the Task Force and to the DBM on funds allocated indicating the amount released, obligated and disbursed for projects and the accomplishments for the expended appropriations.

Section 5 Repealing Clause. – All other orders, rules, regulations and issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this EO are hereby repealed or modified accordingly. Task Force shall maintain a Secretariat to be headed by an Executive Director. It may request that personnel from different government agencies and instrumentalities be detailed by their respective heads.

Section 6 Effectvity. – This EO shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 5 th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Nine.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2009). [Executive Order Nos. : 701-830]. Manila : Malcañang Records Office.