MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 257

CREATING A REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE (RDC) UNDER THE NEDA BOARD

WHEREAS , regional development is a means to promote national growth and countryside development;

WHEREAS , it is a priority of the government to continue addressing disparities in regional development and promote equitable allocation of resources among regions;

WHEREAS , to effectively address the critical regional and local development needs, there is a need for a coordinated effort at the national level that shall strengthen the linkages between national and regional/local planning, programming, budgeting and implementation;

WHEREAS , it is imperative that spatial implications of policies are adequately considered in national development policy formulation;

WHEREAS , there is a need for an inter-agency body at the national level that shall coordinate and integrate regional developments efforts of the government to ensure harmony and effective implementation at the regional and local levels;

WHEREAS , pursuant to Executive Order No. 230, the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) is primarily responsible for the formulation of continuing, coordinated and fully integrated social and economic policies, plans and programs both at the national and regional levels.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of a NEDA Board-Regional Development Committee (NB-RDC). A Regional Development Committee is hereby constituted under the NEDA Board.

SECTION 2. Composition. The NB-RDC shall be composed of the following:

SECTION 3. Functions of the NB-RDC. The NB-RDC shall:

a. formulate and monitor the implementation of policies that reduce regional growth disparities, promote equitable allocation of resources among regions;

b. serve as clearinghouse for key regional development policy proposals which impact on two or more regions;

c. formulate and monitor the implementation of the framework for regional development of the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan;

d. direct the formulation and review guidelines for the regional allocation of agency budgetary resources; and

e. periodically review the viability of the regional configuration of the country and recommend to the President the re-delineation of regions, as may be necessary.

SECTION 4. Creation of NB-RDC Technical Board. A Technical Board shall be created to provide technical support to the NB-RDC.

SECTION 5. Composition of the Technical Board. The Technical Board shall be composed of the following:

SECTION 6. Funding. Funds needed to carry out the provisions of this Executive Order for the first calendar year shall be drawn from the NEDA budget.

Fund requirements for the succeeding years shall be provided in the General Appropriations Act.

SECTION 7. Implementing Authority of the NEDA Director-General. The NEDA Director-General shall issue such implementing rules, regulations, and other issuances as may be necessary to ensure the efficient and effective implementation of the provisions of this Executive Order.

SECTION 8. Repeal. All previous issuances inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 9. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 15 th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Three.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2003). [Executive Order Nos. : 201-300]. Manila : Malcañang Records Office.