MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 147

CREATING THE NORTH LUZON DEVELOPMENT PLAN MANAGEMENT OFFICE

WHEREAS , the Updated North Luzon Development Plan (2001-2004), which was prepared by the North Luzon Growth Commission (formerly the Northwestern Luzon Growth Quadrangle Commission) created under Executive Order No. 175 dated April 30, 1994, as amended, seeks to establish North Luzon as a strategic growth area in the country and North-East Asia;

WHEREAS , with the abolition of the North Luzon Growth Commission and its Program Management Office pursuant to Executive Order No. 72 dated February 11, 2002 rationalizing the agencies under or attached to the Office of the President, there is no entity, at present, coordinating and monitoring the implementation of the Updated North Luzon Development Plan (2001-2004) on a North Luzon-wide scope;

WHEREAS , the Regional Development Councils of Region 1, Region 2 and the Cordillera Administrative Region, as well as various regional chapters of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PCCI) and the Philippine Association of State Universities and Colleges (PASUC) in said regions, have requested that a government entity be created to coordinate and oversee the implementation of inter-regional and strategic projects on a North Luzon-wide scope;

WHEREAS , there is a continuing need to coordinate and oversee the implementation of the Updated North Luzon Development Plan (2001-2004) in order to bring about the integrated development of North Luzon, particularly in the areas of multilateral economic cooperation, industrial dispersal, investment and trade promotion, and information and communications technology;

WHEREAS , under the Administrative Code of 1987 and other pertinent laws, the President has the continuing authority to create entities, agencies, instrumentalities and units of the National Government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of North Luzon Development Program Management Office .-There is hereby created the North Luzon Development Plan Management Office (hereinafter referred to as “NLDPMO”), to be headed by an Executive Director with the rank of Undersecretary to be appointed by the President, under the supervision and control of the Secretary of Trade and Industry.

SECTION 2. Functions.-The NLDPMO shall have the following functions:

a) Provide overall coordination and monitoring of the component programs/projects of the Updated North Luzon Development Plan (2001-2004);

b) Continue the refinement of the Updated North Luzon Development Plan (2001-2004), giving due consideration to existing development plans, programs and projects in the area;

c) Perform such other functions and responsibilities as the President may direct.

SECTION 3. Organization and Budget .-The organizational structure and staffing pattern of the NLDPMO shall be subject to the approval of the Department of Budget and Management (DBM).

The DBM shall determine the funding for the initial operations of the NLDPMO and obtain the same from such available sources as the DBM may identify. Henceforth, funding for the operations of the NLDPMO shall be included in the annual appropriations of the Department of Trade and Industry. Fiscal austerity shall be strictly observed.

SECTION 4. Repealing Clause .-All executive orders, instructions, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are contrary or inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby modified or repealed accordingly.

SECTION 5. Effectivity .-This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

City of Manila, November 9, 2002.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2002). [Executive Order Nos. : 101-200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.