MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 2

CREATING AN INTERAGENCY COMMITTEE FOR RELIEF, REHABILITATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF AREAS AFFECTED BY ARMED CONFLICTS IN MINDANAO

WHEREAS , the attainment of a just and enduring peace is imperative for political stability and socioeconomic progress of the country;

WHEREAS , the government is committed to seek an end to the internal armed conflicts through a comprehensive peace process;

WHEREAS , the armed conflicts in Mindanao has resulted in damaged communities, displaced families and disruption of social life and economic livelihood;

WHEREAS , the reconstruction of the peace process, hand-in-hand with immediate relief, rehabilitation and community-based development efforts in the areas affected by armed conflicts, is an expressed policy of the incumbent Administration;

WHEREAS , the government is committed to ensure the safe return of families and individuals affected by armed conflicts to their communities of origin and assist them in rebuilding their shattered  lives by addressing their basic needs;

WHEREAS , there is a need to integrate, coordinate and synchronize relief, rehabilitation and community-based development efforts in areas affected by armed conflicts, including those of existing line agencies and advisory bodies, in support of the government’s peace process in Mindanao;

WHEREAS , there is a need to ensure community-based planning and implementation for relief, rehabilitation and development in these areas, done in close consultations with leaders of civil society, NGOs, POs, local government units and cognizant military and police commands and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order.

Section 1. Creation of an Interagency Committee for Relief, Rehabilitation and Development of Areas Affected by Armed Conflict in Mindanao. There is hereby created an Interagency Committee for Relief, Rehabilitation and Development of Areas Affected by Armed Conflicts in Mindanao (hereinafter referred to as INTERACT-MINDANAO, which is tasked to coordinate, integrate, and implement the overall relief, rehabilitation and community-based development efforts for areas affected by armed conflicts in Mindanao. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

Section 2. Functions. INTERACT-MINDANAO shall have the following functions:

1. Conduct an immediate inventory of all relief, rehabilitation and development effects in Mindanao;

2. Update existing data on, and determine the status of the evacuee situation in the areas affected by armed conflicts, including but not limited to: the number of families involved, their current location and living conditions, their places of origin and their most immediate needs;

3. Coordinate, prioritize and synchronize all plans, programs and projects of all government agencies and instrumentalities involved in relief, rehabilitation and community-based development of areas affected by armed conflicts in Mindanao;

4. Ensure that all plans, programs and activities for relief, rehabilitation and community-based development of areas affected by armed conflict support and contribute to the overall goals of the comprehensive peace process, including addressing the root causes of armed conflicts; consensus-building and consultation; peace education and advocacy.

5. Consistent with the goals of the peace process, ensure the participation of peace partners and the larger civil society, and promote tri-people welfare and solidarity in the relief, rehabilitation and development efforts.

6. Enlist the participation and assistance of any office or instrumentality of government in the performance of its functions for the relief, rehabilitation and community-based development of areas affected by armed conflicts in Mindanao.

7. Through appropriate government agencies, coordinate with international donor community in the relief, rehabilitation and community-based development efforts in Mindanao.

8. Monitor and evaluate the implementation of all plans, programs and projects for the relief, rehabilitation and development efforts, and submit regular status reports to the President on the same.

9. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President.

Section 3. Secretariat. Secretariat support for INTERACT-MINDANAO shall be provided by the Mindanao Economic Development Council (MEDCO)/PA for Southern Mindanao. Personnel from member-agencies may be seconded as needed to assist the Secretariat in the performance of its functions.

Section 4. Funding. Initial funding for the operations of INTERACT-MINDANAO in the amount of Five Million Pesos shall be sourced from the President’s Contingent Fund and released to the Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPP). Appropriations for succeeding years shall be incorporated in the budget of the OPAPP. Funding for the implementation of relief, rehabilitation and development projects by individual agencies shall be drawn from their respective appropriations.

Section 5. Repealing Clause. All Executive Orders, rules and regulations and other issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. Effectivity. This Executive Order takes effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 27th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and One.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RENATO S. DE VILLA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2001). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.