MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 412

DECLARING AND DELINEATING THE EL NIDO PORT ZONE UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY

WHEREAS , the port of El Nido is one of the busiest ports in the country more particularly in the northwestern areas of Palawan;

WHEREAS , there is an urgent need to accelerate the development of the existing seaport of El Nido in Barangay Buena Suerte, Municipality of El Nido, Palawan to serve as a hub of seaborne commerce and trade in northern Palawan, and a gateway to other municipalities, cities, provinces and other countries;

WHEREAS , the development of the existing seaport of El Nido is necessary in order to accommodate projected increases in port traffic and program the development of the port facilities to support the increasing demands of the shipping trade within the region.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The territorial jurisdiction of the port of El Nido situated in Barangay Buena Suerte, Municipality of El Nido, Province of Palawan is hereby declared, expanded, and delineated particularly described as follows:

“Beginning at point marked 1 on the plan, thence to point 2 at a distance of 57.40 meters with bearing at South 10 degrees West, thence to point 3 at a distance of 6.62 meters with a bearing at North 80 degrees West, thence to point 4 at a distance of 27.30 meters with bearing at North 10 degrees East, thence to point 5 at a distance of 82.50 meters with bearing at North 80 degrees West, thence to point 6 at a distance of 500.00 meters with bearing at North 10 degrees East, thence to point 7 at a distance of 189.10 meters with bearing at South 80 degrees East, thence to point 8 at a distance of 384.00 meters with bearing at South 10 degrees West, thence to point 3 at a distance of 122.00 meters with bearing at South 45 degrees West, thence to point 1 or the beginning at a distance of 33.00 meters with bearing at North 60 degrees West, all in all comprising a total area of 89,618.83 square meters more or less.”

SECTION 2. The El Nido port as defined, expanded and delineated is hereby placed under the administrative jurisdiction of the Philippine Ports Authority, which shall, consistent with the regional industrial plans of the government, implement a program in the proper zoning planning, development and utilization of the port.

SECTION 3. All orders, proclamations and issuances or portions thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby amended, repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 7th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2005). [Executive Order Nos. : 401-500]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.