MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 400

REGULATING THE ASSIGNMENT AND ISSUANCE OF LOW-NUMBERED (PROTOCOL) LICENSE PLATES TO MOTOR VEHICLES USED BY OFFICIALS OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS , in 1978, then President Ferdinand E. Marcos issued Executive Order No. 505 revoking E.O. No. 287 series of 1959 and E.O. No. 374 series of 1960, issued by then President Carlos P. Garcia assigning low-numbered/protocol plates to officials of the Republic of the Philippines;

WHEREAS , throughout the years, certain officials have received exemptions for them to use low-numbered/protocol plates on their motor vehicles resulting in the proliferation of these plates;

WHEREAS , the above exemptions have led to the use of low-numbered/protocol plates supplied by unknown sources for motor vehicles of certain officials, specifically, the use of number six (6), seven (7) and eight (8) by Cabinet Secretaries, Senators and Congressmen respectively;

WHEREAS , there is a need to provide a uniform system of assignment and issuance of low-numbered/protocol license plates to high-ranking government officials;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The following officials shall be entitled to the use of low-numbered/protocol license plates:

OFFICIALS

ASSIGNED NUMBER

SEC. 2. All other officials with equivalent rank/position as the above-listed officials are also entitled to the use of low-numbered/protocol license plates subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Department of Transportation and Communications upon the recommendation of the Assistant Secretary of the Land Transportation Office.

SEC. 3. These low-numbered/protocol plates shall be issued in pairs for motor vehicles duly registered in the name of the above listed officials or to their respective spouses. However, not more than two pairs of the said license plates for issuance to two (2) motor vehicles shall be assigned to any of the said officials with the exception of the President of the Philippines, the Vice-President of the Philippines, the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. Senators and Congressmen of the Philippines may be assigned not more than four (4) pairs of low-numbered/protocol plates.

SEC. 4. The assignment or transfer of low-numbered/protocol plates to unauthorized person/s or motor vehicles by government officials entitled thereto is strictly prohibited. Violation of this prohibition shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of the herein granted privilege and for the confiscation of the issued protocol plate, and imposition of the corresponding penalty for the violation/s committed as provided by existing laws.

SEC. 5. The Assistant Secretary, Land Transportation Office, is hereby authorized to promulgate the necessary regulatory measures to implement this order.

SEC. 6. All orders, directives, and issuances inconsistent herewith are deemed amended or modified accordingly.

SEC. 7. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 18th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2005). [Executive Order Nos. : 301-400]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.