MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 270-A

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 270

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 270 entitled “NATIONAL POLICY AGENDA ON REVITALIZING MINING IN THE PHILIPPINES” was issued on January 16, 2004;

WHEREAS, there is need to expressly stipulate the concerns referring to the protection of rights of indigenous peoples and communities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Section 2 (a), (f) and (g) of Executive Order No. 270 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“a) Government recognizes the critical role of investments in the minerals industry for national development and poverty alleviation and shall provide support mechanism for sustained mineral exploration program, including the streamlining of procedures of concerned government agencies and instrumentalities relating to the grant of mining tenements, responsive research and development priorities and capability building for industry manpower”.

“f) Protection of the environment shall be of paramount consideration in every stage of mining operation; mitigation and progressive rehabilitation measures shall be integral components of mining operations. Decommissioning and/or final mine rehabilitation shall be supported by the most appropriate environmental financial surety”.

“g) The ecological integrity of areas affected by mining operation, including biodiversity resources and small-island ecosystems, shall be safeguarded in order to protect public welfare, safety and environmental quality. The rights of affected communities, including the rights of Indigenous Cultural Communities, especially the Free and Prior Informed Consent requirement, shall be protected”.

SEC. 2. Repealing Clause. All executive orders, rules and regulations and other issuances or parts thereof that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 3. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 20th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Four.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2004). [Executive Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.