MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR No. 73

SUBMISSION TO THE GENERAL AUDITING OFFICE OF INVENTORY OF GOODS AND PROPERTIES ACQUIRED BY CONFISCATION, SEIZURE, FORFEITURE, ATTACHMENT, OR DONATION.

Quoted below, for strict compliance, is Memorandum Circular dated April 8, 1964, of the General Auditing Office on the above subject:

“This Office in its Memorandum Circular No. 152, dated March 21, 1952, requires that all government bureaus, offices and other instrumentalities should submit an inventory to the General Auditing Office of all properties acquired by them either through donation, forfeiture, attachment, or confiscation. It has been observed, however, that this standing requirement has never fully complied with.

“In order to provide better control over the properties mentioned above and to insure that they are properly accounted for, thus give support to the Anti-Smuggling of the President, this Office hereby reiterates its previous requirement that an inventory report for them shall be submitted. Starting with the month of April, 1964, all government agencies and instrumentalities concerned shall submit a monthly report to the Auditor General of all goods and properties acquired by them through donation, forfeiture, attachment or confiscation. The report shall contain among others the following information: ( a ) description of the goods or properties, ( b ) quantity, ( c ) estimated value, ( d ) date, place and mode of acquisition, and ( e ) location or where stored. New acquisitions and dispositions made during the month should also be indicated. The inventory report shall be submitted directly within ten days of the following month.

“If any item in the inventory report is to be disposed of, the Auditor General or his representative should always be notified in advance as to the date and manner of disposition. For the purpose of improving the accounting for confiscated or seized goods, all apprehending officers shall issue a receipt for each seizure or confiscation they make regardless of the articles or the amounts involved. The form of the report is shown in Attachment A hereof. The receipt will be accomplished in five (5) copies to be distributed as follows:

“Original—to the owner of articles seized. In the absence of the owner, the original should be left or posted in the premises where the articles were seized.

“Duplicate—to the head of the agency.

“Triplicate—to the Auditor General or his representative.

“Quadruplicate—to the receiving officer (in charge of storage).

“Quintuplicate—for file of the apprehending officer.

“The distribution of the copies shall be made within 24 hours after the seizure has been made.

“The full cooperation of all concerned is earnestly requested.”

By authority of the President:

CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, June 15, 1964.

Reference: Receipt for confiscated or seized articles

Source : Supreme Court Library