MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 40

URGING ALL GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS RESPONSIBLE FOR PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT TO ATTEND THE SIXTH NATIONAL CONFERENCE ON PUBLIC PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION.

The Personnel Officers Association of the Philippines, Inc (POAP), with the technical a distance of the Civil Service Commission, will hold its Sixth National Conference on Public Personnel Administration on September 19-21, 1963, in the City of Manila, on the theme: “The Personnel Man and the Challenge of His Increased Responsibilities.”

The effectivity of the Revised Civil Service Rules early this year, implementing Republic Act No. 2260, has given the personnel man a new stature of importance because of the emphasis placed on progressive policies in personnel management.More is demanded of him in the way of translating into reality the provisions of the law and rules on personnel management. This conference will provide round-table discussions on the following areas:

1. Getting top management to appreciate the staff role of the personnel man.

2. How to increase awareness of line supervisors to their personnel management responsibility.

3. Ranking positions for purposes of promotion.

4. Preparing an agency merit promotion plan.

5. Training supervisors to rate employee performance.

6. Handling employee complaints and grievances.

7. Setting up qualification indexes.

8. Operating a suggestions and incentive award system.

9. Maximizing benefit from CSC inspections and audit.

10. Putting the annual report to work for the personnel man.

In view of the importance of this conference, all heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus, offices, and government-owned or controlled corporations are hereby urged to send their personnel officers to attend this conference. Their attendance shall be on official time and their expenses for transportation, subsistence, lodging and conference fees in connection therewith shall be chargeable against the appropriation of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

Delegates should be required to submit to their respective agency heads a report of their attendance and participation in the conference.

By authority of the President: RUFINO G. HECHANOVA Executive Secretary

Manila, August 20, 1963.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library