MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 49

ANNOUNCING THE FILING OF SWORN STATEMENTS OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 3019 AND PRESCRIBING A REVISED FORM THEREFOR.

Under Section 7 of Republic Act No. 3019, otherwise known as the Anti-graft Law, every public officer is required to file with the office of the Department Head concerned his statement of assets and liabilities “within thirty days after the approval of this Act or after assuming office, and within the month of January of every other year thereafter, as well as upon the expiration of his term of office, or upon his resignation or separation from office.” In the case of a Department Head or chief of an independent office, the statement shall be filed with the Office of the President. The last filing of such statements was in January, 1962, as published in Memorandum Circular No. 18 of this Office dated January 12, 1961.

For the proper guidance of all concerned, it is hereby informed that public officers who filed their statements in January, 1962, are scheduled to file their new Sworn Statements of Assets and Liabilities within the Month of January, 1964. Those who entered the service and assumed office sometime during the period since January 1, 1962, who are presumed to have filed their sworn statements of assets and liabilities within thirty days after assuming office, are also scheduled to file such statements in January, 1964. The statement shall cover the period from the day immediately following the date included in the previous statement, up to December 31, 1963.

For this purpose, there is hereby prescribed the attached “Sworn Statement of Financial Condition, Assets, Income and Liabilities” from, which shall be used in lieu of the form prescribed under Administrative Order No. 334 dated September 1, 1960. Sufficient number of copies of this form shall be prepared by all offices concerned for the use of their respective officials and employees.

All concerned are hereby reminded that failure to file the required statements within the prescribed period is punishable by a fine of not less than P100 nor more than P1,000, or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the Court, or by dismissal from the service in a proper administrative proceeding even if no criminal prosecution is instituted against the official or employee concerned, as provided in Section 9 (b) of the law.

By authority of the President:

SALVADOR L. MARIO Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, December 5, 1963

Source: Presidential Museum and Library