MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR No. 127

WHEREAS, the future of a country depends on its youth and their proper upbringing; and

WHEREAS, Filipino children have the right to grow up into well-rounded, civic-minded and mortally upright citizens;

WHEREFORE, the following declaration of Filipino children’s rights and responsibilities is hereby promulgated to arouse greater concern for their proper moral and intellectual upbringing and for t guidance of all concerned;

“DECLARATION OF FILIPINO CHILDREN’S RIGHTS and RESPONSIBILITIES RIGHTS

1. Every child shall be entitled to the rights set forth in this Declaration without distinction by reason of sex, religion, social origin, political opinion, property, birth or other status.

2. Every child, endowed with the full dignity and worth of a human person from the time of his conception, has the right to be born.

3. Every child, for the full and harmonious development of his personality, has the right to a home and a wholesome family life which will provide for him love, moral and material security and understanding. For that child who must receive foster care, the nearest substitute for his own home must be provided in accordance with his needs.

4. Every child is entitled to a good home, good nutrition, adequate housing conditions, healthful recreation, and proper medical attention.

5. Every child has the right to receive an education to help him become an asset to society.

For the gifted child, the right to be given every opportunity and encouragement to develop his special talents.

For the child who is in conflict with society the right to be dealth with intelligently as society’s charge, not society’s outcast.

6. Every child has the right to religious institution and moral education as early as possible, for the formation and cultivation of sound and moral habit in his life.

7. Every child has the right to have full opportunity for play and wholesome recreation for developing skills and practicing activities of his choice, individual as well as social.

8. Every child has the right to protection from exploitation and against hazards which would adversely affect or prejudice his health or education or interface with his physical, mental or moral development.

9. Every child has the right to the care, assistance and protection of the government for his proper and well-rounded development when his parents or persons responsible for his care and support fail or are unable to provide him with his fundamental needs.

10. Every child has the right to live in a community and society that guarantees safety, health, good moral environment and facilities for his wholesome growth and development.

11. Every child as a future citizen has the right to an efficient and honest government run by his elders according to the principles of democracy; and the right to be given by elders every example of honesty, morality and integrity, both in their public and private life.

12. Every child as a junior member of a world community, has the right to be brought up in a spirit of understanding, tolerance, friendship among peoples, peace and universal brotherhood, and in the full consciousness that his energies and talents should be shared with his fellowmen.

RESPONSIBILITIES

1. To love God as his Creator, learn HIS commandments and practice his religion.

2. To honor and respect his parents, elders, teachers and duly constituted authorities.

3. To obey the laws and uphold the democratic principles of life.

4. To grow in character and ability as he grows physically, and to be honest with himself and with others in all his thoughts, words and deeds.

5. To develop high moral principles and the courage to live by them; and to strive to be healthy in body, mind and spirit.

6. To respect the rights of others and set good examples so that others may emulate and profit by them.

7. To regard his education as the fulfillment of his goals and values in life.

8. To preserve, strengthen and uphold always world peace and the brotherhood of man.”

The National Coordinating Center for the Study and Development of Filipino Children and Youth, (NCCSDFCY) is hereby designated to assume responsibility for the full, effective and desirable dissemination and implementation of this Declaration.

By authority of the President:

JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Manila, June 25, 1965

Source: Supreme Court Library