MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR No. 82

URGING A NATIONWIDE SIMULTANEOUS LAUNCHING OF THE SECOND YEAR OF THE RICE AND CORN PRODUCTION CONTEST DECREED UNDER PROCLAMATION NO. 53 OF THIS OFFICE DATED SEPTEMBER 28, 1962.

Proclamation No. 53 of the President dated September 28 1962, decreed a four-year Rice and Corn Production Contest from July 1, 1962 to June 30, 1966, as a corollary to the rice and corn production program being executed by the Rice and Corn Production Coordinating Council. The contest is supervised by the National Rice and Corn Production Contest Committee composed of representatives of 17 government and private entities. The successful first year of the contest had its climax on August 28, 1964, when top producers of rice and corn were awarded cash prizes by the President and the First Lady.

Aside from proving that rice and corn yields of over 200 cavans to the hectare are easily attainable with the use of scientific methods of production, the contest is elicited public attention throughout the country. This inspiring advantage must be pursued with more vigor and dedication as a step toward the solution of the problems of under production in these staple food crops and low farm income among the millions of rice and corn dirt farmers.

In order to usher in the second year of the contest under more auspicious circumstances, the President will launch this year’s contest at an opening ceremony to be held in Biñan, Laguna, on September 11, 1964, between nine and eleven o’clock in the morning.

The President desires that this launching ceremony be duplicated on a nationwide scale. I, therefore, urge all Provincial Governors, City and Municipal Mayors, Barrio Councils and other agencies of the Government, and civic organizations to lead their respective communities simultaneously with the launching to be led by the President. The ceremony may be symbolized by one or more of the different phases of rice and corn production which may be in progress in the community at the launching time.

For the information of all concerned, there are enclosed copies of the aforementioned Proclamation No. 53 and the guide on the launching of the 1964-1965 National Rice and Corn Production Contest to be led by the President on September 11, 1964.

By authority of the President:

CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, September 10, 1964

Source : Presidential Museum and Library