MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR No. 123

URGING ATTENDANCE IN THE NATIONAL SEMINAR ON AGRICULTURAL MARKETING

A short-term National Marketing Seminar on Agricultural Marketing has been organized pursuant to the resolution of the FAO Far East Regional Conference held at Kuala, Lumpur, Malaysia in 1962, to be held at the Asian Labor Education Center (ALEC), Diliman, Quezon City, on September 7-27, 1965.

This seminar is designed to provide in-service training in Agricultural Marketing to the personnel of various government and private agencies interested in the improvement of the marketing system. It will feature discussion on crops, livestocks and livestock products, particular emphasis to be made on the major products such as paddy and rice, poultry and eggs and fruits and vegetables. It will also touch on vital problems related to the marketing systems and their improvement, as well as modern techniques of marketing necessary in the economic development of our country.

Departments, bureaus and offices are hereby authorized to send not more than three of their employees whose duties relate to agricultural marketing to the seminar, except the Central Cooperative Exchange which may send not more than ten (10). Their attendance shall be on official time and their expenses for transportation, subsistence and lodging, registration and seminar fees shall be chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds, to the usual accounting and auditing requirements, and to their submitting a report to their respective agency heads on their participation and attendance in the seminar. The expenses of the participants from the private agencies shall be borne by them.

For further particulars, please contact Director Eugenio E. Cruz of the Bureau of Plant Industry, designated Director of the Center, at Telephone Nos. PLDT-5-47-12 and GTS-22-14-67.

By authority of the President: RAMON A. DIAZ Executive Secretary

Manila, May 31, 1965

Source: Supreme Court Library