MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 128

URGING ATTENDANCE IN THE SECOND NATIONAL CONVENTION OF GOVERNMENT CARTOGRAPHIC, PHOTOGRAMMETRIC AND GEODETIC ENGINEERS AND SURVEYORS.

The Board of Technical Surveys and Maps, with the assistance of 30 agencies of the government, is holding the Second National Convention of Government Cartographic, Photogrammetric and Geodetic Engineers and Surveyors on July 26-31, 1965, in the City of Manila on the theme: “Surveying and Mapping—Key to National Progress.”

Surveying and Mapping are essential tools in the attainment of national progress. This conference will assess the gains so far made in this direction and introduce modern trends and development especially those brought out in the 4th United Nations Regional Cartographic Conference for Asia and the Far East with a view to improving and updating present techniques and methods.

Departments, bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, which have members in the Philippine Surveying and Mapping Institute, the Philippine Society of Photogrammetry, the Philippine Society of Geodetic Engineers, the Philippine Geodetic and Geophysical Institute, the Land Surveyors Association of the Philippines, the Philippine Geographical Society and the Geological Society of the Philippines may send each not more than ten delegates to this convention. Their attendance shall be on official and their expenses for transportation, subsistence lodging and conference fees relative thereto shall be chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

The delegates shall submit a report of their attendance and participation in the conference to their respective agency heads. The Board of Technical Surveys and Maps shall render a report on this conference to the Civil Service Commission in line with the latter’s leadership function in the field of career and employee development.

By authority of the President

RAMON A. DIAZ Executive Secretary

Manila, June 28, 1965

Source: Supreme Court Library