MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA.

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
PROCLAMATION NO. 396 .

DECLARING THE YEARS BEGINNING 2023 THROUGH 2033 AS THE
“DEKADA NG KASAYSAYAN NG PILIPINAS”

WHEREAS, Section 15, Article XIV of the Constitution provides that the State
shall conserve, promote and popularize the nation's historical and cultural heritage
and resources, as well as its artistic creations;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 10086 or the "Strengthening
Peoples’ Nationalism Through Philippine History Act," provides that the State shall
provide the means to strengthen the Filipino people's nationalism, love of country,
respect for its heroes and pride for the people's accomplishments, by reinforcing the
importance of Philippine national and local history in daily life, with the end in view of
raising social consciousness;

WHEREAS, on 23 October 1933, Executive Order No. 451 (s. 1933) was
issued, creating the Philippine Historical Research and Markers Committee (PHRMC),
a body in charge of identifying, designating and marking cultural and historical
antiquities in the Philippines and preserving them for posterity;

WHEREAS, various Presidential issuances were promulgated over the years
in response to the need for a historical body with broader functions, and in 2010, by
virtue of RA No. 10086, the National Historical Commission of the Philippines (NHCP)
became an independent government agency responsible for restoration, conservation,
and protection of the country’s historical objects, as well as the determination of all
factual matters relating to official Philippine History;

WHEREAS, on 23 October 2033, the NHCP will celebrate its centennial
anniversary, marking 100 years since the establishment of its predecessor, the
PHRMC;

WHEREAS, the Filipino nation greatly values the almost a century of
contributions of the dedicated individuals who make up the NHCP, including historians,
researchers, Curators, architects, engineers, chemists, conservators, artists, planners,
managers, and many others, who all work tirelessly to advance historical research,
promote the legacy of esteemed Filipino figures through commemorative events,
safeguard and restore historic sites, structures, objects, and properties, show
reverence for national symbols, and educate the public about their rich history and
heritage; and

WHEREAS, the Filipino nation joins the NHCP in celebrating this milestone in
Philippine bureaucracy and in highlighting the role of history in nation-building;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby declare the years beginning 2023 through 2033 as “Dekada ng
Kasaysayan ng Pilipinas.” ‘

For this purpose, the NHCP is directed to lead, coordinate, and supervise the
observance of the Dekada ng Kasaysayan ng Pilipinas, and identify the programs,
projects and activities for the celebration thereof.

All other agencies and instrumentalities of the National Government, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations, government financial institutions, and
state universities and colleges, are hereby enjoined, and all local government units,
non-government organizations, as well as the private sector, are hereby encouraged,
to render the necessary support and assistance to the NHCP, and to actively
participate in the observance of the Dekada ng Kasaysayan ng Pilipinas.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 7th dayof November _, in the year of
Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

 

By the President:

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

ci
IBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

 

 

{ill 2 ATTY. DUSTIN ©. CARVIDA

ACTING™BERECTOR IV

LUT

PBBM003088

REPU!