MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
PROCLAMATION NO. 1077

DECLARING A STATE OF NATIONAL CALAMITY DUE TO
TYPHOON “TINO”

WHEREAS, Section 2(p) of Republic Act (RA) No. 10121 or the “Philippine
Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010" deciares it a policy of the State to
provide maximum care, assistance, and services to individuals and families affected by
disaster, implement emergency rehabilitation projects to lessen its impact, and facilitate
the resumption of normal social and economic activities;

WHEREAS, Sections 16 and 6(c) of RA No. 10121 provide that the President,
upon recommendation of the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
Council (NDRRMC), may declare a cluster of barangays, municipalities, cities,
provinces, or regions under a State of Calamity, and lift such declaration;

WHEREAS, according to NDRRMC, Typhoon Tino (international name:
Kalmaegi) brought torrential rains, widespread flooding, and multiple landslide
incidents over various regions in the country, resulting in the loss of lives of many and
tremendous destruction of properties, including massive damage to agriculture and
critical infrastructures and lifelines, and disrupted the means of livelihood and the
normal way of life of the people in the affected areas;

WHEREAS, the NDRRMC, through NDRRMC Resolution No. 2 (s. 2025),
recommends the declaration of a State of National Calamity for a period of one (1)
year relative to the effects of Typhoon Tino; and

WHEREAS, consistent with RA No. 10121, the declaration of a State of
National Calamity will, among others: (i) hasten the rescue, recovery, relief, and
rehabilitation efforts of the government and the private sector, including the facilitation
of international humanitarian assistance; (ii) immediately authorize the imposition of
mandatory remedial measures pursuant to Section 17 of RA No. 10121, such as, but
not limited to, price ceiling on basic necessities and prime commodities, grant of no-
interest loans to the most affected section of the population, and prevent overpricing,
profiteering or hoarding of prime commodities, medicines and petroleum products; and
(iii) grant wide latitude to national and local governments in utilizing appropriate funds
for rescue, recovery, relief, and rehabilitation efforts of, including provision for basic

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

services to, affected populations, in accordance with existing laws, rules, and
regulations;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby declare a State of National Calamity for a period of one (1) year.

All concerned agencies and instrumentalities of the National Government are
hereby directed to continuously undertake urgent and critical disaster response to
save lives, reduce health impacts, ensure public safety and meet the basic
subsistence needs of the people affected, and to implement post-disaster recovery
measures to restore normalcy, and improve facilities, livelihood and living conditions
of disaster-stricken communities, in accordance with pertinent operational plans and
directives.

All departments and other concerned government agencies are also hereby
directed to coordinate with, and provide or augment the basic services and facilities of
affected local government units, and facilitate private sector and_ international
assistance, as may be necessary, in accordance with laws, rules and regulations.

Law enforcement agencies, with support from the Armed Forces of the
Philippines, are directed to undertake all necessary measures to ensure peace and
order in affected areas, as may be necessary.

The State of National Calamity shall remain in force and effect unless earlier
lifted by the President.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this Sth dayof November _in the
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

By the President:

 

     

THE ene

Il ill il ll iit Hi

PBBMO1