MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

PROCLAMATION NO. 353

AMENDING PROCLAMATION NO. 2054 (S. 2010) BY
TRANSFERRING THE OBSERVANCE OF THE “CYBERSECURITY
AWARENESS MONTH” FROM SEPTEMBER TO OCTOBER OF
EVERY YEAR

WHEREAS, under the Constitution, the State recognizes the vital role of
communication and information in nation-building;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 10844 or the “Department of
Information and Communications Technology (DICT) Act of 2015” declares it a policy
of the State to ensure consumer protection and welfare, data privacy and security,
foster competition and the growth of the information and communications technology
(ICT) sector;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of RA No. 10173 or the “Data Privacy Act of 2012”
mandates the State to ensure that personal data in information and communications
systems in the government and in the private sector are secured and protected;

WHEREAS, under Section 5 of RA No. 10844, the DICT is the primary
administrative entity in charge of planning, developing, and promoting the national ICT
development agenda, and under Section 7 of RA No. 10173, the National Privacy
Commission (NPC) is responsible for monitoring and ensuring compliance of the
Philippines with international standards set for data protection;

WHEREAS, one of the strategies set forth in the Philippine Development Plan
2023-2028 is to ensure safety and security in cyber and physical spaces, and adopt a
legal framework to strengthen cybersecurity and policies on minimum information
security standards;

WHEREAS, the Philippines, as a State Party to the Council of Europe
Convention on Cybercrime or the “Budapest Convention,” has been committed to the
development of domestic legislation against cybercrimes and to the promotion of
awareness and collaboration among nations in the fight against cyber-related crimes,
and;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 2054 (s. 2010) declared the month of September
of every year as “Cybersecurity Awareness Month” to reinforce efforts to address
strategic policy dimensions of cybersecurity, develop a national cyber defense
capability, and create public awareness through intensified campaigns showcasing
cybersecurity information; and

WHEREAS, in order to synchronize the Philippines with the international
observance of the “Cybersecurity Awareness Month’ in October, and to further signify
the country's unwavering commitment towards a unified approach in the digital era of
governance, there is a need to amend Proclamation No. 2054;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order the amendment of Proclamation No. 2054 to transfer the observance
of the “Cybersecurity Awareness Month” from September to October of every year.

The DICT, in coordination with the NPC and other relevant government
agencies, shall lead the observance of the Cybersecurity Awareness Month, and
identify the programs, projects and activities for the yearly celebration thereof,
consistent with international best practices.

All other national government agencies and _ instrumentalities, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations, government financial institutions, and
state universities and colleges, are hereby directed, and all local government units,
non-government organizations, as well as the private sector, are hereby encouraged,
to render the necessary support to the DICT and to actively participate in the annual
observance of the Cybersecurity Awareness Month.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 2nd dayof October , in the year of
Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

 

By the President:

 

 

2 cememeiiet

ii oe
| -ATTY. —— BRAD

     

jets