MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

PROCLAMATION NO. 397

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM 03 TO 09 NOVEMBER OF EVERY
YEAR AS THE “PHILIPPINE CRIMINOLOGY PROFESSION WEEK”

WHEREAS, Section 5, Article Il of the 1987 Constitution provides that the
maintenance of peace and order, the protection of life, liberty, and property, and the
promotion of the general welfare are essential for the enjoyment by all the people of
the blessings of democracy;

WHEREAS, Section 2, Article | of Republic Act (RA) No. 11131 or the
“Philippine Criminology Profession Act of 2018,” recognizes the importance of
criminology profession in national security, public safety, peace and order, and in
nation-building and development;

WHEREAS, criminology education in the Philippines began in 1954 when the
first college of criminology or educational institution for scientific crime was founded
while the practice of criminology in the Philippines was professionalized in 1972 with
the creation of the Board of Examiners for Criminologists (BEC) under RA No. 6506;

WHEREAS, on 08 November 2018, RA No. 11131 was enacted and replaced
the BEC with the Professional Regulatory Board of Criminology, providing it with
expanded mandates and integrating all criminologists into one national organization,
among others; and

WHEREAS, it is imperative to recognize the role of the criminology profession
in the maintenance of national security, and to honor Filipino Criminologists who have
remained committed to the exercise of their profession while contributing immensely
to the development of our nation, especially in the sectors of public safety and peace
and order;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby declare the period from 03 to 09 November of every year as the “Philippine
Criminology Week.”

The Professional Regulatory Board of Criminology, under the Professional
Regulation Commission, shall lead the observance of the Philippine Criminology

Profession Week, and identify the programs, projects and activities for the yearly
celebration thereof.

All other national government agencies and_instrumentalities, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations, government financial institutions, and
state universities and colleges, are hereby directed, and all local government units,
non-government organizations, as well as the private sector, are hereby encouraged,
to actively participate and render the necessary support and assistance to the
Professional Regulatory Board of Criminology for the effective implementation of this
Proclamation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 7th day of November __, in the year of
Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

 

By the President: /

   

  
  

 

 

 

- BERSAMIN
ive Seé¢retary

 

   
 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

PINES

 

 

 

 

PBBM003089