MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

PROCLAMATION No. 221

AMENDING PROCLAMATION NO. 1414 (S. 2007)

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article II of the Constitution provides that the State
shall give priority to education, science and technology, arts, culture, and sports to
foster patriotism and nationalism, accelerate social progress, and promote total human
liberation and development;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 1414 (s. 2007) declared the fourth week of
November of every year as “National Biotechnology Week” to promote safe and
responsible use of modern Biotechnology and its products as a means to achieve and
sustain food security, equitable access to health services, sustainable and safe
environment, and industry development;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 1414 also established the National Biotechnology
Week Inter-Agency Steering Committee (NBW-IASC), which shall formulate and
implement programs and activities for the annual celebration of National
Biotechnology Week;

WHEREAS, since 2013, the “Global Biotech Week” is observed annually to
celebrate the achievements of Biotechnology in research and development, as well as
its commercial applications in agriculture, health, environment, industry, and other
areas by means of its safe and responsible use;

WHEREAS, there is a need to amend Proclamation No. 1414 and change the
schedule of the observance of the “National Biotechnology Week” to the fourth week
of September of every year to align with the celebration of the Global Biotech Week;
and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all the executive departments, bureaus and offices and the
mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby declare the fourth week of September of every year as the “National
Biotechnology Week.”

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

The NBW-IASC shall now be composed of the heads of the Department of
Agriculture, Department of Education, Department of Environment and Natural
Resources, Department of Health, Department of the Interior and Local Government,
Department of Science and Technology, Department of Trade and Industry, and
Commission on Higher Education. The members of the NBW-IASC may designate
their respective alternates, who shall be fully authorized to decide for or on their behalf.

The NBW-IASC shall lead the observance of the National Biotechnology Week.
The Chairperson and Co-Chairperson of the NBW-IASC shall rotate among its
members, in the above-cited order, on a yearly basis.

All agencies and instrumentalities of the National Government, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations and state universities and colleges, are
hereby directed, and all local government units, non-government organizations,
professional associations, and the private sector, are hereby encouraged to actively
participate and render the necessary support and assistance to the NBW-IASC for the
effective implementation of this Proclamation.

Proclamation No. 1414 (s. 2007) is hereby amended. All other issuances,
orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof that are inconsistent with this
Proclamation, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 5th day of June , in the
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

 

By the President:

 

Office of the President

 

DIRECTOR IV

 

wa