MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

PROCLAMATION NO. 920

DECLARING A STATE OF CALAMITY IN REGION VIII (EASTERN
VISAYAS)

WHEREAS, the San Juanico Bridge, a 2.16-kilometer bridge which serves as
the only permanent land link between the islands of Samar and Leyte, is a vital
component of the Pan-Philippine Highway (Maharlika Highway/AH26), which connects
Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao;

WHEREAS, the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) conducted
an assessment of the San Juanico Bridge and determined the same to be in critical
condition due to significant structural compromises to the bridge, prompting the
enforcement of a strict three (3)-ton vehicle load limit effective 15 May 2025;

WHEREAS, the traftic controls currently in effect in San Juanico Bridge to
prevent overloads and mitigate risks halted the passage of heavy cargo vehicles,
thereby severely disrupting the transport of food, medicine, agricultural products,
construction materials, and other essential commodities across Eastern Visayas;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to repair and rehabilitate the San Juanico
Bridge to ensure timely delivery of essential goods and services and restore regional
mobility;

WHEREAS, in accordance with Section 16, in relation to Section 6(c), both of
Republic Act (RA) No. 10121 or the “Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Act of 2010,” the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
Council (NDRRMC), through Resolution No. 1 (s. 2025), has recommended the
declaration of State of Calamity in Region VIII (Eastern Visayas) on account of the
escalating risks caused by the significant structural compromises in San Juanico
Bridge;

WHEREAS, under Section 3 of RA No. 10121, a State of Calamity pertains to
a condition involving mass casualty and/or major damages to property, disruption of
livelihoods, roads, and normal way of life of people in the affected areas as a result of
the occurrence of natural or human-induced hazard; and

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the declaration of a State of Calamity will, among others, hasten
the repair and rehabilitation of the San Juanico Bridge, and afford the National
Government, as well as local government units (LGUs), ample latitude to utilize
appropriate funds for the repair and safety upgrading of the subject public
infrastructure;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby proclaim as follows:

Section 1. Declaration of a State of Calamity. There is hereby declared a
State of Calamity in Region VIII (Eastern Visayas) on account of escalating risks
caused by significant structural compromises in San Juanico Bridge, for a period of
one (1) year beginning this date, unless earlier lifted or extended as circumstances
may warrant.

The DPWH, in coordination with the concerned LGUs, is hereby directed to
expedite all measures necessary to fully repair and rehabilitate the San Juanico
Bridge.

The Department of Budget and Management is hereby directed to assist the
DPWH in identifying appropriate and sufficient funding sources to support the repair
and rehabilitation of the San Juanico Bridge.

Law enforcement agencies, with support from the Armed Forces of the
Philippines, are hereby directed to undertake urgent response to ensure the safety of
the people affected by the critical condition of the San Juanico Bridge, as well as all
necessary measures to ensure peace and order in the affected areas, subject to
existing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 2. Convergence. All departments, agencies, bureaus, and offices of
the National Government are hereby directed, and all LGUs and the private sector are
hereby encouraged, to render full support and assistance to and cooperation with each
other, and mobilize the necessary resources to undertake critical, urgent and
appropriate measures in a timely manner to fully repair and rehabilitate the San
Juanico Bridge.

Section 3. Reporting. The NDRRMC and DPWH shall submit to the President,
through the Office of the Executive Secretary, a quarterly report on the implementation
of this Proclamation.

Section 4. Separability. If any part or provision of this Proclamation is held
invalid or unconstitutional, the provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force
and effect.

Section 5. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 5th day of Jarie vin
the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

By the President:
5

 

   
   
   

  

Office of the f the President
revi OFFICE

ECTOR IV

 

i] il ll i tl IU

 

HU