MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

PROCLAMATION NO. 486

DECLARING THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY OF EVERY YEAR AS “TAX
AWARENESS MONTH”

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act No. 8424 or the “Tax Reform Act of
1997," as amended, declares it a policy of the State to: (i) promote sustainable
economic growth through rationalization of the country's internal revenue tax system,
including tax administration; (ii) provide, as much as possible, equitable relief to a
greater number of taxpayers in order to improve the levels of disposable income and
increase economic activity; (iii) create a robust environment for the business sector to
enable firms to compete better in regional and global markets; and (iv) ensure that the
Government is able to provide for the needs of those under its jurisdiction and care:

WHEREAS, taxation is crucial for nation-building as it allows the government
to promote the welfare of citizens, sustain essential economic and development
programs, and push the country towards strong economic recovery;

WHEREAS, the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR), being the premier
revenue-generating agency of the country, needs all the support it can get from various
sectors of society in disseminating information on the various requirements of taxation,
particularly relative to taxpayer registration, filing of tax returns, and payment of taxes;
and

WHEREAS, there is a need to promote and enhance the awareness of Filipinos
on tax laws, rules and regulations in order to improve the nation’s tax collection and
enhance the trust of the general public in the integrity of the country’s tax
administration system;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby declare the month of February of every year as “Tax Awareness Month.”

For this purpose, the BIR is hereby directed to lead, coordinate, and supervise

the observance of the Tax Awareness Month, and identify the programs, activities and
projects for the celebration thereof.

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

All agencies and instrumentalities of the National Government, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations, government financial institutions, and
state universities and colleges, are hereby directed, and all local government units,
non-government organizations, as well as the private sector, are hereby encouraged,
to render the necessary support and assistance to the BIR, and to actively participate
in the observance of the Tax Awareness Month.

Proclamation Nos. 960 (s. 1972) and 1239 (s. 1974) are hereby repealed. All
other issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof that are inconsistent
with this Proclamation, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 1st day of March , in the
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

 

By the President:

 

   
 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY
Mono

ry o- Peg ACTIN DIRECTOR IV

 

 

   

PBBM004021