MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

PROCLAMATION NO. 1104

DECLARING THE THIRD WEDNESDAY OF JUNE OF EVERY YEAR
AS THE “NATIONAL PULMONARY REHABILITATION DAY”

WHEREAS, Section 15, Article II of the Constitution provides that the State shall
protect and promote the right to health of the people and instill health consciousness
among them;

WHEREAS, Section 30 of Republic Act No. 11223 or the “Universal Health Care
Act” mandates the Department of Health (DOH) to strengthen national efforts in
providing a comprehensive and coordinated approach to health development on
scaling up health promotion and preventive care;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 183 (s. 1993) declares the month of June of every
year as “No Smoking Month’ as part of the awareness campaign on the ill-effects of
cigarette smoking and to join the World Health Organization in the annual celebration
of “World No Tobacco Day”;

WHEREAS, pulmonary rehabilitation is a comprehensive intervention
combining exercise training, education, and behavioral modification, and has been
internationally recognized as a standard of care that improves physical and
psychological well-being, reduces hospitalizations, and enhances the quality of life of
patients with chronic respiratory diseases (CRDs);

WHEREAS, the DOH emphasizes the need to raise public knowledge and
appreciation of pulmonary rehabilitation as a well-established and effective standard
of care for CRDs, particularly those linked to smoking and vaping, to promote
prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts, and to reinforce the government's
anti-smoking and anti-vaping advocacy given the direct link between smoking and
CRDs; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all the executive departments, bureaus and offices and the
mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

do hereby declare the third Wednesday of June of every year as the “National
Pulmonary Rehabilitation Day.”

For this purpose, the DOH shall lead the observance and celebration of the
National Pulmonary Rehabilitation Day. The DOH shall also coordinate with relevant
non-government organizations (NGOs), such as the Philippine College of Chest
Physicians, and the private sector to implement collaborative activities that promote
pulmonary rehabilitation in the country.

All agencies and instrumentalities of the National Government, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations and state universities and colleges, are
hereby directed, and all local government units, NGOs, and the private sector, are
hereby encouraged to actively participate and render the necessary support and
assistance to DOH for the effective implementation of this Proclamation.

Further, the Presidential Communications Office is also directed to implement
effective measures to inform and encourage the public to support the programs,
activities, and projects for the celebration of the National Pulmonary Rehabilitation
Day.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 4th day of December , in the
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

 

By the President:

ED COPY

LENTINO-NAVA

  

 

Acting Exetutive Secretary

 

eo
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

 

 

PBBM010919