Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 73

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF THE PHILIPPINE PUBLIC HEALTH ASSOCIATION, INC. (PPHAI).

The PPHAI will hold its Annual Conference on October 14 and 15, 1993 in Manila on the theme “Challenges of the Devolution for Health Care Delivery under R.A. 7160.” The Conference aims to discuss issues, problems and alternative solutions raised by the local government executives and their respective devolved health personnel.

Considering the significance of this affair in facilitating a more effective health care services program, not more than five (5) representatives each from the offices and bureaus of the Department of Health, preferably members of the Association, including its regional offices, government and special hospitals, including the Philippine General Hospital; officers of the different chapters of PPHAI; provincial, city and municipal health officers; and other agencies involved in public health programs are hereby authorized to attend the Conference on official time, with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems, and a convention fee of P500.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements. Meals covered by the Conference fee shall be deducted from the per diems. Participants residing or stationed within Metro Manila shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and registration fees only. The Department of Health and other public health agencies may reduce the number of participants so as not to disrupt essential public health services in their respective jurisdictions.

Participants shall, within a reasonable time thereafter, echo the conference to key personnel of their respective offices. Likewise, within thirty (30) days after the Conference, the PPHAI shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the conference, including a duly audited financial report and a list of participants indicating their respective offices, copy furnished the Department of Budget and Management and the Civil Service Commission.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, September 8, 1993

Source : CDAsia