MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO 5

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE AND ADOPTING THE PLAN FOR THE CLEANING AND GREENING OF METRO MANILA.

WHEREAS, it is the concern of our society to keep and maintain a clean, healthy and beautiful environment in Metropolitan Manila;

WHEREAS, to attain this objective, it is desirable that all sectors, including local government units, national government agencies and the non-government/civic organizations, join hands to undertake activities that will make Metro Manila clean, pleasant and attractive to its residents, including domestic and foreign tourists;

WHEREAS, to make the Metropolitan Manila communities and residents responsible and supportive to the aforesaid concern, it is imperative to instill in them the proper consciousness that would get them involved in the cleaning and greening of Metro Manila; and

WHEREAS, to instill public discipline, it is necessary to undertake educational and public information campaign on proper waste management and strict enforcement of sanitation and environmental laws.

NOW THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order that:

SECTION 1. The Plan for the Cleaning and Greening of Metro Manila is hereby approved.

SEC.2. An Inter-Agency Committee for the Cleaning and Greening of Metro Manila is created to oversee the implementation of this Plan to be led by the Metropolitan Manila Authority and shall be composed of the National Capital Region (NCR) Directors of the following agencies:

1. Department of the Interior and Local Government

2. Department of Environment and Natural Resources

3. Department of Health

4. Department of Education, Culture and Sports

5. Department of Public Works and Highways

6. Department of Social Welfare and Development

7. Department of Tourism

8. Philippine Information Agency

9. Philippine National Police

10. Department of Transportation & Communications- Land Transportation Office

1 Representatives of Local Government Units

SEC. 3. This Committee shall have the following functions:

1. Oversee the overall implementation of the Plan;

2. Recommend proposals, plans and policies to the President regarding the Plan;

3 Formulate the specific plan of activities for each project;

4 Create the necessary technical working groups/committees to assist the Committee in the implementation of the Plan;

5 Request the assistance of any government agency and instrumentality in the implementation of the Plan;

6 Submit periodic reports to the President; and

7 Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President.

SEC. 4. The Executive Secretary shall issue the necessary implementing orders to carry out the provisions of this Memorandum Circular.

SEC. 5. This Circular shall take effect immediately

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) DIONISIO C. DE LA SERNA Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia