MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 43

In view of the declared policy of the government embodied in Proclamation No. 167 (s. 1993) to make export development the key to sustainable and balanced agri-industrial Philippine economic growth, and the need for concerted government effort to create a favorable business climate which will enhance growth and expansion of the country’s export industry, all Executive Departments and Agencies are hereby directed to do the following:

1. Submit within two (2) weeks a list of department/administrative orders related to the processing of export documents, compliance with necessary export requirements, access to financing, availment of duty drawbacks, tax and other incentives, and justify the continued implementation of these orders in the light of the export drive. All orders the continued implementation of which is difficult to justify shall be reviewed for possible revocation or amendment;

2. Submit within six (6) weeks recommendations for programs which, when implemented, will support exports as the key to the development of the Philippine economy and, subsequently, lead to concerted efforts for encouraging the growth and expansion of the country’s export industry;

3. Report on the status of pending cases, policies under review, and unimplemented department/administrative orders, directives, etc., which, directly or indirectly, can help create or promote a competitive environment for the export sector; and

4. Work closely with the private sector, particularly the Philippine Exporters Confederation, Inc. (PHILEXPORT), in the drive towards responding to the needs of, and creating a conducive business environment for, the country’s export industry.

Submissions called for in this Memorandum Circular shall be submitted by the departments and agencies to the Export and Investment Development Council for consolidation into action plans which shall, in turn, be elevated to the President for appropriate action.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ANTONIO T. CARPIO Chief Presidential Legal Counsel

Source : CDAsia