Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 70

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE 25TH MANAGEMENT CONGRESS OF THE PHILIPPINE COUNCIL OF MANAGEMENT (PHILCOMAN)

The Philippine Council of Management (PHILCOMAN) will hold its 25th Management Congress on September 9–10, 1993 at the Hyatt Regency Hotel, Manila, on the theme “Creating World Class Managers for Philippines 2000.” The Congress aims to focus on achieving excellence in local government administration with special emphasis on the effective linkages among government, the business sector, NGO’s and other strata of society towards creating World Class Managers in preparation for NIC status in the year 2000.

Considering the significant contributions this affair may serve in enhancing a more effective local government management, one (1) representative holding a key management/administrative position each from the Staff Bureaus and Offices, Services and Department Regional Offices of the Department of Interior and Local Government and the local government units (i.e. provincial, city and first class municipalities), as well as government personnel who are PHILCOMAN officers and members, are hereby authorized to attend the Congress on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, traveling allowance and a convention fee of P1,200 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements. Meals covered by the Congress fee shall be deducted from the traveling allowance. Participants residing or stationed within Metro Manila shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and convention fees only.

Participants shall, within a reasonable period thereafter, echo the Congress to key personnel of their respective offices. Likewise, within thirty (30) days after the Congress, the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the Congress, including a duly audited financial report and a list of participants indicating their respective offices, copy furnished the Department of Budget and Management and the Civil Service Commission.

By authority of the President (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR Executive Secretary

Manila, 6 September 1993

Source : CDAsia