MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 92

DIRECTING IMMEDIATE AND STRICT COMPLIANCE BY ALL HEADS OF DEPARTMENTS, BUREAUS, OFFICES AND AGENCIES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT, LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS AND GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS WITH THE PROVISIONS OF CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION (CSC) MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 12, S. 1993, CSC RESOLUTION NO. 94-1464 (10 MARCH 1994) AND CSC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 12, S. 1994

WHEREAS, pursuant to the provisions of Rule IX of the Omnibus Rules Implementing Book V of Executive Order No. 292 (the Administrative Code of 1987), the CSC issued Memorandum Circular No. 12, s. 1993, to assist government agencies in the development and efficient implementation of their respective performance evaluation systems;

WHEREAS, in order to promote efficient and effective personnel administration in government and to prevent prejudice to the public service, CSC Resolution No. 94-1464 (10 March 1994) was issued authorizing the separation of officials and employees who are either habitually absent without approved leave or have unsatisfactory or poor performance, or have shown physical or mental unfitness to perform their duties; and

WHEREAS, CSC Memorandum Circular No. 12, s. 1994 was issued providing for the procedure to be followed in separating from the service those civil service employees mentioned in CSC Resolution No. 94-1464 (10 March 1994).

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order:

Section 1 . Performance Evaluation System . (a) A performance evaluation shall be regularly conducted by all agencies in accordance with the guidelines prescribed under CSC Memorandum Circular No. 12, s. 1993. The highest ranking officer in charge of personnel management in the agency shall be responsible for the development and administration of the performance evaluation system. In accordance with the provisions of CSC Memorandum Circular No. 12, s. 1993, the performance evaluation shall be done twice a year or once every semester composed of six months ending on June 30 and December 31. However, if the organizational needs of the agency concerned require a shorter or longer period, the minimum evaluation period shall be at least 90 days or three months. No evaluation period shall be longer than one year.

(b) Heads of Departments, Bureaus, Offices and Agencies of the National Government, local government units and government-owned or controlled corporations shall submit a status report of their respective implementation of the performance evaluation system to the Office of the Executive Secretary within thirty (30) days after each evaluation period, which status report shall indicate the following:

i. the number and corresponding percentage of personnel who received each adjectival rating;

ii. a list of those who received an overall adjectival rating of “Outstanding”;

a list of those who received an overall adjectival rating of “Unsatisfactory” (if the unsatisfactory rating is received for the second consecutive time, the same should also be indicated);

a list of those who have received an overall adjectival rating of “Poor”;

v. a list of those who have pending administrative charges and the grounds therefor, the status of said administrative case(s) and the overall adjectival rating of the public official or employee concerned for the past two (2) consecutive evaluation periods; and

vi. for those whose administrative case(s) has/have been terminated, the outcome or resolution thereof and the overall adjectival rating of the public official or employee concerned for the past two (2) consecutive evaluation periods.

Section 2 . Objectivity in the Rating of Public Officials and Employees . All those who are tasked to evaluate their respective personnel shall do the same with utmost objectivity and impartiality with the end view of improving the performance of their respective offices and the overall quality of the civil service. Everyone is directed not to be influenced by the practice of pakikisama in the performance evaluation, which practice has been observed to be prevalent in the conduct of the performance evaluation system in many offices and which is highly detrimental to the civil service.

Section 3 . Separation from the Service or Dropping from the Rolls . The following officers and employees shall be dropped from the rolls of civil servants in accordance with the provisions and procedure prescribed under CSC Resolution No. 94-1464 (10 March 1994) and CSC Memorandum Circular No. 12, s. 1994:

a. Those continuously absent without approved leave for at least thirty (30) calendar days;

b. Those continuously absent without approved leave for less than thirty (30) calendar days and who fail to comply with a return-to-work order;

c. Those given two 2) consecutive unsatisfactory performance ratings;

d. Those rated poor in performance for one evaluation period; and

e. Those declared by the head of office to be physically or mentally unfit for work.

Section 4 . Notice of Separation . The notice of separation shall be signed by the appointing authority or head of office.

Section 5. Effectivity . This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18th day of May 1994, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia