Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 141

ENJOINING GOVERNMENT AGENCIES CONCERNED TO EXTEND OPTIMUM SUPPORT AND ASSISTANCE TO THE PROFESSIONAL REGULATION COMMISSION IN ITS CONDUCT OF THE LICENSURE EXAMINATIONS

The Professional Regulation Commission is charged with the duty to administer Licensure Examinations that are usually held in different examination centers throughout the country. In order to enable the Commission to undertake its task effectively and efficiently, it is desired that:

The Department of Finance, the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, the Department of National Defense, the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the National Bureau of Investigation, the Philippine National Police, and all offices under these agencies and all other departments, agencies and instrumentalities of the government as may be requested by the Professional Regulation Commission, are hereby enjoined to extend optimum support and assistance to the Commission to ensure full security and maintain the integrity and smooth administration of all licensure examinations.

b. The Department of Public Works and Highways, the Department of Transportation and Communications, the Philippine Air Lines, the Philippine National Railways, and the Philippine Information Agency are likewise enjoined to extend optimum support and assistance relative to the transport of examination materials and personnel, the utilization of communication facilities throughout the country, and dissemination of essential information on the holding of examinations, respectively.

c. The Secretary of National Defense, the Commanding General of the Philippine Air Force Security Command, and the Commissioner of Customs are requested to exempt from inspection all classified materials pertinent to the examination.

d All heads of government agencies whose representatives may be designated by the Chairman/Commissioners of the Professional Regulation Commission to compose the Regional Examination Committees and the Local Examination Committees to be established in provincial/city capitals where the examinations will be held, are requested to extend optimum support and assistance in all matters relative to the conduct of the examination.

e. All officers and employees who will be hired by the Professional Regulation Commission to assist in the administration of licensure examinations shall be given appropriate honoraria for services rendered.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D TORRES Executive Secretary

Manila, March 14, 1996

Source: CDAsia