MALACANANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO 2

DIRECTING THE FORMULATION OF THE MEDIUM-TERM PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN (MTPDP) AND THE MEDIUM-TERM PUBLIC INVESTMENT PROGRAM (MTPIP) FOR 1993-1998

WHEREAS, Section 9 of the 1987 Constitution mandates the central planning agency of the government to coordinate the preparation of the development plan;

NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby ordered that:

SECTION 1. The National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) shall coordinate the preparation of the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan (MTPDP) and Medium-Term Public Investment Program (MTPIP) for 1993-1998. The Plan shall be jointly formulated by the executive and legislative branches of government and shall be based on the medium-term plans and programs of all government instrumentalities.

SECTION 2. All government departments, offices and instrumentalities, including local government units (LGUs) shall formulate their respective medium-term plans and public investment programs for the period 1993-1998. The Plan shall contain at least the following basic elements:

1. Development goals and objectives;

2. Strategy and policy framework to attain such goals and objectives;

3. Key measurable targets supportive of broader development objectives and corresponding priority sub-sector public investment activities; and

A descriptive list of priority development programs and projects consistent with the national vision/thrust and attainable within the medium-term plan period.

SECTION 3. The MTPIP shall contain a detailed area-specific Priority Subsector Activities (PSAs) consistent with the Plan. These are generic activities which will guide the allocation of the financial resources.

SECTION 4. The MTPDP and MTPIP shall be submitted to the NEDA Board by December 1992.

SECTION 5. All departments, agencies and government-owned and controlled corporations shall draw inputs from their regional offices considering regional development strategies, physical framework and local needs. The regional development component of various department, agency and corporate plans shall be consistent with the integrated regional development plans.

SECTION 6. All local government units shall likewise consider their respective regional development framework and local needs in the preparation of their own plans.

SECTION 7. All sectors of society, public or private, shall be consulted to the fullest to obtain their opinions and positions on matters related hereto.

SECTION 8. The form and content of and the institutional processes to be followed in the formulation of the plans and programs are contained in the attached guidelines duly approved by the NEDA Board and such guidelines shall be made an integral part of this circular.

SECTION 9. All agencies and instrumentalities of the government are therefore enjoined to follow these guidelines.

SECTION 10. Funds that are necessary for the attainment of the objectives of this Circular shall be provided by the Department of the Budget and Management subject to the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

SECTION 11. This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th day of July in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) PETER D. GARRUCHO, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia