LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1

All Participating Non-Government Organizations (NGOs)

WHEREAS, the number of drug users increased at an alarming rate of about 300% per annum from only 20,000 in 1972 to about 1.7 Million regular users plus 3.5 million casual users nowadays, inspite of the efforts of the Dangerous Drugs Board and the erstwhile Constabulary Anti-Narcotics Unit (CANU) which was succeeded by the PNP Narcotics Group;

WHEREAS, the estimated value of illicit drug trade is now about P250-300 Billion per annum, 95% of which is in methamphetamine hydrochloride or shabu being sourced from China, thereby resulting in billions of dollars worth of much needed and hard-earned foreign exchange going down the drain and even causing 70% of the heinous crimes, further clogging the dockets of the courts and congesting the jails, with additional 20,000 drug cases per annum;

WHEREAS, the drug syndicates are now unlevelling both the economic and political playing fields, by investing their dirty money in businesses that could readily drive out of competition the legitimate businessmen who are investing legitimately-earned and borrowed money; and engaging in narco-politics of bankrolling with drug money the candidacies of many politicians who shall protect them, once installed in government;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 61 was issued on January 15, 1999 creating the National Drug Law Enforcement and Prevention Coordinating Center (NDLEPCC) purposedly to orchestrate the anti-drug efforts of NGAs, LGUs and NGOs at the operational level; and

WHEREAS, results of the local, regional and island group anti-drug summits conducted nationwide from March 12 to April 6, 2001 invariably point to the necessity of enhancing further the orchestration of and doing much more in the anti-drug campaign with a high sense of urgency, and avoid what is now going on in Columbia.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, do hereby order the following:

1.That all NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs shall implement the attached National Anti-Drug Program of Action which forms as an integral part of this issuance and hereinafter referred to as NADPA, for the attainment of a drug-free Philippines in 2010;

2. That the roles of the offices of primary responsibility (OPRs) are as follows:

a) Dangerous Drugs Board (DDB) shall be the policy-making body and regulatory agency on dangerous drugs pursuant to RA 6425;

b) National Drug Law Enforcement and Prevention Coordinating (DEP) Center shall orchestrate and consolidate at the operational level, the drug law enforcement and prevention effort of NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs from national down to barangay level pursuant to EO 61; and

c) Philippine National Police (PNP) is the premier and overall drug law enforcement and prevention operating arm of the government nationwide.

3. That the different NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs shall be clustered into Special Task Groups to formulate and execute implementing plans to the NADPA as follows:

a) PNP to lead in the prevention and control of the production of marijuana, ophedra, coca, opium poppy, etc. with the support of other NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGAs;

b) PNP shall lead in the prevention and control of processing dangerous drugs, precursors and the like; with the support of other NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGAs;

c) PNP shall lead in the prevention and control of drug trafficking by land, air and water, with the support of other NGAs, LGUs and participating NGOs;

d) Bureau of Customs (BUCUS) shall lead in the prevention and control of drug trafficking through airport and seaport, and via mails and parcels; with the support of other NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs;

e) DDB shall lead in the prevention and control of the diversion of legit production, precursor and essential chemicals, with the support of other NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs;

f) Anti-Money Laundering Task Force (AMLTF) shall lead in the prevention and control of financing link of the drug chain, with the support of other NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs;

g) PNP shall lead in the prevention and control of Retailing link of the drug chain with the support of other NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs;

h) DDB shall lead in the implementation of the Primary Prevention Approach for Non-users with the support of other NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs;

i) Department of Health (DOH) shall lead in the prevention and control of Secondary Prevention for drug experimenters; with the support of other NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs;

j) DOH shall lead in the implementation of the Tertiary Approach for drug dependents, with the support of other NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs;

k) Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) shall lead in the implementation of the projects and activities under the Development/Livelihood Program; with the support of other NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs;

l) Department of Education, Culture and Sports (DECS) shall lead the implementation of the projects and activities under the Education Program, with the support of other NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs;

m) Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) shall lead the implementation of the project and activities under the Family Solidarity/Development Program, with the support of other NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs;

n) Civil Service Commission (CSC) shall lead the implementation of the projects and activities under the Good Government Program, with the support of other NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs;

o) Department of Justice (DOJ) shall lead the implementation of the projects and activities under the Legal Reforms Program, with the support of other NGAs, LGUs and participating NGOs;

p) NAPOLCOM Technical Committee on CPCJS shall formulate policies under the Enhancement/Capability Build up of CJS to be implemented by Institutions/NGAs/LGUs/GOCCs concerned; and

q) Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) shall lead the implementation of projects and activities under the International Cooperation Program.

4. That in the implementation of the NADPA, all NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs shall be guided by the following coordinating instructions:

a) Implementation of Primary Prevention Approach for non-drug users shall be a shared responsibility of all NGAs, LGUs and GOCCs with DDB/DEP Center/PNP Nargrp for their respective personnel and constituencies. In this connection, all NGAs and GOCCs are enjoined/authorized to appropriate and utilize two (2%) of their respective budgets for this purpose;

b) OPRs, designated Lead Agencies and all Provincial/Chartered City LGUs shall formulate their respective (IMPLANs) to the NADPA to be submitted to DEP Center, within 60 days from receipt hereof;

c) Lead agencies shall be the OPRs in the formulation, signing and implementation of MOAs/MOUs/Joint SOPs (as appropriate/warranted) for their respective Clustered/Special Task Groups;

d) All Local Chief Executives and ADAC Chairpersons and members must undergo Anti-Drug training/seminar to be conducted by DDB, DEP and/or PNP NARGrp NTL 30 days from assumption of office;

e) Quarterly progress reports and annual accomplishment report (to include budget/expenditure) by OPRs, Lead Agencies and Provincial/Chartered City LGUs shall be submitted to DEP Center for consolidation and subsequent submission to the Office of the President;

f) DDB and DEP Center shall jointly evaluate the cost effectiveness and performance of all participating NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and NGOs in the Anti-Drug Campaign every semester, results thereof shall be submitted to the Office of the President;

g) Interagency/LGU/GOCC/NGO, vertical and/or lateral coordination is authorized/encouraged;

h) All NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs shall utilize their respective personnel, equipment, funds and supplies. To optimize utilization thereof, conduct of joint operations, jibed missions, sharing of excess capacity and slack time, and the like are encouraged;

i) Collectively, we should have unity, solidarity and teamwork, while individually we should have the commitment to attain a drug-free Philippines in 2010.

5. This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

National Anti-Drug Program of Action

For a Drug-free Philippines by 2010

1. REFERENCES:

a) UN Political Declaration, Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction and Measures to Enhance International Cooperation to Counter the World Drug Problem of 1998;

b) ASEAN and China Cooperative Operations in Response to Dangerous Drugs (ACCORD) Plan of Action of 2000.

c) Republic Act 6425 (Dangerous Drugs Law of 1972), as amended;

d) Executive Order No. 61 Creating the National Drug Law Enforcement and Prevention Coordinating Center;

e) List of NGAs, GOCCs, and acronyms/abbreviations, and their meaning ( Annex “A” )

2. PURPOSE

This Letter of Instructions (LOI) seeks to mobilize and bring to bear the entire Government machinery and the Civil Society in the all-out and sustained anti-drug campaign nationwide towards the attainment of a drug-free Philippines in 2010.

3. SITUATION

a . The Drug Menace — Annex “B”

In 1972, there were only 20,000 drug users abusing marijuana in Metro-Manila. Nowadays (after 29 years), there are about 1.7 million users, mostly (95%) abusing Methamphetamine Hydrochloride (shabu) nationwide. The drug menace has become Public Enemy No 1 of the entire Filipino People as well as the No 1 Threat to the National Security of our country. (Please read Annex “B” for more details)

b . The Drug Chain — Annex “C”

To have a good understanding of and a comprehensive framework for analyzing the nature and dynamics of the drug menace, it should be thought of and viewed as the “Drug Chain”. It is composed of six links, namely: Production, Processing, Trafficking, Financing, Retailing and Consumption. Each link is made up of several nefarious activities and concomitant problems spread over vast areas. (Please see Annex “C” for a detailed presentation)

c . Diagnosis of the Drug Problem — Annexes “D” and “E”

The extremely lucrative profit is the motive behind the illicit drug trade, which is subject to the law of supply and demand. (Please refer to Annex “C” for the explanation) . The drug crime is abetted/exacerbated further by certain risk factors or root-causes in the environment, such as poverty, ignorance, lost family values, etc. (Please go over Annex “E” for a comprehensive diagram)

d . Enemy Forces — Annexes “F” and “G”

The Regional Anti-Drug Summits (RADS) conducted nationwide on March 12–31, 2001 starting from the Barangay, then municipal/city, provincial, all the way to the regional level, provided us with the latest assessment of the nature and magnitude of the drug problem in the country (Ref 1-f above). The results thereof will serve as the baseline data in the formulation as well as the subsequent evaluation of this National Anti-Drug Program of Action (NADPA) which is just in accordance with the UN Guiding Principles of 1998 (Ref 1-a above). The consolidated Categorization of Barangays as to the degree of drug-affectation; and the Watch List of Drug Syndicates and Personalities are appended herewith as Annexes “F” and “G” respectively.

4. HOLISTIC ANTI-DRUG STRATEGY/IDEOLOGY

a. Holistic National Drug Solution — Annexes “H”, “I” & “J”

The Center of Gravity of the drug problem is the profit motive, which should be eliminated, by reducing the profit from illicit drug trade to zero. Applying the balanced combination of Supply Reduction and Demand Reduction, as shown in Annex “H”, will do this. To do so, package of prevention and control measures shall be instituted against Production, Processing, Trafficking, Financing, Retailing and Consumption of the Drug Chain, as indicated in Annex “I”. At the same time, a package of Development and Reform Programs shall be undertaken to address and solve the risk factors/root causes/deficiencies in the environment, as indicated in Annex “J”.

b. Anti-Drug Ideology — Annex “K”

To remedy the “ningas-cogon” tendency and crab mentality among the implementors/participants in the anti-drug campaign, the Holistic Anti-Drug Strategy (HADS) shall be composed/structured in the manner of an anti-drug ideology. (Please see Annex “K” for a concise explanation)

c. The Holistic Anti-Drug Strategy

A. Vision 2010 (Concept of Alternative Future)

A Drug-free Philippines!

B. National Objectives

1. To reduce to zero or at least minimize the Profits derived from illicit drug activities thru Supply Reduction and Demand Reduction, in order to fulfill the Freedom from Fear for our people;

2. To address and eradicate or alleviate the Breeding Grounds/risk factors in the environment/social milieu that abet/exacerbate the drug problem, in order to fulfill the Freedom from Want for our people and thereby preempt them from committing or becoming victims of drug-related crimes; and

3. To motivationally enlighten, empower and mobilize the people to participate in and support the Criminal Justice System and Government machinery in attaining the two aforementioned objectives, so that Participatory Democracy shall be institutionalized in our society.

C. Strategic Concepts — Annexes “L”, “M”, “N” & “O”

It is a three-pronged strategy, each prong assigned to overcome its targeted obstacle and accomplish its allocated objective (Please refer to Annex “L”)

1 st Prong: Supply/Demand Reduction Campaign

It consists of Production, Processing, Trafficking, Financing, Retailing, and Consumption prevention/control measures to reduce profit to zero and thereby accomplish the first national objective.

2 nd Prong: Development/Reform Package of Programs (Drug Pre-emption Campaign)

It encompasses Education, Good Government, Development/Industrialization, Moral/Values/Spiritual Formation and Legal Reform Programs to address/solve the risk factors/deficiencies in the environment and thereby attains the second national objective.

3 rd Prong: People Empowerment Campaign

Its components include Propaganda, Organizational, Political, Enforcement and Ideological Drives to catalyze into action the people and eliminate the crisis of citizenship, and thereby realize the third national objective. (Please see Annex “M”) . The operational methodology for People Empowerment consists of Motivational Enlightenment, Organization and Mobilization (Annex “N”). The ultimate goal is to be able to mobilize People Power III against the drug menace nation-wide, as envisioned in Annex “O”.

C. BROAD FORCE IMPLICATIONS

To properly operationalize/implement the preceding Strategic Concepts, the Broad Force Implications shall consist of the following:

1) Holistic Leadership — Annex “P” and “Q”

It shall be exercised through the Combined Anti-Drug and Development Councils (CADDECs) from the national down to the barangay levels (Annex “P” — Organizational Chart). In turn, the sub-national CADDECs shall formulate implementing plans to and oversee/orchestrate the implementation of the National Anti-Drug Program of Action down to the barangay level. (The composition of National CADDEC is shown in Annex “Q”)

2) Criminal Justice System

Implementor of the Drug Supply and Demand Reduction Campaign, with the support of NGAs, LGUs, NGOs and the mobilized sectors of the society.

3) NGAs, LGUs, NGOs , GOCCs & Mobilized Sectors of Civil Society — Annex “R”

Implementors of the Development/Reform Package of Programs (Drug Pre-emption Campaign) orchestrated through the Multi-Agency Development Task Forces (MADTAFs) (See Annex “R” for its Organizational Chart) .

4) CITIZENRY

Force multipliers of the Criminal Justice System, NGAs, GOCCs, and LGUs (through People Empowerment Campaign), in both Supply/Demand Reduction Campaign and Development/Reform Package of Programs.

5. MISSION AND OBJECTIVES

The entire Government machinery, in partnership with the Civil Society and through International Cooperation, shall conduct an all-out and sustained anti-drug campaign nationwide, so as to attain a drug-free Philippines in 2010.

To accomplish this mission, the following objectives are set forth:

a) To dismantle/neutralize all drug syndicates, producers, traffickers, pushers and their cohorts in the police/military/government offices;

b) To prevent all non-users from being initiated to drug use through education and information;

c) To intervene and convert all drug experimenters/casual users to non-users;

d) To treat, rehabilitate and empower drug dependents to become drug-resistant and productive members of the society;

e) To strengthen legal research and work for legal reforms, so as to provide more legal weapons that can be wielded in the anti-drugs campaign;

f) To empower all barangays as anti-drug self-policing communities;

g) To tap and mobilize all NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and NGOs for greater community participation in the anti-drug campaign nationwide;

h) To motivationally enlighten, organize, mobilize and bring People Power to bear against the drug menace nationwide; and

i) To enhance international cooperation in the global campaign against dangerous drugs.

6. Implementation

a. Presidential Guidance

“We must encourage the involvement of the different sectors of our society in the process of governance and their enlightened participation in addressing our collective concerns . . . like dangerous drugs”.

– PGMA, 02 Feb 2001

b. Concept of Operations

Based on the Presidential guidance and the HADS above, the anti-drug campaign shall consist of the following:

A. Drug Supply Reduction Drive

The Criminal Justice System shall endeavor to reduce the supply of the drug chain to the barest minimum level possible. This is to simultaneously drive the prices of drugs skyrocketing high and create acute shortage of the contraband to death-knell level. The drug supply reduction drive involves the five (5) pillars of the Criminal Justice System — law enforcement, prosecution, courts, correction, and community; the main objective of which is to neutralize sources of illegal drugs, from street-level pushers to big time drug lords and traffickers. This involves the arrest of drug personalities, seizure of illegal drugs, filing of cases, and prosecution of arrested personalities. Following measures shall be implemented:

1. Production Control/Prevention Measures

a. Crop eradication operations (manual and aerial)

b. Confiscation/forfeiture of plantation lands;

c. Investigation and prosecution of owners, planters, guards, etc;

d. Interdiction operations to stop diversion of licit production by land, sea and air, including importation/smuggling; and

e. Others

2. Processing Control/Prevention Measures

a. Aggressive police search and destroy operations to neutralize secret laboratories;

b. Strict enforcement of regulations and close monitoring of processing chemicals and refining supplies to minimize diversion of licit precursor chemicals;

c. Investigation and prosecution of owners, workers, suppliers, buyers, guards, etc in this drug link; and

d. Others

3. Trafficking Control/Prevention Measures

a. Strict Customs operations to intercept drug shipments in airports and seaports;

b. Border and coastal patrol operations;

c. Coastal, maritime and small island watch;

d. Airport security to prevent pilferage/landing;

e. Search and seizure operations especially with the use of X-ray and ion detector machines, K-9 and the like;

f. Bilateral and Multilateral cooperation;

g. Investigation and prosecution of traffickers, couriers, and cohorts;

h. Others

4. Financing Control/Prevention Measures

a. Enactment of Anti-Money Laundering Law;

b. International/bilateral cooperation to identify, investigate, and institute forfeiture proceedings against money laundering activities of drug financiers;

c. Investigation and prosecution of Drug Syndicate Hierarchy (DSH) such as drug lords and financiers for tax evasion; and

d. Others

5. Retailing (Pushing) Control/Prevention Measures

a. Buy-bust operations;

b. Patrol/Police visibility operations

c. Check point operations;

d. Saturation drives;

e. Raids of drug dens;

f. Arrest, investigation, and prosecution of pushers, as may be warranted;

g. Police-Community Cooperation; and

h. Others

B. DRUG DEMAND REDUCTION DRIVE

The NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs shall exert all-out and sustained efforts to reduce, if not eradicate, the demand side of the drug chain. This effort concentrates on anti-drug advocacy along the lines of public information, preventive education, intervention, and treatment and rehabilitation. This drive shall be carried out by using all three approaches, targeting all the three main groups as follows:

1. Primary Prevention Approach for Non-Users

Primary prevention attempts to discourage the initiation of drug use, especially by children and adolescents. It tries to keep them from “falling into the drug river”. A sequence of mutually reinforcing measures is encompassed by primary prevention. These measures and their respective activities are the following:

a. Public Awareness

• Public service announcement

• Advertisements

• Press conferences

• Press materials

• Public forums

b. Public Education

• In-depth coverage on TV and radio

• Newspaper features

• Parent mobilization and education

• School curricula

• Symposiums for key influences like parents, teachers, etc.

c. Attitude and Behavioral Change/Reinforcement

• Parenting skills training

• Peer counseling

• Resistance skills training

• Alternatives to drug abuse

d. Social/Public Action

• Neighborhood improvement

• School renovation

• Job creation

• Drug-free zones

• Police patrol and protection

2. Secondary Prevention Approach for “Experimenters” and Casual Drug Users

Secondary prevention (intervention) discourages the escalation of drug consumption by occasional or experimental users and encourages them to return to non-use. It tries to get them “out of the drug river” before too much damage is done — and then keep them out. In addition to the measures listed under primary prevention, casual users may need one-on-one assistance, including identification and referral services and short-term counseling. Increased attention must be given to pregnant women who may put their unborn children at risk not only of fetal drug effects, but also of AIDS. Successful intervention reduces the prevalence of drug abuse. The measures and their respective activities are as follows:

a. Outreach Identification and Referral

• Community-based information and referral networks

• Employee assistance programs

• Drug-related arrests

• Emergency rooms

• Health clinics

• Social service agencies

b. Intervention

• Hotlines

• Crisis counseling

• Short-term counseling

• Emergency rooms

• Health clinics

3. Tertiary Preventive Approach for Addicts and Recovering Persons

Tertiary prevention provides treatment and aftercare or rehabilitation to help people get off and stay off drugs. It tries to save the casualties of drug use, to revive them, and then help them stay “out of the drug river”. Addicted and recovering people may profit from the kinds of measures listed under primary and secondary prevention, but typically will also need intense and extended one-on-one services, as well as long-term support. Both the AIDS epidemic and the mounting numbers of children suffering from intra-uterine drug exposure call for intensified prevention activities at the tertiary stage. Successful treatment and rehabilitation reduces the prevalence of drug abuse. The measures and their respective activities are as follows:

a. Detoxification

• Inpatient

• Outpatient

• “Social” detox

b. Chemically-Assisted or Drug-free

• Outpatient

• Inpatient

• Short-term residential

• Long-term residential

c. Relapse Resistance

• Halfway houses

• Aftercare programs

• Support groups (e.g. Alcoholics Anonymous and Narcotics Anonymous)

(This approach shall entail the construction/expansion and/or preparation of many Treatment/Rehabilitation Centers)

It is most important to emphasize that a single approach can never do the full prevention job. The goal is to combine selected approaches in the most powerful sequence possible; to address as many risk groups as the prevention budget will allow; to include a range of key settings in the program; and to engage powerful influencers from all segments in these efforts.

C. DEVELOPMENT/REFORM PROGRAMS

The NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and participating NGOs shall address/solve, or at least minimize, the risk factors/deficiencies (breeding grounds) abetting/exacerbating the drug problem by undertaking the following:

1) Development/Livelihood Program

a) Livelihood project for pushers and rehabilitated drug patients;

b) Skills training and job placement for the same;

c) Alternative development (new/legit crops) for planters/owners of plantation land;

d) Self-employment assistance project;

e) etc.

2) Education Program

a) Drug Patient Education

b) Out-of-school Youth Education

c) Adult Education

d) etc.

3) Family Solidarity/Development Program

a) Parenting Skill Training

b) Spiritual/Value Formation

c) Citizenship Training

d) Boys/Girls Scouting

e) etc.

4) Good Government Program

a) Professionalization/Moral Recovery Program for Law Enforcers

b) Upgrading of ethical/moral standards for civil officials

c) CJS Watch/Operation “No Bribe”

d) etc.

5. Legal Reforms

a) Enactment of Anti-Money Laundering Law;

b) Amendment of RA 6425;

c) Creation/Appointment of more special drug courts/prosecutors

d) Amendment/relaxing of Bank Secrecy Law;

e) etc.

6) Enhancement/Capability Build-up of CJS

a) Law Enforcer Pillar

b) Prosecution Pillar

c) Courts Pillar

d) Corrections Pillar

e) Community Pillar

D. International Cooperation

This thrust shall enable our Government to run after/neutralize transnational drug syndicates like the 14K and Bamboo Gang; as well as plug/minimize drug trafficking to and from the Philippines. Exchange of information and relevant technologies that could be used in the Anti-Drugs Campaign could also be accessed through this initiative. Multilateral, regional, sub-regional and bilateral assistance and cooperation could be availed of in law enforcement, prosecution and judicial matters through this line of communication. As a member of the UN, global Drug Control policies and measures are tapped through this linkage. Our anti-drug capability is also built-up via this avenue through training, funding and other forms of assistance.

E.HARNESSING PEOPLE POWER VS DRUGS

1) Operation “Private Eye” — Annex “S”

People Power shall be harnessed to enhance the intelligence and counterintelligence efforts of the Anti-Drug Campaign through the implementation of “Operation Private Eye”. The citizenry shall serve as the “eyes and ears” of the Law Enforcement Pillar by collecting and reporting/submitting information/leads/evidence against Drug Syndicate Hierarchy (DSH) personalities, Drug chain activities and instrumentalities, and their cohorts in the police/military/government offices. Monetary rewards shall be offered and given to anyone who could provide such info/leads/evidence/etc in such a manner that his identity shall remain anonymous (Please see Annex “S” for more details) .

2. Freedom Operations Against Drugs (KILL Drugs) — Annex “T”

An apolitical people power movement that shall motivationally enlighten, organize, mobilize and bring people power to bear in the Anti-Drug Campaign. It shall actively participate in and support the drug law enforcement and prevention efforts of the NDEP Center, NGAs, GOCCs and LGUs as their force multipliers for a more effective and people-powered anti-drug campaign nationwide. Its ultimate objective is the realization of People Power to bear against dangerous drugs nationwide. (Please read flyer in Annex “R”)

F. OPERATIONS vs DRUG SYNDICATE HIERARCHIES (DSH)

Anti-DSH Operations shall be conducted in all regions nationwide, targeting the Drug Lords, Traffickers, Transnational Drug syndicates, top cohorts from the police/military/government offices and others above/excluding the street-level drug pushers. Tracker Composite Teams (TCTs) from the PNP, NBI, AFP and other law enforcement agencies shall be organized and deployed to track down and follow up their respective assigned Drug Syndicates.

G. QUICK OPERATIONS — Annex “U”

To clear, consolidate and empower drug-affected barangays to become self-policing communities, special community operations shall be conducted to make a target barangay become a Barangay Against Narcotic Abusers and Traffickers (BANAT). Barangays that have been subjected to BANAT Operations and successfully made into anti-drug self-policing communities shall be turned over to the Barangay Officials (BADAC). (Please read Annex “S” for more details)

c. Tasking

A. Offices Primarily Responsible (OPRs)

1) Dangerous Drugs Board (DDB)

a) Promulgate rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of R.A. 6425, as amended, including the manner of safekeeping, disposition, burning or condemnation of dangerous drugs under its charge and custody, and prescribe administrative remedies or sanctions for violations of such rules and regulations;

b) Take charge and custody of all dangerous drugs seized, confiscated and/or surrendered by any national, provincial or local law enforcement agency, if no longer needed for purposes of evidence in court;

c) Authorize pursuant to provisions of RA 6425, as amended, the importation, distribution, manufacture, production, compounding, prescription, dispensing and sale of and other lawful acts in connection with, dangerous drugs of such kind and quantity/quantities to be imported, manufactured and held in stock at any given time by an authorized importer, manufacturer, distributor of dangerous drugs and precursor chemicals, through issuance of S-licenses, permits and certifications. However, issuances of S-licenses in Regions are delegated to BFAD/DOH personnel who are deputized by the Board as Drug Relation Officers.

d) Draw up in consultation and coordination with agencies involved in drugs control, treatment and rehabilitation, a national treatment and rehabilitation plan/program for drug dependents, to be carried out by both public and private treatment and rehabilitation center (TRCs).

e) Inspect, accredit, and monitor, assist and supervise government and private TRCs, and to prescribe and promulgate rules and regulations that will govern such centers.

f) Receive, gather, collect, analyze, and evaluate all information on the importation, exportation, production, manufacture, sale stocks and the estimated need for dangerous drugs, and seizures/apprehensions reports from any instrumentality or agency of the Government or any private persons or enterprises dealing in or engaged in activities having to do with dangerous drugs and precursor/essential chemicals (PECs), and from any drug law enforcement agency who effected any seizure or arrest involving dangerous drugs and PECs.

g) Conduct drug profiling and upgrade the capability of its Drug Profiling Laboratory for this purpose.

2) National Drug Law Enforcement and Prevention Coordinating Center (DEP Center)

a) Orchestrate and consolidate the drug law enforcement and prevention efforts of national government agencies, local government units, government owned/controlled corporations and non-government organizations to have a more effective anti-illegal drug campaign.

b) Shall have the authority to coordinate, oversee, follow up, monitor and evaluate the anti-drug activities of all NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs, and participating NGOs in the implementation of this National Anti-Drug Program of Action.

c) Approve, support and monitor the implementation of case operation plans against Levels 1 and 2 drug traffickers, undercover operations, controlled deliveries, conspiracy investigations, and investigations involving money laundering, chemical diversion and clandestine laboratories; including the activation and deployment of interagency Tracker Composite Teams (TCTs) in para 6-b-F above.

d) OPR for the implementation of Operation “Private Eye” and supervision/steering of KILL-Droga projects and activities.

3) PNP

a) Conduct Anti-DSH Operations, using NARG vs. drug syndicates operating in two or more regions and the PNP RAIDTFs (Regional Anti-Illegal Drugs Task Force) vs. drug syndicates operating in only one region;

b) Prevent/control Drug Retailing through the conduct of buy-bust operations, raids of drug dens, patrol/police visibility operations, saturations drives, arrest/investigation/prosecution of pushers etc utilizing the RAIDTFs and Drug Enforcement Units;

c) Conduct case operations/prepare case operations plans against drug syndicates and levels 1 and 2 personalities through NARG, in close coordination with DEP Center;

d) Provide intelligence regarding drug syndicates and personalities as well as location of marijuana production areas to the DEP Center;

e) Conduct BANAT Operations to clear and convert drug-affected barangays into anti-drug self-policing communities, in tandem with the MADTAF Action Teams (MATs) of NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs and/or NGOs;

f) Administer and manage the PNP Rehab Center in Bicutan, Taguig, Metro Manila through NARG; in coordination with DDB and DEP Center; and

g) Others in partnership/close collaborations with other NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs, and/or NGOs.

C. Clustered/Special Task Groups

1. Prevention/Control of Production (Plantations) — Implement the measures in para 6.b.A.1) above.

PNP-Lead Agency

Support

2. Prevention/Control of Processing (Secret Labs) — Implement the measures in para 6.b.A.2) above.

PNP-Lead Agency

Support

3. Prevention/Control of Trafficking — Implement the measures in para 6.b.A.3) above.

a) On Land:

PNP-Lead Agency

Support

b) At Sea/Coastal Area/Small Islands

PNP-Lead Agency

Support

DOTC (PCG)

LGUs

Brgy Tanods

c) By Air:

PNP-Lead Agency

Support

DOTC (ATO)

LGUs

d) Through Airport/Seaport:

BUCUS-Lead Agency (upgrade its technical capability to detect drugs hidden in cargos/containerized vans)

Support

Airport Mgmt

PCG

BPI

Quarantine

DEP Center

e) Via Mails/Parcels:

BUCUS-Lead Agency

Support

Phil. Post

Forwarding Companies

4) Prevention/Control of Diversion of Precursors/Legit Production — Implement the measurers in para 6.b.A.1 and 2) above.

DDB-Lead Agency

Support

DEP Center

DENR (FMB)

BUCUS

NGOs

5) Prevention/Control of Financing — Implement the measures in para 6.b.a.4) above

Anti-Money Laundering Task Force-Lead Agency

6) Prevention/Control of Retailing — Implement the measures in para 6.b.A.5) above.

PNP-Lead Agency

Support

BJMP

Gov’t/Coy Security Guards

7) Primary Prevention for Non-users — Implement the measures and activities in para 6.b.B.1) above

DDB-Lead Support

Support

8.) Secondary Prevention (intervention) for Experimenters — Implement the measures and activities in para 6.b.8.2) above.

DOH-Lead Agency

Support

9) Tertiary/Prevention (Treatment and Rehabilitation) — Implement the measures and activities in para 6.b.c.1) above.

DOH-Lead Agency

Support

DDB

DSWD

DPWH

DOJ (NPS)

DEP Center

PNP

NBI

LGUs

NGOs

Other NGAs

10) Development/Livelihood Program — Undertake the projects and activities in para 6.b.C.1) above.

DOLE-Lead Agency

Support

11) Education Program — Undertake the projects and activities in para 6.b.C.2) above.

DECS-Lead Agency

Support

DSWD                                   PNP                                       Academe

AFP (CRS/ALPs)                LGUs                                     DEP Center

CHED                                     NGOs                                    GOCCs

TESDA                                   Other NGAs

12) Family Solidarity/Development Program — Undertake the projects and activities in para 6.b.C.3) above.

DSWD-Lead Agency

Support

CHED                                     DECS                                      BSP/GSP              Interfaith

PTAs                                      LGUs                                     NGOs                    Other NGAs

13) Good Government Program — Undertake the project and activities in para 6.b.C.4) above.

CSC-Lead Agency

Support

NAPOLCOM                         PPSC                                      DEP Center

DILG (LGA)                          OESPA                                  LGUs

NGOs                                     GOCCs                                  Other NGAs

14) Legal Reforms

DOJ-Lead Agency

Support

NPS                                        DDB                                       BFAD

PNP                                       DEP Center                         BUCUS

NBI                                         UP Law Center                  EMB

Other NGAs/NGOs         Parole & Probation Office

15) Enhancement/Capability Build-up of CJS — Formulate the projects and activities in para 6.b.C.6) above to be implemented by Institutions/NGAs concerned.

NAPOLCOM Tech Com on CPCJS-Lead Agency

Support

PNP                                       NBI                                         DDB

NPS                                        BJMP                                     DEP Center

NGOs                                    Parole & Probation Office

15) International Cooperation

DFA-Lead Agency

Support

DDB                                       DEP Center                         Foreign Drug Agency Liaison Officers

PNP                                       AFP                                        Other NGOs

PCTC                                      Other NGAs                       KILL Droga

7. Coordinating Instructions

a) Implementation of Primary Prevention Approach for non-drug users shall be a shared responsibility of all NGAs and LGUs with DDB/NDEP Center/PNP NARG for their respective personnel and constituencies. In this connection, all NGAs and GOCCs are enjoined/authorized to appropriate and utilize two percent (2%) of their respective budget for this purpose;

b) OPRs, designated Lead Agencies and all Provincial/Chartered City LGUs shall formulate their respective Implementing Plans (IMPLANs) to the NADPA to be submitted to NDEP Center, within 60 days from receipt hereof; (Annexes “V” & “W” — Formats for LGUs {IMPLANS of lower/component LGUs shall be based on the Provincial/Chartered City Implans.}

c) Lead agencies shall be the OPRs in the formulation, signing and implementation of MOAs/MOUs/Joint SOPs (as appropriate/warranted) for their respective Clustered/Special Task Groups;

d) All Local Chief Executives and ADAC Chairpersons and members must undergo Anti-Drug training/seminar to be conducted by DDB, NDEP and/or PNP NAR Grp NLT 30 days from assumption of office. (Annex “X” — Program of Instruction)

e) Quarterly progress reports and annual accomplishment report (to include budget/expenditure) by OPRs, Lead Agencies and Provincial/Chartered City LGUs shall be submitted to NDEP Center for consolidation and subsequent submission to the Office of the President. {Reports of Prov’l/Chartered City LGUs shall embody/incorporate the reports of their lower component LGUs down to barangay level} (Annex “Y” — Report Form for LGUs) ;

f) DDB and NDEP Center shall jointly evaluate the cost effectiveness and performance of all participating NGAs, LGUs and NGOs in the Anti-Drug Campaign every semester; results thereof shall be submitted to the Office of the President. (Results thereof shall form part of the bases for selecting the “Best Performing LGUs in the Anti-Drug Campaign” pursuant to EO No. 249)

g) Inter-agency/LGU/GOCC/NGO, vertical and/or lateral coordination is authorized/encouraged.

h) All NGAs, LGUs, GOCCs, and participating NGOs shall utilize their respective personnel, equipment, funds and supplies. To optimize utilization thereof, conduct of joint operations, jibed missions, sharing of excess capacity and slack time, and the like are encouraged.

i) Collectively, we should have unity, solidarity and teamwork, while individually we should have the commitment (Annex “Z”) to attain a drug-free Philippines in 2010.