MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 28

DIRECTING THE METROPOLITAN TRANSPORTATION SERVICE (METRAN) TO FURNISH TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES TO BUREAUS AND OFFICES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT

For the purpose of carrying into effect section 15 of Republic Act No. 80 which prohibits the use of any appropriation therein authorized for the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles, except as specifically enumerated, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby direct that the Metropolitan Transportation Service (METRAN) shall hereafter furnish motor transportation service to all bureaus and offices of the National Government on hire or rental basis in accordance with the following schedule of rates:

Leases by the week shall be based on a charge of 12-hour use daily less 30 per cent discount.

For provincial trips—an additional P1 per hour.

Hereafter, any bureau, or office desiring motor transportation shall make the necessary requisition therefore from the Metropolitan Transport Service (METRAN). Such transportation shall be available solely for official purposes. Official transportation shall not be withheld for longer than the time of actual need. Except as may expressly be authorized by the President upon recommendation of the corresponding Head of Department, no official transportation shall be assigned for the exclusive use of any office or official. Calls for transportation shall be recorded on a travel order form which shall show the inclusive hours of travel, the places visited, and the purposes of the trips made.

All motor vehicles of the Government held or operated by the different departments, bureaus and offices, including their accessories, spare parts, existing stocks of fuels and lubricants, except the vehicles assigned for the use of the officials and personnel specified in section 15 of Republic Act No. 80, shall be transferred to the Metropolitan Transportation Service (METRAN)  which shall pay the determined depreciated cost of such motor vehicles in installments within a  period not exceeding three years.

For the purpose of appraising the reasonable cost at which said motor vehicles shall be transferred to the Metropolitan Transportation Service (METRAN), there is hereby created a committee composed of the Undersecretary of Public Works and Communications as chairman, and the General Manager of the Metropolitan Transportation Service (METRAN) and a representative of the Auditor General as members. The committee shall use as basis in their appraisal the actual net cost as which the motor vehicle  was purchase from the Government Procurement Commission or elsewhere, deducting there from reasonable depreciation charges on account of the use to which the  motor vehicle had or might have been subjected.

The Metropolitan Transportation Service (METRAN) shall employ all drivers, chauffeurs, chauffeur-mechanics, and motorcycle drivers occupying positions carried in Commonwealth Act No. 723 as re-enacted in Republic Act No. 1, but eliminated in Republic Act No.80.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done at the City of Manila, this 22 nd day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 127]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.