MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 71

SAVING UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS VALIDLY EXISTING CONCESSIONS OR LICENSES TO CUT TIMBER WITHIN THE AREA RESERVED UNDER PROCLAMATION NO. 29 FROM THE OPERATION THEREOF

WHEREAS, the following parcel of land situated in the municipalities of Butuan and Buenavista and municipal districts of Las Nieves, Remedios, Milagros, Concordia, Esperanza, Guadalupe, Santa Ines, San Luis, Mampinsahan, Verdu, Maygatasan and Nuevo Sibagat, Province of Agusan, to wit:

Beginning at point 1, which is the mouth of Baug River, which is approximately 8,000 meters N. 17deg. W. from BLIM No, 1 Butuan, Agusan; thence following Baug River upstream in a general northeasterly direction about 1,300 meters to point 2 which is the junction of Baug and Bansa Rivers; thence following Bansa, Maycasina, Tagibo and Pianing Rivers upstream in a general southeasterly then easterly direction about 23,000 meters to point 3 which is the source of Pianing River; thence S. 45deg. E. about 5,800 meters to point 4 at Uaua River; thence S. 17deg. 30’ E. about 27,200 meters to point 5 which is the source of Labao River; thence following Labao River downstream in a general southwesterly direction about 19,000 meters to point 6 which is the junction of Labao and Agusan Rivers; thence following Agusan River upstream in a general southeasterly direction about 28,500 meters to point 7 which is the junction of Agusan and Maasam Rivers; thence following Maasam River upstream in a general southwesterly direction about 21,000 meters to point 8 at the same Maasam River; thence N. 30deg. W. about 23,200 meters to point 9 which is the junction of Ojot River and Agsab Creek: thence in a northerly direction about 7,500 meters to point 10 which is the source of Lingayao River; thence following Lingayao River downstream in a general northeasterly direction about 12,800 meters to point 11 at the same Lingayao River; thence in a northerly direction to point 12 which is the source of Danapa Creek; thence following Danapa Creek downstream in a northeasterly direction about 3,500 meters to point 13 which is the junction of Danapa Creek with Agusan River; thence following the Agusan River downstream in a general northerly direction about 6,300 meters to point 14 which is the junction of Agusan and Bugabus Rivers; thence following Bugabus River and Caliitan Creek upstream in a northwesterly then southwesterly direction about 27,000 meters to point 15 which is the source of Caliitan Creek; thence in a northeasterly direction to point 16 which is the source of Tamutao River; thence following Tamutao and Buenavista Rivers downstream in a northeasterly direction about 17,500 meters to point 17 which is the mouth of the Buenavista river; thence following the coast line in an east-northeasterly direction about 14,800 meters to point 1, the point of beginning, containing an approximate area of 165,000 hectares.

has been reserved, under Proclamation No. 29, dated July 29, 1947, as “Special Forest for Government Lumber Production Purposes” to be undertaken by the National Development Company;

WHEREAS, there are concessions or licenses to cut timber within the area hereinabove validly existing as of July 1, 1947;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order that the reservation established under Proclamation No. 29 shall not operate to invalidate any concession or license to cut timber within the area covered by the reservation validly existing as of July 1, 1947: Provided, That if upon expiration of such concession or license subsequent to July 1, 1947, the licensee or concessionaire shall have failed as of the date of the expiration of the said license or concession to meet all the requirements and obligations imposed by his license or concession and the rules and regulations of the Bureau of Forestry pertinent thereto, the said license or concession shall thereupon be automatically revoked and the area covered by the revoked license or concession shall no longer be subject to private operation; Provided, further, That the provision of any license or concession to the contrary notwithstanding, the National Development Company shall have the right of way to carry on its operation throughout the extent of the area reserved; and Provided, finally, That no further concession or license shall be issued affecting any area within said reservation.

Done at the City of Manila, this 29 th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1947). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-127]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.