MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 65

PERMITTING LIMITED EXPORTATION OF LOGS AND FLITCHES SUBJECT TO CERTAIN CONDITIONS

By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the Philippines, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, do hereby order that effective July 15, 1947, logs and flitches may be exported from the Philippines in accordance with the following rules and regulations:

1. Export license for logs and flitches may be issued only to actual producers thereof.

2.  Any actual producer of logs and flitches may export not more than 20 per cent of his actually produced marketed product during the previous month, which exportable 20 per cent shall consist on of veneer or peeler logs Nos. 1 and 2, and flitches with thickness and width of not less than 8 inches.

3. In addition to the above quota for each actual producer, a timber producer-exporter may also be licensed to export the amount of logs and/or flitches sufficient to pay for milling and logging machinery actually purchased and imported by him or to his order and for his own use, after the date of this Order, upon presentation of shipping documents showing that such machinery has actually been shipped.

4. Any logger or miller, or producer of logs and/or flitches found violating any of the foregoing conditions and requirements shall be deprived of his export license.

5. All exportation of logs and flitches shall be covered by export license duly issued by the Philippine Sugar Administration in accordance with the provisions of Executive Order No. 3, dated July 10, 1946, as amended by Executive Order No. 23, dated November 1, 1946, upon recommendation of the Director of Forestry.

6. Executive Order No, 3, dated July 10, 1946, and Executive Order No. 13, dated August 26, 1946, are hereby modified accordingly.

7. This Order shall take effect on July 15, 1947.

Done at the City of Manila, this 27 th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1947). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-127]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.