MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 21

FIXING WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 1, 1947, AS CENSUS DAY

Whereas Republic Act No. 36, entitled “Census Act of Nineteen Hundred Forty-Six,” provides that the President of the Philippines shall, by executive order, proclaim any day selected for census-taking as Census Day;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the provisions of Republic Act No. 36, do hereby designate Wednesday, January 1, 1947, as Census Day, on which date the enumeration of the population and the collection of all pertinent social and economic data throughout the Philippines shall begin and proceed on consecutive days thereafter, including Sundays and holidays, until completed.

In accordance with the provisions of said Republic Act No. 36 that “the supervisors, enumerators and other subordinate personnel for the census work shall be drafted mostly from the personnel of the Government, including provincial, city and municipal officials and employees, school teachers, field forces of the different bureaus and offices, city and municipal police forces, and members of the Philippine Army,” all Heads of Departments under the Executive branch of the Government are hereby enjoined to authorize and instruct all bureaus and offices respectively under them and provincial, city and municipal officials and Army commanders concerned to make available for purposes of census-taking, the services of such of their personnel as shall be requisitioned for the purpose. All such government personnel as will be drafted for the census work shall, unless otherwise directed by a superior census authority, render service in the barrio, poblacion, municipality, city or province where they are actually working.

Done at the City of Manila, this 15 th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 127]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.