MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 85

ORGANIZING CERTAIN BARRIOS AND SITIOS OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF PLARIDEL, PROVINCE OF OCCIDENTAL MISAMIS, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF CALAMBA WITH THE SEAT OF GOVERNMENT AT THE BARRIO OF CALAMBA

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the eleven municipalities in the Province of Occidental Misamis as established by section thirty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, and Executive Order No. 242, dated December 28, 1939, are hereby increased to twelve by segregating from the municipality of Plaridel the barrios of Calamba, Libertad, Dapacan, Mauswagon, Sulipat, Bonifacio and Siloy and the sitios of Laknapan, Sulipat, Calaran, Calaran Calamba, Magcamiguing Langob, Langob Buenavista, Bonawan, Dapacan Bonawan, Salvador, Saliak Sulipat, Napisik Sulipat, and Baloncan Bonifacio, and organizing the same into an independent municipality under the name of Calamba with the seat of government at the barrio of Calamba.

The municipality of Calamba as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

From point No. 1, as shown on the sketch of the proposed municipality of Calamba, prepared and submitted by the District Engineer, based on Forestry map dated October 31, 1925, which is at the  intersection of the trail which leads southeastward from the barrio of Lobog in the municipality of Plaridel, with the present boundary line between the municipalities of Plaridel and Lopez Jaena, following a straight line due N. 81 ° 00’ W., 8,920 meters to point No. 2, which is at the intersection of this line with the provincial road connecting the municipalities of Oroqieta and Baliangao; thence S. 77 ° 00’ W., 2,880 meters to point No.3; thence following the entire southern part of the boundary line between the municipalities of Plaridel and Baliangao, then the boundary line between the municipalities of Plaridel and Lopez Jaena to the point of beginning.

The municipality of Plaridel shall consist of its present territory minus the territory comprised in the municipality of Calamba.

The organization herein made shall take effect on November 16, 1947.

Done at the City of Manila, this 3rd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) N. ROXAS Acting Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1947). Executive Order No. 85 : Organizing certain barrios and sitios of the municipality of Plaridel, Province of Occidental Misamis, into an independent municipality under the name of Calamba with the seat of government at the barrio of Calamba. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 43 (10), 4079-4080.