MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 95

PROVIDING FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE TURTLE AND MANGSEE ISLANDS

By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the Philippines, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, do hereby proclaim the assumption of jurisdiction and administration by the Republic of the Philippines over the Turtle and Mangsee Islands which form part of Philippine territory, and order the establishment of a special local government therein in accordance with the following provisions:

1. All the islands to the north and east of the boundary line fixed in the convention between the United States and the United Kingdom which was proclaimed by the President of the United States on December 15, 1942 (47 U.S. Stat. at Large, Part 2, pp. 2198-2201), known as the Turtle Islands, including Sibaung, Boaan, Lihiman, Langaan, Great Bakkungan, Taganak, and Baguan, are hereby constituted into a special municipal district under the jurisdiction of the Province of Sulu.

2. To provide a temporary local government for this special municipal district, there is hereby created the position of district officer with compensation at the rate of P1,200 per annum. He shall be charged with the administration of the aforesaid Turtle Islands under the supervision and control of the Provincial Governor of Sulu who is hereby authorized to appoint him subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

3. The district officer shall exercise, inter alia, the following powers and duties:

( a ) He shall be the chief administrative officer of the islands;

( b ) He shall be justice of the peace ex-officio with the same powers and duties as a regular justice of the peace; and shall act also as deputy of the Collector of Customs, the Commissioner of Immigration, and the Director of Fisheries, and shall also act as Health Officer: Provided , That in acting in such capacities, he shall be subject to the supervision of the Department Head concerned.

4. The Provincial Governor of Sulu shall negotiate for the establishment of a store at Taganak financed by private capital to sell and distribute the supplies needed by the inhabitants of the islands under the supervision of the Provincial Governor exercised directly or through the district officer.

5. There shall also be a chief of police with compensation at the rate of P600 per annum and two policemen each with compensation at the rate of P360 per annum, all to be appointed by the district officer with the approval of the Provincial Governor of Sulu. The chief of police shall also act as deputy of the provincial treasurer in the collection of taxes. The Provincial Governor is hereby empowered, should the circumstances so require, to detail members of the police forces of any municipality or municipal districts under his jurisdiction to render service in the islands for a limited period.

6. All revenues collected in the Turtle Islands shall be constituted into a special fund which shall be turned over by the chief of police to the Provincial Treasurer of Sulu to be expended for the administration thereof.

7. The district officer, with the approval of the Provincial Governor, shall provide clerical assistance necessary for the proper discharge of the functions and duties of the offices of the district officer and the chief of police. The Secretary of the Interior is hereby empowered to authorize the creation of such offices and/or positions as may be deemed necessary to effectuate the proper administration of this special municipal district.

8. The islands to the north and east of the aforesaid boundary line, known as the Mangsee Islands, shall form part of the municipal district of Balabac, Province of Palawan.

9. This Order shall take effect upon the transfer of the Turtle and Mangsee Islands to the Republic of the Philippines.

Done at the City of Manila, this 13th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) N. ROXAS Acting Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1947). Executive Order No. 95 : Providing for the administration of the Turtle and Mangsee Islands. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 43 (11), 4552-4554.