MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 101

RESTRICTING THE CARRYING OF FIREARMS BEFORE, DURING AND AFTER THE GENERAL ELECTIONS ON NOVEMBER 11, 1947

WHEREAS, it is necessary, in the interest of peace and order, that the carrying of firearms by persons who have been authorized under existing laws and regulations to possess them be restricted before, during and after the general elections on November 11, 1947;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, hereby order that private persons heretofore granted special permits or license to possess firearms in accordance with law, with the exception of police officers and those charged with duty of preserving peace and order, are hereby prohibited to carry their firearms outside their respective residences. Violation hereof shall subject the offenders to arrest and immediate confiscation of their firearms.

Merchants and other persons who, in the course of their business, need to carry firearms should obtain a special permit for each travel or trip they make from the nearest headquarters of the Military Police Command to enable them to carry firearms outside their respective residences.

All law enforcement agencies of the Government are hereby directed to wage an intensive campaign against illegal possession of firearms all over the Philippines.

This Order shall take effect immediately and shall continue in full force and effect until ten days after the elections.

Done at the City of Manila, this 4th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) N. ROXAS Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1947). Executive Order No. 101 : Restricting the carrying of firearms before, during and after the general elections on November 11, 1947. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 43 (11), 4558-4559.