MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 110

ORGANIZING THE PHILIPPINE MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS AND PROVIDING FOR ITS DIRECTION AND MAINTENANCE

By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the Republic, and for the purpose of defining the functions of the Representative of the Philippines at the seat of the United Nations, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, hereby order as follows:

1. The Representative at the seat of the United Nations as other Representatives of the Philippines to the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council, the Trusteeship Council, and the committees and commissions and subcommissions under them, and to all other organs and agencies of the United Nations to which the Philippines has been or may hereafter be elected, or of which it has become or may hereafter become a member, with the exception of those Representatives to such international agencies as are now or may hereafter be placed under the administrative supervision of the Philippine Ambassador to the United States of America or other officials as the President may designate, shall be known as the Philippine Mission to the United Nations.

2. The Representative of the Philippines at the seat of the United Nations shall be the Chief of Mission and shall coordinate at the seat of the United Nations the activities of the Mission in carrying out the instructions of the President or the Secretary of Foreign Affairs.

3. The Chief of Mission shall be responsible for the administration of the Mission including personnel, budget, obligation and expenditure of funds which may be made available or allotted by the Secretary of Foreign Affairs for the conduct, operation and maintenance of its services. The salaries and allowances of the personnel shall be fixed by the Secretary of Foreign Affairs who shall appoint them in accordance with the provisions of Executive Order No. 18, dated September 16, 1946, and in pursuance of existing regulations. The Chief of Mission shall likewise discharge his responsibility in accordance with such rules and regulations as the Secretary of Foreign Affairs may from time to time prescribe.

Done at the City of Baguio, this 12th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Republic of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) N. ROXAS Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1947). Executive Order No. 110 : Organizing the Philippine Mission to the United Nations and providing for its direction and maintenance. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 44 (1), 7-8.