MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 73

CREATING THE RADIO BROADCASTING BOARD TO ADMINISTER AND OPERATE RADIO STATION KZFM ACQUIRED AS SURPLUS BY THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

WHEREAS, the United States Information Service, an instrumentality of the United States Government, has transferred and conveyed unto the Government of the Republic of the Philippines, the free use of all radio broadcasting equipment and facilities now existing and utilized by Radio Station KZFM, and such other radio equipment as be declared surplus and transferable to the Government of the Republic of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, the Republic of the Philippines is desirous of affording a medium for the dissemination of information and news through the radio to the remotest corners of the Philippines and of providing means for the training of Filipino radio technicians;

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 33 authorized the President of the Philippines to create or designate an agency or instrumentality to accept and administer the surplus properties acquired by the Government of the Republic of the Philippines from the Government of the United States of America;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and section 2 of Republic Act No. 33, do hereby create and constitute an office to be known as the Radio Broadcasting Board which shall be composed of the Press Secretary of the Office of the President as Chairman, and four other members to be appointed by the President of the Philippines. The Chairman and members of the Radio Broadcasting Board shall not receive any additional compensation but may be allowed to collect a per diem of twenty-five pesos for each day of actual attendance at the meeting of the board called by the Chairman thereof. For administrative purposes, the board shall be under the control and supervision of the Chief of the Executive Office.

The Radio Broadcasting Board shall have the following functions and duties:

(a) To administer and operate all broadcasting equipment and facilities now existing and utilized by Radio Station KZFM, and such other radio equipment as may be declared surplus and transferred to the Government of the Republic of the Philippines, or which the board may hereinafter acquire;

(b) To provide for the use of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines a ready broadcasting station;

(c) To provide for an effective medium through which the Government of the Republic of the Philippines may be brought nearer to the people, and for the dissemination of government information; and

(d) To provide a new vehicle for advertising needed articles for educational and cultural purposes, books, magazines and school supplies, medical supplies and equipment, movie programs of educational and cultural significance, agricultural implements, seeds, and supplies.

The Radio Broadcasting Board shall, with the approval of the Chief of the Executive Office, promulgate all needful rules and regulations consistent with law relative to the administration and operation of Radio Station KZFM.

Subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines, the Radio Broadcasting Board shall appoint a manager and fix his compensation. The manager shall, with the approval of the Radio Broadcasting Board, appoint such technical, clerical, and other employees as may be necessary: Provided, That all appointments for positions with compensation of two thousand four hundred pesos per annum or more shall be subject to the approval of the President.

There is appropriated out of the funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the sum of two hundred thousand pesos as a revolving fund for the operation and maintenance of the office created herein.

The Radio Broadcasting Board shall submit its annual report and balance sheet to the President of the Philippines.

Done at the City of Manila, this 12 th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M (1947). Executive Order No. 73 : Creating the Radio Broadcasting Board to administer and operate Radio Station KZFM acquired as surplus by the Government of the Republic of the Philippines from the government of the United States of America. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 43 (9), 3557-3559.