MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 114

REQUIRING PUBLIC BIDDING, UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS, FOR AWARD OF CONTRACTS FOR REPAIR OR CONSTRUCTION WORKS TO BE ENTERED INTO BY THE CORPORATIONS OWNED OR CONTROLLED BY THE GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, it is beneficial to the public interest that contracts for repair or construction works to be entered into by the corporations owned or controlled by the Government be submitted to public bidding so as to obtain the lowest or most advantageous cost under the circumstances;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order that all contracts for repair or construction works to be entered into by the corporations owned or controlled by the Government, when the estimated cost of each contract is three thousand or more, shall be submitted to public bidding and awarded to the lowest responsible bidder after such publication or advertisement as may be determined in the discretion of the president, general manager or manager of the corporation concerned: Provided, however , That in case of urgent necessity involving work that must be done within a specified time and failure to do so would involve the loss of, or danger to, life and/or property, the managing heads above mentioned, with the approval of the Control Committee of the Government Enterprises Council, created by Executive Order No. 93, dated October 4, 1947, may cause any repair or construction work costing three thousand pesos or more to be executed by administration and without calling for bids: Provided, further, That the provisions of this Order shall not apply where the law or charter of the corporation concerned expressly authorizes the award of such contract without public bidding; nor where the by-laws thereof expressly authorize the same and the amount involved is less than three thousand pesos.

Done at the City of Manila, this 27th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) N. ROXAS Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1947). Executive Order No. 114 : Requiring public bidding, under certain conditions, for award of contracts for repair or construction works to be entered into by the corporations owned or controlled by the government. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 44 (1), 11-12.