MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 89

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 73, DATED AUGUST 12, 1947

The fourth, seventh, and eight paragraphs of Executive Order No. 73, dated August 12, 1947, are hereby amended to read, respectively, as follows:

“NOW, THEREFORE, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and section 2 of Republic Act No. 33, do hereby create and constitute an office to be known as the Radio Broadcasting Board which shall be composed of the Chief of Executive Office as Chairman, the Press Secretary of the Office of the President as Vice-Chairman, and three other members to be appointed by the President of the Philippines. The Chairman, Vice-Chairman, and members of the Radio Broadcasting Board shall not receive any additional compensation but may be allowed to collect a per diem of twenty-five pesos for each day of actual attendance at the meeting of the Board. For administrative purposes, the board shall be under the control and supervision of the Chief of the Executive Office.”

“Subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines, the Radio Broadcasting Board shall appoint a general manager and fix his compensation. The manager shall, with the approval of the Radio Broadcasting Board, appoint such technical, clerical, and other employees as may be necessary: Provided, That all appointments for positions with compensation of two thousand four hundred pesos per annum or more shall be subject to the approval of the President.”

“There is appropriated out of the funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the sum of two hundred thousand pesos as a revolving fund for the operation and maintenance of the office created therein. In addition to and as part of the revolving fund herein created, the Board is hereby authorized to appropriate by special budget and with the approval of the President for its operation and maintenance all the income or receipts from its operation.”

Done at the City of Manila, this 3rd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1947). Executive Order No. 89 : Amending Executive Order No. 73, dated August 12, 1947. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 43 (10), 4083.