MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 272

AUTHORIZING THE RURAL INSURANCE & SURETY CO., INC. TO BECOME A SURETY UPON OFFICIAL RECOGNIZANCES, STIPULATIONS, BONDS AND UNDERTAKINGS

WHEREAS, Section 1 of Act No. 536, as amended by Act No. 2206, provides that whenever any recognizance, stipulation, bond or undertaking conditioned for the faithful performance of any duty or of any contract made with any public authority, national, provincial, municipal or otherwise, or of any undertaking, or for doing or refraining from doing anything in such recognizance, stipulation, bond or undertaking specified is, by the laws of the Philippines or by the regulations or resolutions of any public authority therein, required or permitted to be given with one surety or with two or more sureties, the execution of the same or the guaranteeing of the performance of the condition thereof shall be sufficient when executed or guaranteed solely by any corporation organized under the laws of the Philippines, having power to guarantee the fidelity of persons holding positions of public or private trust and to execute and guarantee bonds or undertakings in judicial proceedings and to agree to the faithful performance of any contract or undertaking made with any public authority;

WHEREAS, said section further provides that no head of department, court, judge, officer, board or body, whether executive, legislative or judicial, shall approve or accept any corporation as surety on any recognizance, stipulation, bond, contract or undertaking unless such corporation has been authorized to do business in the Philippines in accordance with the provisions of said Act No. 536, as amended, nor unless such corporation has, by contract with the Government of the Philippines, been authorized to become a surety upon official recognizances, stipulations, bonds and undertakings; and

WHEREAS, the RURAL INSURANCE & SURETY CO., INC., is a domestic corporation organized and existing under the laws of the Republic of the Philippines and fulfills the conditions prescribed by said Act No. 536, as amended;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CARLOS P. GARCIA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the RURAL INSURANCE & SURETY CO., INC., to become a surety upon official recognizances, stipulations, bonds and undertakings in such manner and under such conditions as are provided by law, subject to the condition that the total amount of immigration bonds that it may issue shall not, at any time, exceed its admitted assets.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1958). [Administrative Order Nos. : 235 – 387]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.