H. No. 5652

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Sixteenth Congress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand fifteen.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10826 ]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A MULTI-SPECIES MARINE NURSERY IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF KALAMANSIG, PROVINCE OF SULTAN KUDARAT AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There shall be established, under the supervision of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of the Department of Agriculture (BFAR-DA), a multi-species marine nursery in the Municipality of Kalamansig, Province of Sultan Kudarat.

SEC. 2. The Secretary of Agriculture shall include in the Department’s programs the establishment of the multi-species marine nursery, preferably in the abandoned, undeveloped, or underutilized fishponds covered by fishpond lease agreements in the Municipality of Kalamansig, Province of Sultan Kudarat, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act. The local government units concerned shall set aside funds from any available local revenue in an amount deemed appropriate for its management and operation.

SEC. 3. Within two (2) years after the establishment of the multi-species marine nursery, the BFAR shall, through a memorandum of agreement, transfer its management to the municipality or the community where it will be located. It shall implement a training and phasing-in program for the management and operation of the multi-species marine nursery.

SEC. 4. The Secretary of Agriculture shall issue the rules and regulations on the supervision and monitoring, and the transfer or withdrawal, by the BFAR of the multi-species marine nursery.

SEC. 5. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on May 19, 2015, amended by the Senate on February 1, 2016, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives on February 1, 2016.

Approved: MAY 19 2016

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines