MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 2088

CALLING FOR A REFERENDUM TO ASCERTAIN THE WILL OF THE PEOPLE REGARDING THE HOLDING OF BARANGAY ELECTIONS

WHEREAS, Amendment No. 7 of the 1976 Amendments to the 1973 constitution provides, among others, that “referenda conducted through the barangays and under the supervision of the Commission on Elections may be called at any time the government deems it necessary to ascertain the will of the people regarding any important matter whether of national or local interest”;

WHEREAS, the last barangay council elections were held in January, 1972, inasmuch as the local elections of 1980 did not provide for the election of members of the barangay council;

WHEREAS, some sections of the population have advocated the holding of barangay council elections, while others have declared themselves opposed to it, so that the matter of whether and when new elections for members of barangay councils shall be held is an issue of national concern;

WHEREAS, it is important, for the information and guidance of the government, that said question over the holding of barangay council elections be resolved directly and categorically by the people to remove any present doubt about their true sentiment;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do, hereby proclaim the holding of a referendum to ascertain the will of the people regarding the holding of barangay council elections.

The referendum shall be held simultaneously with the presidential election on June 16, 1981. The question to be submitted to our people shall be phrased: “Do you want to have a barangay election immediately after the presidential election?”

The Commission on Elections shall promulgate implementing rules and regulations to govern the conduct of the referendum. The Ministry of Local Government and Community Development shall provide such assistance as may be necessary to carry out such rules and regulations.

IN WITNESS, WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia