MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1848

AUTHORIZING THE PHILIPPINE TUBERCULOSIS SOCIETY, INC. TO CONDUCT A NATIONAL EDUCATIONAL AND FUND CAMPAIGN DURING THE PERIOD FROM JANUARY 15 TO DECEMBER 31, 1979.

WHEREAS, the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc., conducts a campaign to control and eventually eliminate tuberculosis as a major cause of the physical, economic and social miseries of our people and thereby complements and supports the National TB Control Program of the Government;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc., must continue its educational, prevention and treatment activities so as to reduce the threat posed by TB on the health and welfare of our people;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc. must continue to accelerate its expansion program to bring the benefits of its domiciliary and dispensary services to a bigger number of people;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc. campaign needs intensified community support, participation and involvement to achieve its objectives; and

WHEREAS, it is to the benefit of the community that the humanitarian objectives of the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc. campaign are met;

NOW THEREFORE, I FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc. to conduct a national educational and fund campaign during the period from January 15 to December 31, 1979.

I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, regardless of race or creed, to support actively, and give generously of their time and resources to the anti-TB cause, so as to hasten the control of this debilitating disease, minimize human suffering among the afflicted, and promote national strength and prosperity through a healthy citizenry free from the dangers of the disease.

Furthermore, I call upon and authorize all government financing institutions and government corporations to fully support this fund drive by contributing generously from their funds. This is an exemption from the provisions of LOI 828, No. 2(c).

It is hereby reiterated that all donations and contributions to the fund campaign shall be exempt from income, gift, amusement and all other taxes, and the same shall constitute allowable deductions in full from the income of the donors and contributors, and shall not be included for purposes of computing the maximum amount deductible under Section 30, paragraph (h), of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia