MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1459

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM SEPTEMBER 10 TO 21, 1975 AS METROPOLITAN FILM FESTIVAL AND CREATING AN EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE TO TAKE CHARGE OF ITS OBSERVANCE AND AUTHORIZING THE SAME TO CONDUCT FUND-RAISING CAMPAIGN FOR THE PURPOSE.

WHEREAS, the cinema, being a mass art and an effective tool of communication that influences the thoughts and changes the attitudes of people, should serve as a vehicle for moral regeneration, social development and cultural reawakening in the New Society;

WHEREAS, the movies should depict seriously and artistically our history, traditions, cultures, aspirations and struggles as a nation through the lives of both men of reknown and the man in the street or on the farm;

WHEREAS, it is the commitment of the New Society to enrich Philippine culture, to reawaken the people to their historical heritage and traditional values, and to clarify the Filipino image, through the revival and refurbishment of native arts, among which is the Filipino cinema which should rediscover itself by upholding its inherent artistic and social responsibility;

WHEREAS, this administration has always been guided by the principal of social justice and has pursued efforts to protect the workingman in all fields of human endeavor, thus making it imperative to support welfare groups like the MOWELFUND; and

WHEREAS, in recognition of the value and importance of the local movie industry in the over-all developmental effort for the country, a fitting celebration to encourage quality film production both in substance and in form, as well as provide incentives to the performing artists and the technicians in the industry, is most opportune;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from September 10 to 21, 1975, and henceforth, as “Metropolitan Film Festival.” I urge all citizens of the Greater Manila Area as well as all its local officials and movie organizations to celebrate the festival appropriately to encourage Filipinos to appreciate Filipino cinema and make it form part of their cultural life.

In order to insure the successful celebration of this festival throughout the Greater Manila Area, an Executive Committee is hereby formed to take charge of the arrangement for its observance, composed of the following:

The Executive Committee is authorized to engage in fund raising campaign among all sectors of society including the local governments concerned which may donate their amusement tax shares to the MOWELFUND during the period of the celebration to make it a success. Pursuant to the agreement among the participating film producers, the theme of the Festival will center on the Achievements under the New Society, and the best picture is thus to be conferred the “Dangal ng Bagong Lipunan” award.

All departments, bureaus and agencies of the government are hereby directed to give their full support and assistance to the said Committee to ensure the success of the Metropolitan Film Festival.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia