MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1899

RESERVING A CERTAIN AREA IN THE PROVINCE OF BUKIDNON AS A MILITARY RESERVATION.

WHEREAS, the Philippines, as a sovereign State, has to rely mainly on her military capabilities to defend herself in case of internal aggression and/or foreign invasion;

WHEREAS, to bolster our armed preparedness and improve our military capabilities, there is a need to establish more military reservations as training grounds for the armed forces; and

WHEREAS, an area has already been pinpointed for such purpose which, after studies conducted, is believed ideal to be reserved as military reservation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and upon the recommendation of the Minister of Natural Resources, and pursuant to the provisions of Section 83 of Commonwealth Act No. 141, do hereby reserve for military purposes under the administration of the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, subject to private rights, if any there be, the following described parcel of the public domain situated in the province of Southern Bukidnon particularly described in the attached location map, as a military reservation, and which area is described hereunder to wit:

Beginning at point “1” whose geographic position is 7º 40′ north latitude, 125º deg 02′ 30″ east longitude:

thence due North, 3,680 m. to pt. 2; thence N. 72º W, 1,500 m. to pt. 3; thence N. 20º E, 2,250 m. to pt. 4; thence N. 62º E, 3,000 m. to pt. 5; thence due South, 2,150 m. to pt. 6; thence due East, 1,000 m. to pt. 7; thence due South, 5,500 m. to pt. 8; thence due West, 2.975 m. to pt. 1 which is the point of beginning, containing an area of 2,218 hectares, more or less.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia