MALACAÑANG RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 563

DECLARING A STATE OF PUBLIC CALAMITY IN THE ISLANDS OF SIARGAO AND BUCAS GRANDE, PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL NORTE

WHEREAS, the destructive typhoon “Atring” which devastated the islands of Siargao and Bueas Grande, Province of Surigao del Norte has caused widespread desolation and tremendous destruction to property and has rendered homeless a great number of families mostly from the low-income group; and

WHEREAS, to prevent the excessive increase in the -prices of prime commodities due to profiteering and hoarding by those who control the supply thereof and also to enable government and civic relief and welfare agencies to carry their objectives effectively, it is imperative that a state of calamity be proclaimed in the aforesaid areas;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E, MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Section 105(v) of Republic Act No. 1937 and by Act No. 4164 of the Philippine Legislature, do hereby proclaim and certify that a state of public calamity exists in the islands of Siargao and Bucas Grande, Province of Surigao. During the existence of such calamity, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in said areas (1) to sell or offer for sale palay, rice, corn, cloth, milk, canned goods, sugar and other foodstuffs, building and construction materials and other prime necessities in life at prices higher by twenty-five (25%) or more, over and above the average current local price of such commodities one month prior to the occurence of such public calamity as may be determined by the Director of Commerce, and (2) to aggravate, the crisis by refusing, for the purpose of profiteering, to sell at the legal price, or by hiding, concealing or hoarding the goods or commodities for the same purpose.

The Secretary of Commerce and Industry and the Secretary of Finance, in their respective capacities, are hereby empowered to carry this proclamation into effect and are hereby authorized to call upon such entities and instrumentalities of the government as may be needed to give necessary cooperation and assistance for the success-full prosecution of this proclamation.

I enjoin all government and civic relief and welfare agencies and organizations to extend all possible assistance to typhoon victims and distressed individuals.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library