MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1289

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM AUGUST 23 TO 31, 1974 AS NATIONAL INTEGRITY WEEK

WHEREAS, the Constitution holds all public officials, employees and other persons performing duties and functions under the local or national government accountable to the people;

WHEREAS, the Constitution likewise requires all national and local public officials and employees and other persons performing official functions to serve the people with the highest degree of responsibility, integrity, loyalty and efficiency;

WHEREAS, the Constitution likewise prescribes certain essential duties and obligations of citizens of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, my administration has always been guided by the foregoing constitutional mandates and has pursued efforts to develop the highest degree of responsibility, integrity, loyalty and efficiency among public officials and employees;

WHEREAS, the economic, social and political stability of a country depends largely on the integrity and honesty of its public servants and the consciousness and willingness of the citizens to assume their duties and obligations as citizens of the Republic;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from August 23 to 31, 1974 as National Integrity Week.

In order to ensure the national and faithful observance of the Week with fitting activities, I hereby:

1. Order the Department of Local Governments and Community Development and the Department of Education and Culture to initiate and supervise barangay meetings which shall be held for the following purposes during the Week:

a. To acquaint with and inform the barangay members of the constitutional provisions holding all public officers and employees accountable to the people, as well as of their rights, duties and obligations as citizens as provided in the Constitution and other statutes;

b. To inform the barangay members of the holding of the Pulong Ng Mga Barangay on September 1, 1974, the purpose of the “Pulong” and the mechanics and procedures to be followed during the “Pulong”;

c. To agree on the time and place for the holding of the “Pulong” on September 1, 1974; making provisions, however, that the holding of the “Pulong” shall not interfere with the observance of curfew hours; that the “Pulong” shall be held in a public place or building or when possible, in the place where the members of the barangay usually meet; and, if no place is agreed upon, it shall be held in the place where the last Barangay meetings were held.

2. Call upon all citizens to cooperate with the officials designated by the Department of Local Governments and Community Development and the Department of Education and Culture to initiate and supervise the observance of the Week in their respective barangays or communities.

3. Order all agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations to formulate and implement a continuing program to inform the people of the constitutional mandate and policy on the accountability of public officials, employees and other persons performing duties and functions of their responsibilities, duties and obligations as citizens of the Philippines.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 19th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia