MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1550

DECLARING THE PERIOD JUNE 16, 1976 TO JUNE 15, 1977 AS DIAMOND JUBILEE YEAR COMMEMORATING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE OFFICE OF THE SOLICITOR GENERAL.

WHEREAS, the Office of the Solicitor General, created on June 16, 1901 and originally named the Bureau of Justice, has now been in existence for seventy-five years;

WHEREAS, since its creation, this Office has served as the principal law office of the Government, its departments, bureaus, agencies and offices and government officials in proceedings, investigations, litigations and other matters which require the services of a lawyer and in protecting the national interest and promoting the public welfare;

WHEREAS, during its seventy-five years of existence, the Office of the Solicitor General has played a vital role in the Government’s steadfast adherence to the Rule of Law and sought to maintain the highest standards of the legal profession and personal integrity in the discharge of its responsibilities;

WHEREAS, the Office of the Solicitor General has performed its role with distinction, competence, and dedication that it has earned the respect of the President, the Supreme Court, government officials and the public;

WHEREAS, the fact that government under martial law is firmly anchored upon the mandates, safeguards, and principles of the Constitution has led to various court challenges questioning the far-reaching and revolutionary reform programs of the New Society thereby increasing, as they have always increased in critical times, the complexity, scope and importance of the functions of the Office of the Solicitor General;

WHEREAS, the contributions of the Office of the Solicitor General to the development of Philippine law and jurisprudence and its seventy-five years of dedicated service deserve the recognition, gratitude, and appreciation of the entire nation;

WHEREAS, as the Philippines achieves international respect for its assertive posture in international affairs, as it hopefully takes off into an era of sufficiency and eventual abundance, as it bestows justice on the very least of its citizens and minorities, and as it realizes the goals of the New Society, the Office of the Solicitor General will continue to play a major role and important share in the affairs of the Republic of the Philippines;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution and the laws do hereby proclaim the period June 16, 1976 to June 15, 1977 as Diamond Jubilee Year of the Office of the Solicitor General to commemorate its creation pursuant to Act No. 136 dated June 11, 1901, as amended.

I call upon all government entities and instrumentalities to participate in the celebration and invite private institutions and individuals to join in making the celebration meaningful, significant and fruitful.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia