MALACANANG RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 923

DECLARING THE EXISTENCE OF A STATE OF PUBLIC CALAMITY IN THE PROVINCE OF CAGAYAN.

WHEREAS, heavy damage to crops and property was wrought by typhoon “Dadang” in the province of Cagayan; and

WHEREAS, to prevent the excessive increase in the prices of rice and other essential commodities due to profiteering and hoarding by those who control the supply thereof, and also to enable the Government and civic, relief and welfare agencies to carry out their objectives effectively, it is imperative that a state of calamity be proclaimed in the said province;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by existing laws, particularly Act No. 4164 and Section 105 (V) of Republic Act No. 1937, do hereby proclaim and certify that a state of public calamity exists in Cagayan. During the existence of such a calamity, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in said province (1) to sell or offer for sale foodstuffs, buildings and construction materials and other prime necessities in life at prices exceeding those fixed or may be fixed by the authorities concerned pursuant to existing laws, namely, Act No. 4164 and Republic Act No. 6361, and regulations issued thereunder, and (2) to aggravate the crisis by refusing, for the purpose of profiteering, to sell at the legal price, or by hiding, concealing or hoarding such goods or commodities for the same purpose.

All government agencies are hereby directed to implement and execute rescue and relief operations in accordance with existing operational plans. The National Disaster Control Center at Camp Aguinaldo, Quezon City, created under Proclamation No. 761, series of 1970, shall expand its scope of responsibility of overseeing, coordinating and directing rescue and relief operations to include the above province, utilizing for the purpose all available and necessary material resources, equipment and manpower of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, (AFP), those of other government agencies or instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, as well as the private sector, to give the necessary cooperation and assistance for the successful prosecution of this proclamation.

The Price Control Council is hereby designated the implementing agency to enforce the provisions of Act No. 4164, particularly Section 3 thereof. As such implementing agency, the Price Control Council is hereby empowered to order the seizure of any commodity or material or merchandise of prime necessity, sell it to the public at the price authorized by Act No. 4164, and reimburse to the owner of the same its legal price.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assitant Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia