MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1762

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM AUGUST 27 TO SEPTEMBER 2, 1978, AS INTERNATIONAL LAW WEEK.

WHEREAS, the 58th Conference of the International Law Association will be hosted by the Philippines in the City of Manila from August 27 to September 2, 1978;

WHEREAS, the International Law Association is a world renowned organization devoted to the promotion or international peace and justice through law, lofty ideals to which the Philippines is deeply and firmly committed;

WHEREAS, the urgency of International friendship and cooperation for the advancement of international harmony and world progress may well be brought into sharp focus at the said ILA Conference; and

WHEREAS, it is an honor and privilege for the Philippines to be the venue of this distinguished assemblage of lawyers, professors, scholars and leaders in the various branches of international law, — and an opportunity for the Philippines to make a distinct contribution to the cause of international friendship and unity;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim the period from August 27 to September 2, 1978, as International Law Week. I hereby enjoin all citizens of the Philippines to give all the participants at the said Conference the utmost possible respect, deference, cooperation and courtesies compatible with the importance and dignity of their proceedings.

I further hereby urge all persons during the Week to reflect upon the significance of the Conference and the need for all nations to unite in the spirit of international brotherhood and forge together a just and lasting world order.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd . ) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia