MALACAÑANG RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 710

CALLING THE CONGRESS OF THE PHILIPPINES TO A SECOND SPECIAL SESSION

WHEREAS, the public interest requires that the Congress of the Philippines be convened in a second special session in order to consider other legislative measures of urgent nature;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby call the Congress of the Philippines to a second special session for such number of days as may be necessary not exceeding thirty (30) days commencing on Juno 29, 1970, at 10:00 o’clock in the morning, to consider such measures as it may deem wise, to include the following:

H. No. 2300—An Act to amend the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended, to be known as Supplement (B) to title II (Income Tax) by placing corporations on a tax estimating and quarterly payment system:

S. No. 143—An Act to invigorate the country’s export trade as a means of accelerating economic growth by granting certain incentives to export industries;

H. No. 1056—An Act increasing the rates of import duties on certain articles under section one hundred four of Republic Act 1937, known as the Tariff and Customs Code of the Philippines;

H. No. 2276 and S. No. 531—An Act to promote the discovery and production of indigenous petroleum and appropriating funds therefor;

H. No. 1537—An Act creating a special peace and order fund to be constituted from the proceeds of the tax on travel and the tax on securities transactions, amending- for the purpose Republic Act No. 1479, an amended, and the National Internal Revenue Code;

H. No. 1974—An Act authorizing the sale of military lands to finance various social and economic projects in order to vigorously expand national output, ameliorate the existing social conditions, and for other purposes;

H. No. 315—An Act empowering the President of the Philippines to sell military camps and reservations at or near populated areas for the purpose of raising funds for land reform and for the transfer of present military installations to suitable sites and development thereof, appropriating the necessary funds therefor;

S. No. 301—An Act authorizing the President of Philippines to sell the government interests in the Philippine National Railways for the purpose of implementing more fully and expediting agricultural land reform, to transfer the government shares to filipino citizens, and for other purposes;

S. Jt. Res. No. 1—Joint Resolution establishing basic policies which shall guide the country in its effort to bring about social and economic development through environmental planning;

H. No. 443—An Act amending certain sections of Republic Act Four thousand eight hundred sixty;

H. No. 881—An Act hastening Agrarian Reforms through cooperatives and for other purposes;

H. No. 886—An Act providing for a system of developing cooperatives by providing for a unified state policy, basic cooperative law, administrative machinery, program, approach and appropriations therefor, and for other purposes;

S. No. 142—An Act to institute a modern system of disposition and administration of the mineral resources and to promote and encourage their conservation, development, exploitation, processing and utilization;

S. No. 475 and H. No. 1812—An Act amending certain provisions of Republic Act No. 3089, as amended, entitled, “An Act to provide assistance to the Gold Mining Industry;”

H. No. 1107—An Act to prohibit the importation of certain commodities;

S. No. 153—An Act instituting a coconut investment fund and creating a coconut investment company for the administration thereof;

H. No. 774—An Act filipinizing- the use of domestic credit;

S. No. 101

H. No. 1907—An Act amending section one of Republic Act Numbered Two thousand three hundred sixty one, entitled “An Act Reverting to the general fund of the national government, the cash balances of certain special or revolving funds under certain conditions;”

H. No. 910—An Act consolidating and revising the charter of the National Power Corporation;

H. No. 1124—An Act amending subparagraph seven of section seventeen of Republic Act 877, as amended, known as “Philippine nursing Law;

H. No. 876—An Act amending Republic Act 4864, otherwise known as the “Police Act of 1966;

H. No. —An Act to establish a National Housing Authority and other constituent agencies thereof, to prescribe their powers, to appropriate funds therefor, and for other purposes;

H. No. 2364—An Act granting regulatory and supervisory powers over private schools, colleges, and universities to the Secretary of Education, amending for the purpose Republic Act 2706, as amended;

S. No. 535—An Act to require government approval of tuition and/or other fees charged and/or collected by private educational institutions.

S. No. 77—An Act to amend certain section of Republic Act Numbered Four thousand nine hundred fourteen entitled ‘An Act providing for the election of delegates to, and the holding of the constitutional convention authorized by Resolution of Both Houses of the Congress of the Philippines, adopted on March sixteen nineteen hundred and sixty-seven;

H. No. 1347—An Act amending Republic Act Numbered Four thousand nine hundred fourteen, entitled ‘An Act providing for the election of delegates to, and the holding of the constitutional convention authorized by Resolution of Both Houses of the Congress of the Philippines, adopted on March sixteen nineteen hundred and sixty-seven;

S. No. 478—An Act amending and repealing certain sections of Republic Act Numbered Thirty-eight hundred and forty-four, as amended, otherwise known as the Agricultural Land Reform Code;

H. No. 1127—An Act creating a single working administrative machinery to implement the land reform program of the government to be known as Department of Agrarian Reform and Development;

H. No. 2159 and S. No. 481—An Act amending certain provisions of Republic Act Numbered Seven hundred seventy-six, otherwise known as ‘the Civil Aeronautics Act of the Philippines; and

S. No. 486—An Act to amend certain sections of Republic Act Numbered Sixty-one hundred and twenty-four otherwise known as the Price Control Law (re production cost, spare parts and appeal).

All persons entitled to sit as members of the Congress of the Philippines are requested to take notice of this Proclamation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) PONCIANO G. A. MATHAY Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff