MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1604

DECLARING 1977-1987, AS THE “DECADE OF THE FILIPINO CHILD” AND CALLING A NATIONAL CONFERENCE ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF CHILDREN.

WHEREAS, the social, economic and political stability of a country depends greatly on its human resources;

WHEREAS, in order to maintain a sturdy citizenry, the welfare and development of the youth has been one of the biggest concerns of the New Society;

WHEREAS, a Child Welfare Code has been promulgated under Presidential Decree No. 603 to safeguard the welfare of the youth and define their rights and privileges;

WHEREAS, there is a need for a national consultations program on the development of children to harness to the fullest advantage all efforts towards their development into productive members of society;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the decade, 1977-1987 as the “Decade of the Filipino Child” and I hereby call a national conference on the development of children to be held in Manila on December 8-10, 1976, on the theme “The Filipino Child: Our Richest Human Resources.”

The goal and direction of the conference shall be as follows:

1. Discuss urgent concerns and issues affecting the development of children in five areas, to wit:

a) education b) health and nutrition c) justice and the courts d) Labor e) Social services and development

2. Determine strategies for the implementation of Presidential Decree No. 603, otherwise known as the Child and Youth Welfare Code in each of the areas aforementioned.

3.  Propose an integrated National Plan of Action for the Development of Children and Youth for the coming decade, 1977-1987.

In order to coordinate the implementation and enforcement of all laws, decrees and policies relative to the promotion of child and youth welfare and the development and implementation of an integrated national program of services for their welfare in line with the New Society’s development policies, the Council for the Welfare of Children, all heads of departments and agencies involved in the promotion of child and youth welfare, all heads of provincial and city sangguniang bayans, and all national presidents and executives of non-government organizations and professional organizations involved in providing child and youth welfare services are hereby enjoined to participate and cooperate in the planning and conduct of the conference.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia