MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1198

PROCLAMATION OF EID-UL-FITR AND EID-UL-ADHA AS LEGAL HOLIDAYS IN IMPLEMENTATION OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 291.

Upon recommendation of the Muslim community in pursuance of Section 4, Presidential Decree No. 291, and in implementation of the provisions of said decree.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution of the Philippines as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972 and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby proclaim as legal holidays the following Muslim Holidays:

1. Eid-ul-Fitr (Hariraya Puasa) which falls on the 1st day of the 10th Lunar Month of Shawwal, Year 1393 of the Hijrah Calendar marking the end of the fasting month of Ramadan. This day corresponds to the 27th of October, 1973.

2. Eid-ul-Adha (Hariraya Haj) which falls on the 10th day of the 12th Lunar Month of Dull Hajj, Year 1393 of the Hijrah Calendar commemorating the Great Sacrifice of Prophet Abraham of his son. This event takes place during the pilgrimage season. This day corresponds to January 3, 1974.

In addition, I further order that:

1. All department heads shall implement the provisions of Presidential Decree 291 as amended in their respective departments excusing all Muslims employees from work, provided, that all government offices, bureaus, agencies and instrumentalities in the provinces of Sulu, Tawi-Tawi, Davao del Norte, Davao Oriental, Davao del Sur, South Cotabato, North Cotabato, Palawan, Maguindanaw, Sultan Kudarat, Lanao del Sur, Lanao del Norte and Zamboanga del Sur; and in the cities of Cagayan de Oro, Marawi City, Iligan City, Zamboanga City, Basilan City, Cotabato City, Davao City and General Santos City shall observe the herein legal holidays in accordance with law.

2. All Governors and City Mayors of the provinces and cities enumerated herein shall implement the provisions of Presidential Decree 291, as amended and this proclamation, and observe the Muslim holidays as Philippine legal holidays in accordance with law.

3. All private corporations, offices, agencies, entities or establishments operating within the provinces and cities enumerated herein shall observe the legal holidays as proclaimed, provided, however, that all Muslim employees working outside of the Muslim provinces and cities shall be excused from work during the observance of the Muslim holidays as recognized by law without diminution or loss of salary or wages during said period in accordance with Section 5 of Presidential Decree 291.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia