MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 2150

DECLARING THE EXISTENCE OF A PUBLIC CALAMITY IN THE PROVINCES OF NORTHERN SAMAR, MASBATE, ORIENTAL MINDORO AND ROMBLON.

WHEREAS, great damage and destruction of life and property were brought about by the recent typhoon “Dinang” in the Provinces of Northern Samar, Masbate, Oriental Mindoro and Romblon;

WHEREAS, to prevent excessive increase in the prices of prime commodities due to profiteering and hoarding by those who control the supply thereof, and to enable the government, as well as civic, relief and welfare agencies to carry out their functions, it is necessary that a state of public calamity be proclaimed in the entire Provinces of Northern Samar, Masbate, Oriental Mindoro and Romblon, the most severely affected areas by typhoon “Dinang”.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare a state of public calamity exists in the Provinces of Northern Samar, Masbate, Oriental Mindoro and Romblon.

During the existence of the calamity it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in said towns to sell or offer for sale any foodstuff, building and construction materials and other prime necessities of life at prices exceeding those fixed or may be fixed by proper authorities, and to aggravate the crisis by refusing, for the purpose of profiteering, to sell at the legal price, or by hiding, concealing or hoarding such foodstuff, building and construction materials and other prime commodities for the same purpose.

All government agencies concerned are hereby directed to implement and execute rescue, relief and rehabilitation work in accordance with existing operational plans and the directive and orders I have issued in connection with calamities.

The Price Control Council, with the assistance of the Integrated National Police, shall enforce the provisions of Act 4164, particularly Section 3 thereof, in all affected areas. As such implementing agency, the Council is hereby empowered to order the seizure of any commodity, material or merchandise of prime necessity, sell to the public at the price authorized by Act No. 4164 and Republic Act No. 6361, and reimburse to the owner of the same its legal price.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia