MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1148

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM JULY 1 TO 7 AS NATIONAL CULTURE CONSCIOUSNESS WEEK

WHEREAS, Section 9(2), Article XV of the new Constitution of the Philippines provides that “Filipino culture shall be preserved and developed for national identity. Arts and letters shall be under the patronage of the State”;

WHEREAS, Section 11, Article XV of the same Constitution provides that “the State consider the customs, traditions, beliefs and interests of national cultural communities in the formulation and implementation of state policies”;

WHEREAS, continuing awareness and appreciation by our people of our rich cultural heritage can contribute to the attainment of the laudable aims and noble objectives of the New Society;

WHEREAS, there is need to focus attention on the achievements of our people in the field of arts and letters in order to rekindle in our hearts genuine pride in ourselves as Filipinos; and

WHEREAS, Philippine society is composed of varied and diverse cultures, and integration of the various cultural patterns and traditions can lead ultimately to the inevitable conclusion that despite cultural diversities we are just one people and thereby forge closer ties of national unity;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare the period from July 1 to 7 of every year as “National Culture Consciousness Week.” I urge all citizens of this country as well as all associations and organizations to celebrate this week appropriately in connection with the need to make Filipinos constantly aware of their proud cultural heritage. In order to insure the successful celebration of this week throughout the Philippines, a Special Committee is hereby created to take charge of arrangements for its celebration, composed of the following:

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia