MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1151

CREATING THE AWARD AND DECORATION OF INTERNATIONAL ARTIST.

WHEREAS, it is the declared policy of the State to promote the arts and letters under the Constitution, giving due recognition to those who have made profound contributions to the development of the artistics and cultural heritage of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, it becomes immediately apparent that such .persons are not limited to citizens of the Philippines, the arts and letters being a universal medium of expression free of the restricting confines of geography and nationality;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, do hereby create an Award and Decoration to be known as International Artist, to the conferred upon artists of foreign nationality who have contributed to the advancement of the arts and of the culture of the Philippines.

An International Artists Awards Committee is hereby treated to administer the conferment of the category of international Artist upon those deserving thereof. The Committee, which, as in the case of the National Arts Awards Committee, shall be composed of the members, of the Board of Trustees of the Cultural Center of the Philippines, shall organize itself immediately and shall draft the rules to guide its deliberation of International Artists. These rules shall ensure that only such foreign .artists who are of exceptional excellence in their chosen careers, are of world acceptance and acclaim, and through their body of work, have contributed to the direct advancement of Philippine Arts and Culture, and through the use of the arts for international peace and progress have promoted international unity and understanding, shall receive the Award.

Whenever practicable, International Artists shall be accorded the same privileges and honors given National Artists under Presidential Decree No. 208 dated June 7, 1973, during their stay in the Philippines.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of June, the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office