MALACAÑANG RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 843

RESERVING THE TALA ESTATE FOR VARIOUS GOVERNMENT USES AS WELL AS FOR HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT.

WHEREAS, the 808-hectare Tala Estate was acquired by the Government in 1938 primarily for a leprosarium;

WHEREAS, even under the old concept of custodian care for hansenites only one-fifth of the Tala Estate is utilized;

WHEREAS, in view of the advances in medical science which no longer requires the compulsory segregation of hansenites, as recognized in Republic Act 4085, the leprosarium now needs lesser land than originally envisioned;

WHEREAS, the rapid expansion and urbanization of the Metropolitan Manila area focuses the need of establishing new residential areas within a 20-kilometer radius from the center of the Metropolis, and of utilizing inexpensive land in order to serve low-income families whose housing needs can only be met by the Government; and

WHEREAS, the Tala Estate is fit for such development and there is therefore need to revise, update and maximize its utilization;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby reserve the entire Tala Estate, whose perimeter boundary is more particularly described as follows:

Bounded on the North by Marilao River, the Estate of C. Francia and Marilao River; on the East by the Ipo-Novaliches Road, Lot 1221-A and Lot 933-B, FLS 1096-3, Tala Estate; on the South by Lot 935, 934, 937, 896, 895, 853, 850, 849, 548, 611, 602, 581 and 577 of Tala Estate; and on the West by Marilao River,

containing a total area of EIGHT HUNDRED EIGHT (808) HECTARES, belonging to the government as evidenced by TCT Nos. 34591 thru 34637,

for the following uses under the administration of the government agencies mentioned hereunder;

1. For the leprosarium and the settlement site of the hansenites and their families, an area of one hundred thirty (130) hectares is hereby reserved under the administration of the Department of Health, covering the elongated area presently occupied by the leprosarium, to be bounded on the north by the present NHC plan and the industrial belt to be established eastward of the NHC plant; on the East by the proposed road on Lot 932; on the South by Matarik Creek; and on the West by the proposed road traversing Lots 912 and 915;

2. For the various plants and installations of the National Housing Corporation, for its future expansion and for its staff and pilot housing development, fifty (50) hectares is hereby reserved under the administration of the National Housing Corporation, to cover the present site of the NHC plant plus additional areas immediately around it.

3. For the civic center to contain the city hall, city high school, city stadia and parks, twenty (20) hectares is hereby reserved under the administration of the City of Caloocan, to be located almost at the geographical center of the Estate;

4. For welfare projects, ten (10) hectares is hereby reserved for the Department of Social Welfare, to be located within any of the blocks bordering the civic center;

5. For housing, resettlement sites and other uses necessary and related to an integrated social and economic development of the entire estate and its environs, the remaining five hundred ninety eight (598) hectares is hereby reserved under the administration of the PHHC.

More precise identities of the parcels of land allocated above will be made after a final survey shall have been completed, and the extent of private rights shall have been thoroughly investigated, and for this purpose there shall be a joint PHHC-Bureau of Lands team to undertake the necessary segregation survey and inquiries on private rights within the Estate.

No transfer of title shall be made until the enactment of a law allowing the use of the site for purposes other than that of a leprosarium.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia