Malacañang Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 2399

DESIGNATING THE SECOND WEEK OF DECEMBER EVERY YEAR AS EDUCATION WEEK

WHEREAS, the second week of December every year marks the signing of the 1863 Educational Decree which reorganized the Spanish colonial educational system and the establishment of primary instruction and normal schools for Filipino teachers;

WHEREAS, succeeding educational acts during the American occupation, the Commonwealth Era and the present Republic provided for the same objectives of Educational Act of 1863 and an expanded educational program in the Philippines greatly affecting students and teachers;

WHEREAS, it has been the policy of the Philippine government to develop high-level professions that will provide leadership for the nation and improve the quality of human life, including the establishment and maintenance of a complete, adequate and integrated system of education relevant to the goals of national development.

WHEREAS, actual implementation of these educational reforms and objectives are made possible through the unselfish participation and guidance of teachers in the noble task of educating the Filipino youth and these noble efforts have contributed to the progress achieved in providing education and strong Filipino values among the youth;

WHEREAS, this proclamation serves as a fitting honor and recognition to the noble deeds and efforts of the teachers in molding a reliable and strong Filipino citizenry;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare the second week of December of every year as “Education Week,” the final day of which shall be designated “Teachers’ Day.” During “Education Week,” appropriate activities shall be undertaken through the initiative of the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports to recognize the objectives, programs and accomplishments of the education system and to honor and recognize the roles and contributions of public and private school teachers and education support personnel.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five, and of the Independence of the Philippines.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia