MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1996

PROCLAIMING THE NATIONWIDE OBSERVANCE OF AND PHILIPPINE PARTICIPATION IN THE INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF DISABLED PERSONS IN 1981.

WHEREAS, the national government has assiduously perfected and established National policy for the full integration of disabled persons into the mainstreams of society, as well as the primary duty for the prevention of disability;

WHEREAS, every effort is being exerted by the New Society to insure the protection of the rights of the disabled, provide services for their needs, and insure their participation and involvement in the rehabilitation process;

WHEREAS, for the purpose of having a central authority to direct, coordinate and integrate all programs and services pertinent to the welfare and well-being of the disabled, the National Commission Concerning Disabled Persons was created pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1509;

WHEREAS, the holding of the National Decision Makers Conference on October 25-26, 1979, underscored the fact that disability prevention and rehabilitation are essential components on comprehensive plans for social and economic development, and provided the Commission with directions for the formulation of the National Rehabilitation Plan;

WHEREAS, the third week of July every year has been declared as the National Disability Prevention and Rehabilitation Week under Proclamation No. 1870 dated June 22, 1979;

WHEREAS, the United Nations has declared 1981 as the International Year of Disabled Persons;

WHEREAS, the Philippines is a member of the UN Advisory Committee for the International Year of Disabled Persons, which was created by the General Assembly at its thirty first session to prepare the programs for its observance; and

WHEREAS, by virtue of its membership in the Advisory Committee, the Philippines is committed to participate in and celebrate the International Year of Disabled Persons;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim the nationwide observance of and participation in the International Year of Disabled Persons in 1981.

The National Commission Concerning Disabled Persons is hereby directed to give the National Rehabilitation Plan the widest possible dissemination to the public and private sectors and to coordinate projects, as well as implement with integrated networks and systems the rights and responsibilities of the disabled under the Philippine laws on disability.

To these ends, the National Commission Concerning Disabled Persons may call upon any ministry, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may need in the implementation of the National Rehabilitation Plan.

Non-government organizations and institutions, as well as professional associations, are hereby enjoined to take full cognizance of the National Rehabilitation Plan, and to fully cooperate in the attainment of the goals and objectives of the Plan by gearing their policies and aligning their programs to said Plan.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia