MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1798-A

RESERVING FOR SETTLEMENT PURPOSES CERTAIN PARCELS OF LAND OF THE PUBLIC DOMAIN SITUATED IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF KAPAI, PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR, ISLAND OF MINDANAO, PHILIPPINES, UNDER THE ADMINISTRATION AND DISPOSITION OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRARIAN REFORM

Upon the recommendation of the Minister of Agrarian Reform with the concurrence of the Minister of Natural Resources, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby reserve for settlement purposes certain parcels of land of the public domain situated in the Municipality of Kapai, Province of Lanao del Sur, Island of Mindanao, Philippines, under the administration and disposition of the Ministry of Agrarian Reform, subject to private rights if any there be and to future classification and boundary survey, which parcels of public lands are more particularly described as follows:

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION

A parcel of land within the public domain situated in the Municipality of Kapai, Province of Lanao del Sur, bounded in the North by timberland, on the East by public and private lands, on the South and West by timberland.

Beginning from a point marked “1” as shown in ANNEX PLAN “1”, which is the intersection of Bayog River tributaries with approximate geographical position of 8 deg. 05′ 25″ N and 124 deg. 32′ 15″ E; thence S 35 deg. 00′ E 4,750 m. to point 2;

thence S 45 deg. 30′ W 2,030 m. to point 3; thence N 86 deg. 30′ W 4,930 m. to point 4; thence N 77 deg. 30′ W 4,320 m. to point 5; thence N 56 deg. 00′ W 3,110 m. to point 6; thence N 0 deg. 30′ E 2,050 m. to point 7; thence S 87 deg. 30′ E 3,850 m. point 8; thence S 56 deg. 30′ E 3,350 m. to point 9; thence S 66 deg. 30′ E 2,610 m. to point 10; thence S 53 deg. 39′ E 1,500 m. to point of beginning; containing an area of FIVE THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED (5,500) HECTARES, more or less. All bearings and distances are approximate and are subject to change based on the final boundary survey.

The National Coordinating Committee (NCC) created under Memorandum Order No. 516, as amended, is hereby directed to organize a Plans and Programs Committee composed of the representatives from the NCC as Chairman, the Ministry of Agrarian Reform, Bureau of Forest Development, Bureau of Lands and the Bureau of Soils as members, which shall prepare the area development plan, work program, cost estimates and other technical plans and designs necessary for the total development of the settlement.

The Bureau of Forest Development is hereby directed to undertake the classification of lands subject of this proclamation and to release as alienable and disposable all areas which are suitable for agricultural purposes. The Bureau of Lands shall undertake the boundary, topographic and subdivision surveys and the Bureau of Soils, the soil survey. All expenses for said surveys shall be charged against the funds set aside for this project.

The Bureau of Resettlement, Bureau of Forest Development and the NCC are jointly charged with the responsibility of overseeing and supervising the implementation of the development plans and programs of the settlement project. For this purpose, the Bureau of Forest Development shall immediately issue the necessary licenses and/or permits for the gathering of forest products found in the settlement area in accordance with the area development plan therefor and existing forestry rules and regulations.

For purposes of maintaining a balance ecosystem in the settlement and to assure a sustained and sufficient supply of surface water for domestic and agricultural purposes, all portions classified as timberland inside the settlement reservation and areas within a distance of 500 meters from the boundary of the reservation, are hereby declared and reserved as critical watersheds and shall not be subject to log extraction or harvest in any form. Towards this end, all logging permits and/or licenses within the area are hereby cancelled. Likewise, any pasture permit or pasture lease agreement affecting areas within the settlement reservation shall not be renewed upon its expiration.

To preclude overlapping or conflicting jurisdiction over the reservation, all alienable and disposable lands previously released to the Bureau of Lands are hereby transferred to the Ministry of Agrarian Reform. However, in the disposition of the same, vested rights e. g. land patents or titles, approved applications for issuance of patents filed by public land applicants who have complied with the requirements of the Public Land Law, as amended, shall be respected.

The Ministry of Agrarian Reform is hereby authorized to issue patents to qualified beneficiaries in accordance with the rules and regulations that may be promulgated by the Ministry of Agrarian Reform.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD . )FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia