PROCLAMATION NO. 2031

AUTHORIZING THE EXTENSION OF THE GINTONG ALAY EDUCATIONAL AND FUND CAMPAIGN FROM NOVEMBER 5, 1980 TO MARCH 31, 1981.

WHEREAS, under Letter of Instruction No. 955, the President directed that all programs for the development of athletes (track and field) shall be centralized in the Gintong Alay and that related projects and programs shall be subject to the approval of its Executive Director;

WHEREAS, under Proclamation No. 1922, the President authorized Gintong Alay to conduct an educational and fund campaign between November 5, 1979 to November 4, 1980, to support its program of recruitment, selection and training of national athletes for international competitions;

WHEREAS, under Letter of Instructions No. 1022-A, the President directed the expansion of the scope of Gintong Alay include other sports included in the Southeast Asian Games programs of events;

WHEREAS, the projects needs the full support of the citizenry so that our youth may grow into healthy and physically fit leaders; and

WHEREAS, in view of the sectoral involvement of key officials in the government and the private sector as well as the nationwide campaign preparations including provincial rallies throughout the country, the period prescribed under Proclamation No. 1922 is considered too short to raise funds needed by Gintong Alay in carrying out its assigned task;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the extension of the Gintong Alay Educational and Fund Campaign from November 5, 1980 to March 31, 1981. I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, irrespective of race and creed, to support this fund drive by giving generously of their means for the success of this laudable project.

Furthermore, for greater effectivity of the campaign, the Gintong Alay Education and Fund Campaign shall be exempted from the payment of all forms of taxes in the purchase of products and goods to be used as prizes in its national grand raffled called “The Gintong Alay Golden Draw”, and that winners in said draw will likewise be exempted from payment of corresponding taxes.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia