Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

PROCLAMATION NO. 2020

AUTHORIZING THE PHILIPPINE REHABILITATION FUND, INC. TO CONDUCT A NATIONWIDE EDUCATIONAL, MEMBERSHIP AND FUND CAMPAIGN DURING THE PERIOD FROM OCTOBER 15, 1980 TO OCTOBER 14, 1981

WHEREAS, approximately ten per cent (10%) of our population are handicapped by various forms of physical, mental and emotional disabilities and are, therefore, unable to contribute their share to the national development efforts; and whereas their present plight infringes upon their inherent right to human dignity and to economic and social security;

WHEREAS, the various problems and numbers of the disabled population are growing, and that there is now an urgent need to harness public and private resources to resolve these problems which hinder the full utilization of the nation’s total manpower resources for the attainment of the New Society’s economic and social development goals, as well as to guarantee the enforcement of the basic social development goals, as well as guarantee the enforcement of the basic rights of disabled citizens; and

WHEREAS, the Foundation is engaged in the provision of support and assistance to the projects of the National Commission Concerning Disabled Persons (NCCDP) and all other agencies and instrumentalities concerned with disability prevention and rehabilitation of the disabled, and in the process, contribute significantly to the national goals and efforts towards development for economic and social stability;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President and Prime Minister of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Philippine Rehabilitation Fund, Inc. to conduct a national educational, membership and fund campaign during the period from October 15, 1980 to October 14, 1981.

I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, irrespective of nationality or creed to give generously and participate actively in this campaign and thus help in the renewal of fresher hopes for the millions of Filipino disabled, so that they too can partake in the national development efforts, and thus become productive and useful citizens of the country.

All donations and contributions to this fund campaign shall be exempt from customs duties, income and gift taxes, and the same shall be deductible in full and shall be included for purposes of computing the maximum deductible under National Internal Revenue Code, as amended, from the income of donors and contributors.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Senior Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia