MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1602

AUTHORIZING THE PHILIPPINE EYE AND EAR INFIRMARY FOUNDATION TO CONDUCT A NATIONAL EDUCATIONAL AND FUND CAMPAIGN DURING THE PERIOD FROM SEPTEMBER 1, 1976 TO JULY 31, 1977.

WHEREAS, the Philippine Eye and Ear Infirmary Foundation (PEEI) is a non-profit organization extending direct and sustained medical services to indigent people afflicted with eye, ear, nose and throat ailments;

WHEREAS, in addition to direct aid to victims of these ailments, the Foundation has likewise engaged in providing assistance to medical practitioners to pursue specialized studies in the field of ophthalmology and related sciences;

WHEREAS, the facilities of the Philippine Eye and Ear Infirmary must be expanded to enable the organization to extend its vital services to a greater number of indigent people, who otherwise, are unable to afford these medical treatments;

WHEREAS, the Foundation’s objectives of reaching all our citizens with valuable public information on the need for proper eye, ear, nose and throat care to prevent the spread of these crippling diseases that affect the productivity of a significant portion of our population; and

WHEREAS, only the unified moral and financial support of a concerned citizenry can insure the continuous extension of these vital PEEI services to our less fortunate countrymen;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Philippine Eye and Ear Infirmary Foundation to conduct its national educational and fund campaign during the period from September 1, 1976 to July 31, 1977.

I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines regardless of nationality or creed, to support actively and give generously of their means to the PEEI cause so as to enable this organization to pursue its goals the beneficiary of which counts among the most destitute members of our society, thereby minimizing human suffering among our poor, who, in our humane and compassionate community, need not be underprivileged or abandoned.

It is hereby reiterated that all donations or contributions which may be made by private entities or persons to the Philippine Eye and Ear Infirmary Foundation Fund Campaign shall be exempt from income and gift taxes, and the same shall constitute allowable deductions in full from the income of the donors and contributors for income tax purposes.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the city of manila, this 4th day of December, in the year of our lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia