MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 2226

DECLARING SATURDAY, DECEMBER 11, 1982 AND EVERY YEAR THEREAFTER AS PAMPANGA DAY

WHEREAS, on January 11, 1978, Proclamation No. 1702 was issued proclaiming February 13, 1978 and every year thereafter as Pampanga Day, in commemoration of the establishment of the first civil form of provincial government in the Philippines at Bacolor, Pampanga on February 13, 1901, with Ceferino Joven as Governor by appointment through Executive Order No. 64;

WHEREAS, historical records show that after the Spanish conquest of Pampanga on May 24, 1571 and its pacification or “reduccion” in the last months of the same year, the Spaniards inaugurated the Province of Pampanga as the first province of Luzon on or about December 11, 1571;

WHEREAS, considering the importance of the said inaugural event, it is deemed more fitting and appropriate to mark and set aside as Pampanga Day the day of the founding of the province in lieu of the day the first civil form of provincial government was established therein;

WHEREAS, in order to preserve, maintain and hand down to posterity the beauty and richness of Pampango culture and heritage, as well as its arts and literature, it is necessary to commemorate the foundation day of the province by honoring its illustrious sons and daughters who have distinguished themselves in different areas of endeavor;

NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the powers vested in me by President of the Republic of the Philippines, I hereby proclaim December 11, 1982 and every year thereafter as Pampanga Day.

I further proclaim that the same date and every year thereafter be made a public holiday for the Province of Pampanga, Philippines.

This Proclamation supersedes Proclamation No. 1702 issued on January 11, 1978.

DONE in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 27th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia