MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1876

CALLING A REFERENDUM IN THE MUNICIPALITIES OF CAGAYAN PROVINCE TO ASCERTAIN THE OPINION OF THE PEOPLE THEREAT ON MATTERS OF LOCAL INTEREST.

WHEREAS, the 1976 Amendments to the Constitution, provide among other things that “referenda conducted through the barangays and under the supervision of the Commission on Elections may be called at any time the government deems it necessary to ascertain the will of the people regarding any important matter whether of national or local interest”;

WHEREAS, there are certain developments in the various municipalities of Cagayan concerning political matters and peace and order problems which, if not attended to immediately, may affect the successful implementation in the area of the socio-economic policies and projects of the national leadership;

WHEREAS, it is the desire of the national leadership that the economic development of the Cagayan Valley including the province of Cagayan should be pursued and accelerated without being hampered by political as well as peace and order problems;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby proclaim:

SECTION 1. Holding of Municipal Referenda. – There shall be held in the various municipalities of Cagayan a series of consultations or referenda to ascertain the thinking of the people in said municipalities on how to prevent certain political as well as peace and order problems from disrupting the economic development of the area.

The Commission on Elections shall formulate the necessary question or questions for the purpose of attaining the objectives of this Proclamation.

SEC. 2. Comelec to Determine the Schedule of the Consultations. – The Commission on Elections shall determine what municipalities shall hold the first and succeeding consultations, taking into account geographical contiguity, terrain, economic conditions, peace and order, and political problems that may obtain in the municipalities affected, Provided, however, that the first consultation to be held in the municipalities determined by the Commission on Elections shall be on August 4 and/or 5, 1979.

SEC. 3. Manner of Consultation. – The referendum or consultation in each municipality shall be conducted in an informal manner through viva voce. However, whenever, there is sufficient number of voters who request to be allowed to answer in writing, the Commission on Elections shall provide the necessary sheets of paper properly initiated or marked to prevent the use of unauthorized sheets.

SEC. 4. Who May Participate in the Consultations. – Any voter who was registered for the elections of the members of the Batasang Pambansa on April 7, 1978 shall be qualified to participate in the consultations referenda herein contemplated.

The following shall also be qualified to take part:

(1) Persons who have, since the last registration of voters, reached the age of 18 years, these persons may be registered under the instant system.

(2) Youth who are at least 15 years old but less than 18 on the date of the consultation or referendum.

SEC. 5. Report to the President. – The Commission on Elections shall render a report to the President on the result of every consultation or referendum held.

SEC. 6. Penalties. – The provisions of the 1978 Election Code on electoral offenses and penalties, especially with respect to illegal voting, disruption of the proceedings, use of unauthorized forms, frauds, violence, terrorism and similar offenses, shall be applicable to the referenda or consultations herein provided.

SEC. 7. Implementing Rules. – The Commission on Elections shall promulgate the rules and regulations necessary to carry out the objectives of this proclamation.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 1st day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia