MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 2145

DECLARING THE SATURDAY OF EVERY FAMILY WEEK CELEBRATION AS “GRANDPARENTS’ DAY”.

WHEREAS, considering that the family is the basic unit of Philippine society and is generally intact in spite of advanced education and increasing exposure to Western Culture;

WHEREAS, grandparents play an important role in the rearing of the home for a wholesome growth and normal activities of the family, especially where the mother is employed and is usually outside the home;

WHEREAS, grandparents contribute to the moral and material well-being of Philippine society by the inspiration they provide in strengthening the character of their grandchildren to become useful and respected members of society;

WHEREAS, grandparents deserve the family’s love, recognition, respect and adulation in the twilight years of their lives in acknowledgement of their traditional services, wisdom and guidance in leading the younger generation to effective citizenry;

WHEREAS, the first week of December every year has been declared Family Week pursuant to Proclamation No. 147, s. 1949;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the Saturday of every Family Week celebration as “Grandparents’ Day”.

I call upon everyone to pay tribute to Filipino grandparents who share in the responsibility of the wholesome growth and development of the Filipino family.

I authorize the Bureau of Women and Minors of the Ministry of Labor and Employment to take the initiative and assume active leadership in the celebration of “Grandparent’s Day” every year, in cooperation with the Family Life Workshop of the Philippines, the Philippine Elderly Persons Foundation, and similar concerned organizations.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia