MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 2167

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM FEBRUARY 22, 1982 TO JULY 14, 1983 AS “THE YEAR OF THE SCOUT” IN OBSERVANCE OF THE 75TH ANNIVERSARY OF WORLD SCOUTING.

WHEREAS, the year 1982 marks the 75th anniversary of Scouting and the 125th anniversary of the birth of the founder of the World Scout Movement, Robert S.S. Baden-Powell, on February 22, 1857;

WHEREAS, the World Organization of the Scout Movement is now composed of 120 National Scout Organizations with a total membership of more than 16 million youths of different nationalities, races, creeds and religious beliefs;

WHEREAS, since the inception of Scouting in the Philippines some 70 years ago, millions of Filipino boys and young men have enjoyed the benefits of its programs of citizenship training, character development, physical fitness and handicraft skills;

WHEREAS, our government and our people in general and the Boy Scouts of the Philippines in particular wish to project the role of Scouts, individually and severally, in the improvement of the quality of life of our communities and in bringing about greater progress for human society;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines and Chief Scout of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from February 22, 1982 to July 14, 1983 as “The Year of the Scout” to fittingly celebrate the 75th anniversary of Scouting.

I hereby authorize the officials and leaders of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines to design and implement a program worthy of the occasion by (a) providing opportunities for every Scout to take active part in community improvement and social services, (b) initiating group and individual livelihood projects that will support community health and economic self-sufficiency, (c) giving all youths of Scout age a chance to benefit from the Scouting program, and (d) raising the funds necessary to support its further development.

I call upon all government agencies, professional, educational, cultural, civic, social and religious organizations to support the observance of “The Year of the Scout” by extending all possible assistance to the Boy Scouts of the Philippines to enable it to implement its program and attain its objectives.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia