MALACANANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1583

TRANSFERRING THE OBSERVANCE OF CIVIL SERVICE WEEK FROM SEPTEMBER 13-19 TO JANUARY 20-26 OF EVERY YEAR.

WHEREAS, on January 26, 1973, Presidential Decree No. 110 was promulgated announcing the existence of a new Civil Service Commission which shall establish a career service and adopt measures to promote morale, efficiency and integrity in the civil service as provided in the new Constitution which took effect in the same month;

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 110 provides that in the performance of its duties and functions, the Civil Service Commission shall be guided by the objectives laid down in the Constitution as well as by the economic, social and other policies of the government, thereby signaling the assumption of the Commission of a new role as guardian of the merit system and at the same time as an effective arm of the government in insuring the involvement of public servants in the national development efforts of the New Society;

WHEREAS, pursuant to the above provisions of said Decree, the civil service system is now geared not only to maintain efficient and effective public service but more importantly to carry out the national goal of improving the quality of life of our countrymen;

WHEREAS, it is fitting and proper to focus national attention on this milestone in the history of the civil service system in this country through the annual celebration of the Civil Service Week; and

WHEREAS, for this purpose, it is necessary to transfer observance of Civil Service Week from September 13-19 to January 20-26 every year, which coincides with the month when the new Constitution became effective providing for the Civil Service Commission as a Constitutional body;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby move the observance of Civil Service Week from September 13-19 to January 20-26 of every year and designate the Civil Service Commission to coordinate and take charge of the occasion.

I hereby call upon all citizens and residents of this country as well as school and other educational institutions, professional groups and civic organizations, barangay associations, the press, the radio, and all others interested in a sound and strong civil service system to extend their active support and participation in making the Week’s observance a success.

I also urge the heads of the various departments, agencies, and instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations to hold appropriate programs and ceremonies during the week in honor of our civil servants throughout the country;

Proclamation No. 285 dated August 13, 1964, is hereby modified accordingly.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 8th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia