MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1806

DECLARING THE EXISTENCE OF A PUBLIC CALAMITY IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF ABRA DE ILOG, PALUAN, MAMBURAO, STA. CRUZ AND SABLAYAN, OCCIDENTAL MINDORO

WHEREAS, the recent typhoons that hit the country wrought havoc and destruction never before known and experienced in many parts of the country including the municipalities of Abra de Ilog, Paluan, Mamburao, Sta. Cruz and Sablayan, Occidental Mindoro; and

WHEREAS, to prevent excessive increase in the prices of prime commodities due to profiteering and hoarding by those who control the supply thereof, and to enable the government, as well as civic, relief and welfare agencies, to carry out their objectives effectively, it is necessary that a state of calamity be proclaimed in the affected areas;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim that a state of calamity exists in the municipalities of Abra de Ilog, Paluan, Mamburao, Sta. Cruz and Sablayan, Occidental Mindoro. During the existence of the calamity it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in said areas to sell or offer for sale any foodstuffs, building and construction materials and other prime necessities of life at prices exceeding those fixed or may be fixed by proper authorities, and to aggravate the crisis by refusing, for purposes of profiteering, to sell at the legal price, or by hiding, concealing or hoarding such foodstuffs, building and construction materials and other prime commodities for the same purpose.

All government agencies are hereby directed to implement and execute rescue, relief and rehabilitation work in accordance with existing operational plans and the directives and Orders I have issued in connection with calamities.

The Price Control Council, with the assistance of the Integrated National Police shall enforce the provisions of Act No. 4164, particularly Section 3 thereof, in all affected areas. As such implementing agency, the Council is hereby empowered to order the seizure of any commodity, material or merchandise or prime necessity, sell to the public at the price authorized by Act No. 4164 and Republic Act No. 6361, and reimburse to the owner of the same its legal price.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD . )FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia