Malacañang, Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 2151

DECLARING CERTAIN ISLANDS AND/OR PARTS OF THE COUNTRY AS WILDERNESS AREAS

Upon recommendation of the Director of Forest Development, duly concurred in by the Minister of Natural Resources, and pursuant to Letter of Instructions No. 917, as amended, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby withdraw from entry, sale, settlement, exploitation of whatever nature or forms of disposition, subject to existing recognized and valid private rights, if any there be, and declare as Wilderness Areas certain Islands or parts of the country, which are more particularly described, as follows:

“The Island of Alibijaban located at Ragay Gulf, Bondoc Peninsula in the province of Quezon; the islands of Basot, Quinalaang, Malabungot all in the province of Camarines Sur; the Islands of Guinauayan, Naro, Chico and Pobre all located at Asid Gulf in the province of Masbate; the Island of Majaba and Napayauan all located at Sibuyan Sea all in the province of Masbate; the Island of Dampalit located at Samar Sea in the province of Masbate; the Island of Bantayan located at Bisayan Sea and in the province of Cebu; the Islands of Catiil, Colangaman, Lumislis, Tabangdio, Tintiman and the Islet of Pamasuan all located at the Canigao Channel all in the province of Bohol; the Islands of Budlanan, Bugatusan, Panga, Silo, Cabgan, Cancostino, Tabaon, Maagpit and Islet of Basihan, Bugatusan, Hayaan, Inanoran and Poom Point, East of Basilan Islet all located at Cebu Strait all in the province of Bohol; the Islands of Banaon, Basaan, Saae, Tambu and Bambanon all located at Camotes Sea all in the province of Bohol; the Islands of Lamagon, Cepaya and Cobeto all located at Panag Bay all in the province of Surigao del Norte; the Island of Rasa located at Hinatuan Passage in the province of Surigao del Norte; the Islands of Siargao, Poneas, Dahican, Tona Laonan, Abanay and Bancuyo all located at Dinagat Sound in the province of Surigao del Norte; the Islands of Awasan, Cabilan, Capaquian, Sugbuhan and Tagboaba all located at Awasan Bay all in the province of Surigao del Norte; and the Island of Pandasan located at Davao Gulf in the province of Davao del Sur.”

containing an aggregate area of 4,326 hectares, more or less, subject to future delineation and survey for foreshore protection, maintenance of estuarine and marine life, including special forests for the exclusive habitats of rare and endangered Philippine flora and fauna and for such other purposes under LOI No. 917, as amended, under the Administration and Control of the Bureau of Forest Development, Ministry of Natural Resources.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd . ) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia