MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 2238

PROCLAIMING OCTOBER 16 TO NOVEMBER 15 EVERY YEAR AS COOPERATIVE MONTH

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the state to foster the creation and growth of cooperatives as a means of increasing income and purchasing power of the low-income sector of the population in order to attain a more equitable distribution of income and wealth as declared in Presidential Decree No. 175 dated April 14, 1973;

WHEREAS, cooperatives have substantially contributed to the success of the agrarian reform program under Presidential Decree No. 27 dated October 21, 1972;

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 775 dated August 24, 1975, has mandated the formation and development of Sugar cooperative within the regulatory supervisory powers of the Philippine Sugar Commission in order to effectively promote the integrated development scheme of sugar industry;

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 269 dated August 16, 1973, total electrification of the country on an area coverage service basis through the promotion, organizations and development of electric cooperative has been adopted as the national policy objective; and

WHEREAS, cooperatives are effective instruments for attaining the objectives of Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period October 16 to November 15, of every year as cooperative month, to enhance the active participation of the greatest number of our population in national building through cooperativism and in order that our people may appreciate the contribution of cooperatives to the economic and social development of the country;

The Ministry of Agriculture, through the Bureau of Cooperative Development shall, in coordination with the Philippine Sugar Commission, the National Electrification Administration, the Cooperative Union of the Philippines, Sugar Cooperatives Development Institute of the Philippines, the Federation of Electric Cooperatives of the Philippines and other cooperative federations and unions in all levels, initiate activities and programs within the month to bring to the attention of the people the social and economic benefit they derive from cooperatives.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 10th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty Two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) MANUEL M. LAZARO Presidential Assistant for Legal Affairs

Source: CDAsia