MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 2045-A

AMENDING PORTIONS OF PROCLAMATION NO. 2045 PROCLAIMING THE TERMINATION OF THE STATE OF MARTIAL LAW THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES.

WHEREAS, by virtue of Proclamation No. 2045 the privilege of the writ of habeas c orpus remains suspend in all places in the country with respect to:

“persons at present detained as well as others who may hereafter be similarly detained for the crimes of insurrection or rebellion, subversion, conspiracy or proposal to commit such crimes, and for all other crimes and offenses committed by them in furtherance or on the occasion thereof, or incident thereto, or in connection therewith.”

WHEREAS, the aforesaid Proclamation has become inadequate to meet the demands of public safety and order;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and law, do hereby order the amendment of Proclamation No. 2045, as fol1ows:

The privilege of the Writ, of Habeas Corpus remains suspended in the two autonomous regions of Mindanao and in all other places with respect to persons at present detained as well as others who may hereafter be similarly detained for all cases involving the crimes of insurrection, rebellion, subversion, conspiracy or proposal to commit such crimes, sedition, conspiracy to commit sedition, inciting to sedition, and for all other crimes or offenses committed by them in furtherance or on the occasion thereof, or incident thereto, are in connection therewith, such as but not limited to offenses involving economic sabotage, illegal assemblies, illegal associations, tumults and other disturbances of public orders, unlawful use of means of publication and unlawful utterances, and alarms and scandals, or with respect to any person whose arrest or detention is, in the judgment of the President, required by public safety as a means to repel or quell the existing rebellion in the country.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(Sgd . ) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Presidential Management Staff