MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 2416

AUTHORIZING THE RESEARCH FOUNDATION FOR TROPICAL MEDICINE, INC., TO CONDUCT A NATIONAL FUND CAMPAIGN DURING THE PERIOD FROM DECEMBER 16, 1984 TO DECEMBER 15, 1985

WHEREAS, the Research Foundation for Tropical Medicine, Inc., hereinafter referred to as the “Foundation” is a non- stock/non-profit corporation established by a group of civic- spirited doctors, businessmen and public officials committee to the development and promotion of an extensive and intensive biomedical research program for the treatment, prevent and control of tropical and infectious diseases, such as, gastro-intestinal diseases, viral hepatitis, bacterial or non-bacterial respiratory ailments, schistosomiasis and malaria, among others;

WHEREAS, in the pursuit of its biomedical research program, the Foundation plays a supportive role to the National Government in the formulation and implementation of the latter’s health policies and programs designated to, minimize, if not curb, the prevalence of all types of communicable diseases that are among the leading causes of mortality in the country;

WHEREAS, the noble and laudable purposes and undertakings of the Foundation are deserving of the full support of the Government and the various sectors of society;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Research Foundation for Tropical Medicine, Inc., to conduct a national fund campaign during the period from December 16, 1984 to December 15, 1985.

I call upon all citizens and residents of the country, irrespective of nationality, race or creed, as well as firms, civic, religious and educational institutions to assist in endeavor by giving generously of their means and to actively support the campaign. I further call upon all government agencies, including the Ministries of Health, Education, Culture and Sports, Public Information and the National Media Production Center, to assist the Foundation in its laudable objectives.

I also call upon and authorize all government financial institutions, government-owned or controlled corporations and other government agencies to donate generously from their funds to the Foundation. Such donations shall be considered exceptions to the provisions of Letters of Instructions Nos. 305 and 823.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) MANUEL M. LAZARO Presidential Assistant for Legal Affairs

Source: CDAsia