MALACAÑANG RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1083

DECLARING CALENDAR YEAR 1972 AS CENSUS OF ESTABLISHMENTS YEAR.

WHEREAS, Commonwealth Act No. 591 authorizes the Bureau of the Census and Statistics to prepare for and undertake all censuses of population, agriculture, industry, and commerce and to conduct studies on social and economic conditions in the country;

WHEREAS, it is of utmost urgency that a census of establishments be conducted in order to have a picture of the country’s current economic situation and to assess the damages wrought to economic establishments by the July flood and rains in Luzon; and

WHEREAS, Congress has set aside the necessary appropriation for the preparation of the undertaking;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim calendar year 1972 as the Census of Establishments Year for the preparation and systematic maintenance by all establishments engaged in such economic activities as logging; mining and quarrying; manufacturing; construction; utilities (electricity, gas and water); wholesale and retail, restaurants and hotels; transportation, storage and communication; financial, insurance, real estate and business services; community, social and personal services of their records on such major statistical information as employment, receipts, payrolls, costs, inventories and losses as of 1972 which the Bureau of the Census and Statistics proposes to collect sometime in the early part of 1973.

I enjoin all heads of Departments of the Government and its agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations, as well as provincial, city and municipal officials, to direct all bureaus and offices under them to make available, for purposes of the 1972 Census of Establishments information campaign, the services of their personnel and the use of their facilities as may be needed by the Bureau of the Census and Statistics.

I likewise enjoin industrial, economic, trade and business entities or organizations in this country to give the Bureau of the Census and Statistics their unqualified support and cooperation so that the success of this nation-wide undertaking may be ensured.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia