Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Bus Operators Association of the Philippines

[Released on April 30, 1963]

Towards a Better Transportation Service

I AM COGNIZANT of the problems that beset the land transportation industry. I know that you are handicapped by high operating costs and by relatively low income. You are plagued by the prices of gasoline, oil, equipment and spare parts. The maintenance expenses of your business have been affected by the inflationary trends of the times. Your business is under close government regulations. The rates, which you charge, must be approved by the Public Service Commission. You cannot charge any fare that you desire.

I must say that your problems cannot be solved by simply increasing the rates that you should be allowed to charge. Increasing transportation rates is a highly sensitive matter. Any increase in rates will have instantaneous repercussions in the different areas of our economy. If passenger rates are unduly increased, the traveling or commuting public, more numerous than car owners and motorists, will surely complain. If freight rates are unduly increased, farmers, merchants and middlemen, engaged in shipping goods in public conveyances and who are not provided with their own transportation facilities, will complain or increase the prices of their commodities.

The Administration believes that the better policy is to hold prices down. Any move that will trigger an increase in prices and thus cause hardships to the consuming and riding public should be avoided as much as possible. Let us not aggravate the situation of the struggling masses.

On the other hand, the Administration views with sympathy and understanding the problems of bus operators. You are entitled to a reasonable and decent return from your investment. While it is true that you are rendering a public service, that does not mean that you should sacrifice your property and capital and should not be guaranteed a just and equitable earning.

I suggest that you formulate specific recommendations for the solution of your problems so that the Administration can study them and adopt them if found to be sound and feasible. Whether your problems can be solved by means of a subsidy, or by the elimination of certain taxes or by exempting from customs duties your importations of equipment and spare parts, or by a moderate increase in rates, will have to be thoroughly considered and weighed, in relation to other factors and circumstances. You can rest assured that judicious remedies will eventually be found for the amelioration of your difficulties.

On my part, while awaiting your recommendations, I have my own plans on how to help you meet your problems from the fundamental viewpoint of my socio-economic program. My Administration is pledged to the objective of assisting private enterprise perform its rightful function. This is not a commitment made upon the spur of this occasion. I quote from one of the opening paragraphs of the socio-economic program which I submitted to Congress last year:

“The role of the government is to create a favorable environment for and to assist private business in the performance of its rightful task of developing the country and its resources.”

I appear before you today to reiterate this pledge and to discuss with you the origin and cause of a basic problem confronting your industry as well as solutions which I propose to implement.

But first let me pay tribute to your fierce but responsible entrepreneurship. Yours is a business that operates under two disciplines. As a public utility, the land transportation industry is subject to the discipline of the State’s regulatory power. Under its existing set-up as a private enterprise, it operates under the discipline of a fiercely competitive mechanism. But you as an industry continue to survive, a living refutation to the selfish sophistry of those who would establish the fear that national economic programming will kill the spirit of free enterprise.

Other industries, while also subject to the regulatory power of the State, are spared the discipline of competition by virtue of a monopolistic situation which they enjoy. And still others, while subject to the discipline of rigorous competition, are spared the regulatory discipline of the State.

The nature of your enterprise constrains you to operate under more restrictive conditions, but these have only served to stimulate your resourcefulness and business acumen.

But your spirit of enterprise, your resourcefulness and ingenuity, have not spared you from the plague of problems that now threaten your stability. For what is the actual situation of the transportation industry today? Voluminous studies, both by local and foreign research groups, have been made under the auspices of previous administration. Those studies have unanimously reported that the land transportation industry suffers from the depressive and debilitating; effects of an excessive and wasteful competition. These studies have attributed the illness of your industry to the failure of previous administrations to formulate and implement an economic system of franchise allocation. Authority to operate transportation units in major areas were granted irrespective of whether public necessity and convenience demanded it.

“Without attempting a complete catalogue of deficiencies or prescribing detailed procedural changes to correct them—it may be helpful here to set forth certain facts and conditions encountered during the course of the survey that have a definite bearing on the presently chaotic condition of land transportation in the Philippines (excluding rail and other nonregulated carriers).

“1. There is no real attempt to ascertain the actual conditions or transportation requirements before granting certificates of conveyance and necessity, prescribing rates, or approving requests for additional units.” (Vol. LV, Economic Analysis of Philippine Domestic Transportation, page 94, Standard Research Institute.)

But it is the duty of the appropriate and franchising authorities of the State to deny applications for certificates of conveyance where there is no public necessity for it.

By legal and statutory mandate, your industry is entitled to a policy that would regulate competition and spare you from the consequences of a wasteful and uninhibited one. For there is an economic consideration which underlies this statutory mandate. It is that unless competition in the field of public utility were effectively regulated, the natural and inevitable consequence would be to impair the huge resources that have entered into its investment. An unstable public utility, suffering from chaotic competition, cannot be expected to render adequate and satisfactory service to the public. Financial losses suffered by firms operating in the industry are bound to be reflected in the run-down condition of their plants and equipment, and in a recklessness of operation dictated by the desperate need for clients and customers, thereby endangering lives and valuable properties.

The administration of the Public Service Act is subject to this injunction:

“The primary purpose of the Public Service Commission Law is to secure adequate, sustained service for the public at least possible cost and to protect and conserve investments which have already been made for that purpose. ” (Martin, Philippine Commercial Laws, Vol. II, page 1175.)

Visual evidence merely confirms that judgment passed upon the defective franchise policy of previous administrations which have now resulted in a tremendous misallocation of valuable investment resources.

Where a certificate of conveyance is issued in a situation where public necessity does not demand it, the State in effect misdirects economic resources and threatens the stability of those that are already established in the industry.

Studies have not been wanting which point to an excess supply of transportation facilities as a basic cause of the industry’s problems. But nothing has been done.

The reason, I submit to you, is because prior to my Administration there was no attempt (1) to formulate an integrated program of development which embraces both social and economic aspects of growth and stability and (2) to devise practical procedures by which to implement a program once established.

As I reminded Congress in my State-of-the-Nation Message last year.

“It is essential for the government to formulate and adopt an integrated economic program. Without it, all economic development efforts will be haphazard, sterile, and ineffectual. There will be uncertainty and the business community will remain in a state of doubt as to what economic policies, decisions, and activities the government will undertake.

“Past Efforts.—The sluggishness in the pace of economic development in recent years was largely traceable to our failure to officially adopt a concrete economic blueprint that sets down vividly the course which the public authorities are to pursue in the matter of promoting economic growth and which the business community and the people at large may utilize to advantage as a guidepost to their own efforts.”

The key to an effective regulation and continued stability of the transportation industry is a policy of economic allocation of certificates of conveyance. Under my program, certificates of conveyance should be issued only upon clear proof of public necessity and with a view to its impact upon existing investments. My program is committed to a policy that would prevent, or at least minimize, misallocation of economic resources. It follows from this that, in the case of certificates of conveyance, the same shall be issued only when the appropriate regulatory authority has evidence showing that a misallocation of resources will not result therefrom.

If one may judge from results and the verdict of official studies, it would appear that, under previous administrations, dispensation of these certificates of conveyance was made in total disregard of the economic and statutory considerations that should control.

The case of Saulog Transit v. Samala , promulgated by the Supreme Court last March 30, 1962 (L-16232), judicially confirms the uneconomic policy of previous commissions. That case reversed a decision of the Public Service Commission which authorized respondent to operate additional buses in the Cavite-Manila line. The Supreme Court found that there was no public necessity for the additional buses that the Commission authorized.

The reason is that previous administrations were not systematically oriented to the massive economic problems of the nation. They were not economic-conscious in the full and coordinate sense. The regulatory agencies exercising vast and extensive powers of supervision over the economic activities of private enterprises vested with public interest, has no economic direction, and suffered from a want of a national policy guideline. As a result, crucial decisions were made in a haphazard manner, devoid of any economic criteria. The result was economic chaos, such as that which threatens the transportation industry in metropolitan Manila. As another independent research study has concluded:

“Fragmented management . . . is responsible for the chaotic condition of public transportation in Metropolitan Manila.” (DC Transit Survey, p. 23.)

Those who would criticize the efforts of my Administration to implement a comprehensive and integrated economic program would do well to ponder on the result of lack of programming upon the transportation industry.

The immediate, practical relief to the problem of excess competition is to place a halt upon the issue of additional certificates of conveyance, and/or authorization to operate additional units in areas or routes of saturation. My office will shortly send to the Public Service Commission studies that we have conducted, indicating specific routes and areas, for a coordinated implementation of this basic policy.

It is also desirable that the prior operator rule , as established by our courts, be faithfully applied in order to prevent further fragmentation of ownership and management in the transportation industry.

But these are only initial, implementing steps. The results of a thorough, systematic study of the transportation industry being conducted by me and my economic staff shall be placed at the disposal of the Public Service Commission for its scientific guideline. Cost estimates of operation shall be made to determine what constitutes a fair rate of return on investments to which you are entitled. This would enable a strategic regulatory agency of the government to formulate case by case decisions on the basis of overriding economic principles and a stream of relevant facts about the industry. Henceforth, therefore, decisions of the Commission shall be economically meaningful, and coordinated with the broad objectives of a national program designed to maximize economic use of resources and to prevent misdirection and misallocation of the same.

Time does not allow me to discuss the numerous other problems of your industry as I see them. I chose to discuss the problem of saturation in particular because the same is a case study of the previous error of past administrations, the reasons for the error, and the necessity for applying the principles and solutions envisioned by my integrated program and procedures of implementation.

At the same time, I expect you to exercise a good measure of discipline within your organization, within the industry.

I expect you to rigorously comply with the laws and applicable regulations. Those who do not deserve to remain in the industry should not continue dissipating valuable resources and energy which can better be applied to other forms of economic activity.

And finally, I ask your full and unstinted support of my socio-economic program. This program is not the exclusive concern of the government that I lead. This program was not devised for the benefit of my Administration. This program was formulated for the benefit of the entire Filipino nation and different sectoral interests that comprise the general economy. This program, I repeat, is committed to the principle that “The role of government is to create a favorable environment for and to assist private business in the performance of its rightful function.”

For the government to be able to perform its assigned role under my program, it needs revenues to finance the development of social overheads that would clear fundamental bottlenecks in the economy. As an example, for the government to be able to assist the transportation industry to extend its operations to the numerous communities that today remain isolated from the mainstream of commerce and industry, the government must embark on a massive but coordinated project of road and highway construction. This entails funds. An efficient system of roads and highways, extended to our remote barrios and isolated villages, will open new frontiers for the expansion of the transportation industry. But you, the representatives of private enterprise, cannot afford to open up new roads and new highways. The government must do this for you, and it will, under my Administration. Not roads half-completed, but roads which will serve an economic function.

If the revenue I ask seems extensive and massive, you would do well to ponder that previous administrations have dissipated the public funds that should have been applied to the projects which I now propose to undertake. I have inherited a legacy of misdeeds and massive waste of economic resources. My Administration has now been saddled by Providence with the task of facing the problems of the present and the future, burdened by the cross of an inglorious past.

But I have no regrets. I meet the challenge with full faith and confidence in the intelligence and understanding of the Filipino. However, I cannot carry this task alone. Even the full force of the government machinery cannot undertake this task alone.

I need your help and the help of all well-meaning citizens. If we are to leave to our children and our children’s children a legacy worthy of ourselves, we must learn to work jointly for the realization of what to me has become a magnificent obsession—prosperity for all and a better life for the common man.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.