Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines During the Send-off Ceremony for the 9th Tactical Fighter Squadron, PAF

[Released on February 7, 1963]

Mission in Congo

I KNOW that I express the sentiment of our entire people when I say this morning: Good luck to you all.

You are about to leave the peace and security of your homes, for an uncertain future in a strife-torn land, thousands of miles away.

It is only proper, therefore, that I—as your President and Commander-in-Chief, the person who has ordered you to the Congo—should tell you why.

We live in a world made small by technology and in an age made awesome by the atom; and this has effected a revolution in the concept of relations between and among nations.

Today, natural boundaries, distance, even time, no longer ensure the security of any given nation. Indeed, at no time in the history of man has the sentiment, “No man is an island entire of itself” been more applicable than in this era of the atom.

It is for this reason that nations with similar aspirations have grouped themselves together under the United Nations and pledged themselves to put a stop to any trouble anywhere lest that trouble spill out and plunge the whole world into nuclear destruction.

We in the Philippines believe in the peace aims of the United Nations, we have pledged support to it in the furtherance of those aims, and we are ready to fulfill that commitment with honor, and if need be, with our blood.

Your leaving for the Congo then is our way of fulfilling our obligation to the United Nations, to help preserve and enhance peace and freedom. We are a developing nation with still unorganized resources, but this has not deterred us from contributing our modest share in the task of the community of nations. We launched “Operations Brotherhood” in Vietnam. Our troops were in Korea when war broke loose in that country. We were poised to send a military contingent to Thailand upon call of that ally. Now our troops shall be in the Congo. All these are growing indications that as our young Republic organizes its resources and seeks its proper place in Asia and in the world, more and more it shall play an increasing role in the international scene to protect its vital interests and to contribute materially to the peace, security and prosperity of mankind.

Today, therefore, we are gathered here, not only to witness the departure of our contingent for duty with the United Nations command in the Congo, but also to give moral support to the brave fighting men of the air force composing this special unit who are on a mission that bears on the well-being and destiny of our Nation.

Designated the 9th Tactical Fighter Squadron, its mission is to take part, flying with the Philippines’ national colors side by side with those of other nations, in a collective undertaking of peace-loving peoples of the world to establish a favorable atmosphere where man can live in freedom.

When you arrive at your base of operations, you will be working with peoples of other nationalities. I wish to stress that I am as concerned with your individual performances as with your unit accomplishment because your unit accomplishment will come as a matter of course if each and everyone of you does his part to the best of his ability.

I say this because I believe that every single element of this unit is the Philippines to any group he works with, big or small. Your identity, therefore, as members of the Philippine Air Force or the Armed Forces is relegated to the background when you are regarded as Filipinos.

Let no one then adopt the false attitude that his individual action is insignificant in the creation of the over-all image of the Filipino people. Your individual actuations put together make up the true image of our country in your area of operations.

Remember always then that you are ambassadors of your country on a foreign soil, bringing the image of your motherland to the heart of Africa. I urge you to perform this goodwill aspect of your mission creditably and well. Your courage and professional skill must be matched by your friendliness and decorum.

As you perform your task, think of the men before you, who gave their lives added luster to the name of the Philippine Air Force like the late Lieutenant Isidro Paredes, the late Lieutenant Cesar Basa, your illustrious living predecessors, like Generals Pelagio Cruz, Pedro Molina, Jonas Victoria and Colonels Jesus Villamor and Godofredo Juliano.

Regarding your combat readiness, I am gratified that Colonel Casabar has taken such good care of this aspect of your fitness for duty with the United Nations, that I hereby extend to him my congratulations for his able work. No better choice of mentor for this fine outfit could have been made. Considering their distinguished military records and their evident sincerity of purpose, I have also great trust in the capability and leadership of Colonel Farolan and Colonel Rancudo.

To these officers of yours, I say in earnest entreaty, take good care of the men. I accompany this entreaty with an order: Give me a periodic report of the manner you have performed this moral duty to the men. I will expect a first report as of the first day you hit camp in the Congo. And I want each and everyone of you, officers and men, to feel free to write to me directly. Never mind the channels. Make your letters as personal as you want, and you can be sure I will answer each and every letter of yours.

To your families and relatives, I give assurance that they can call on me any time for every assistance at all time in any of their problems. I fully understand and share the feelings of your families and loved ones at this moment of parting. The Filipino family is among the closest-knit in the world. This is one reason behind the skill and bravery of the Filipino soldier, reason for him to return in triumph, honor and glory.

And so I conclude, officers and men and guests who are here on this day, February 7th, 1963 is a day to remember. To the families and loved ones of the 9th Tactical Fighter Squadron, it is a day to remember as one of sorrowful parting, sweetened by a resharpened feeling of love and a sense of justified pride that a dear one has been accorded the privilege of doing an extraordinary service for his country. To the officers and men of the squadron, it is a day to remember as one in which they have selflessly offered to consecrate themselves and everything earthly precious to them in sublime love of their native land. To us their superior officers and comrade-in-arms, who sent them out on this mission, it is a day to remember as remindful of the graveness of our responsibility and the need for sacrifice on the part of so many, in order to build a prosperous and great nation. And finally, to our country, it is a day to remember, as one that renews the prideful feeling that the Filipino nation is a Nation of heroes and true men who will not count the cost, who will happily give up everything dear, including life itself, if necessary for the honor and glory of the motherland.

And so, beloved and dear officers and men of the 9th Tactical Fighter Squadron, Philippine Air Force, in behalf of our people I salute you and bid you Godspeed and say to you, bring back the Philippine flag with honor, and with it, your “limbas” heralding your triumph as we fondly and lovingly await everyone of you with unbounded joy on your return.

God bless you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.