Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the LP Convention

[Released on April 6, 1963]

The Liberal and Nacionalista Parties

THE LIBERAL PARTY today is the favorite of destiny. In 1957, we won the vice-presidency although our presidential candidate lost. In 1961, we won the presidency although our party lost the leadership in both Houses of Congress. So in our address to the National Directorate of our party on January 28, 1962, we reported this lack of control of our party in both Houses of Congress. But we vowed to remedy the situation by declaring that “The LP has handled more formidable difficulties than this problem in the past; so we are confident that our party will be able to solve successfully the problem of leadership in Congress.”

Today, that prediction has been fulfilled because at this time of the convention of the LP, the Speaker of the House of Representatives is a Liberal, the Hon. Cornelio Villareal, and the President of the Senate is a Liberal, the Hon. Ferdinand Marcos. Ours is the first administration in democratic history which started with both Houses of Congress controlled by the rival party but before we were half our way, both Houses were placed under the same party as that of the Administration. Considering the undesirability of Legislative-Executive conflict, this augurs well for the success of our Administration and for the welfare of our people.

We express our appreciation to those former Nacionalistas who have joined or assisted us to make this change possible. These new brethren of ours in the party deserve our appreciation and that of the people because they placed the welfare of the country above the interest of their decadent party. Perhaps even more, our old brethren in the party merit also our gratitude and that of our people because of their sense of understanding and even sacrifice, sharing leadership with new brethren, thereby placing the interest of their country and party above their personal interest. Let us now merge these two groups into one compact party united for victory in the coming election, united for reform and united for giving our country the most successful administration for a long time in its history.

After more than a year of dedicated labor from our assumption of the administration to rebuild from the wreckage left in the wake of the corruption and mismanagement of the NP regime, we can look our people in the eye and say with conviction that we have done well in an appalling job under appalling odds.

There were two principal tasks that had to be tackled when our people commissioned us to serve them. The first was the deteriorating economy and the symptomic spiralling prices. From the 6% rate of economic growth when the Garcia-NP regime started, the rate of growth fell to 4.4% in 1961. Prices of commodities were rising beyond the capacity of the people to pay. Rice had risen to as high as P3.00 a ganta and queues had formed in Manila to buy a ganta of rice at controlled prices. The worst part of it all was that there was no hope in sight for the deteriorating economic situation and the spiralling prices.

There was no hope for the economic hardships of the people because the twelve-year system of economic controls had exhausted its usefulness to the economy and the only prospect under controls was continued deterioration in the face of our rapidly rising population. The tragic situation of a dead-end in the economy under controls was aggravated in its hopelessness by an orgy of corruption among the officialdom in all levels which portended complete national disaster.

Apart from the spiralling prices, other symptoms of the grave economic malady were the state of huge deficit in the financial operations of the Government and the negative conditions of the dollar reserves in the banking system. At the end of 1961, the government was operating on a deficit of about P200 million. Dramatizing the desperate financial situation, the P13 million calamity fund was exhausted and the P120-thousand outlay for Malacañang household expenditures had a balance of P36.00. In the Central Bank, the dollar reserves amounted to $101 million.

The economic and fiscal situation was critical. Immediate remedial action was imperative. The remedy could not wait for congressional action because it would be too late. Moreover, Congress was in no position at that time to take the urgent remedial action because it was under the control of an obstructionist party and it was hopelessly torn by passionate partisan strife. There was no time to lose.

The President could take the action but aside from revising the tariff, it was essential to constitute a dollar stabilization fund of at least $250 million. Realizing the critical situation, we acted boldly by sending an economic mission to the United States in a pessimistic atmosphere in an attempt to constitute the needed stabilization fund. Fortunately, this mission succeeded in its task in the phenomenal period of nine days by obtaining commitments that would establish a stabilization fund of $300 million, including from the IMF and the US Treasury, thanks to President John Kennedy. The success of the mission was an eloquent proof that the United States under President Kennedy has such faith and confidence in the LP administration that the American government is ready to come to the economic assistance of the Philippines whenever it becomes necessary.

With the necessary safeguards thus assured, we acted unequivocably and firmly as demanded by the interest of the people. Since it was evident that the foreign exchange control was the main tumor debilitating the economy and generating the complicating corruption, notwithstanding that exchange control meant enormous economic power in our hands as President which meant also tremendous political power, within twenty-one days after we assumed office, we performed the inescapable surgical operation in the economic body to cut the tumor by discarding exchange control, thereby deliberately removing tremendous economic and political power from our hands because it was demanded by the welfare of the people.

After instituting decontrol, we swiftly launched the main solution to our economic and social problems—the five-year integrated socio-economic development program which we submitted to Congress the day after we issued the order of decontrol.

After five anxious months thereafter, we had reason to lift our eyes to Divine Providence in gratitude that the surgical operation we performed to cut the tumor of controls in the economy was successful and that the medicine that we prescribed constituting a five-year socio-economic development program was the correct cure to the gravely ailing economy. After five months, the economic patient started to improve. The floating currency rate stabilized at around P3.90. Dollar reserves rose from $103 million to $140 million after reducing the Central Bank obligations from $341 million to $137 million. Export receipts increased by $103 million over the previous year, while imports decreased by $72 million. In contrast to a trade deficit of $144 million in 1961, our external trade accounts showed a surplus of $31 million last year. Operating receipts of the national government increased by $290 million over those of the past year. Agricultural production increased by 5.5 per cent in palay alone, and 7.1 per cent for all food crops. Industrial production for the first six months increased by 7.3 per cent.

Above all, the situation of spiralling prices had been alleviated. The hopeless spiral of prices under the NP regime had simmered down to a moderate rise which has tended to stabilize. This is the unanimous judgment of knowledgeable experts—that clue to the successful surgical operation in decontrol, the rise of prices has been more moderate than was expected, definitely much more moderate than the hopeless spiral that would have continued to worsen had the NP continued in power. As President Jose Fernandez, Jr. of the Far East Bank and Trust Company observed on April 1, 1963: “Internal prices indicate a much stronger basic position than many of us were willing to concede a year ago. Contrary to fears that price levels would rise sharply, we now find that general wholesale prices increased by only 5%, consumer prices in Manila by 6%, consumer prices outside Manila by only 2% and retail prices in Manila by 7%.” In comparison, in the wake of a similar currency reform, prices increased by 12% in Mexico, 15% in Thailand, 30% in Indonesia and 102% in Argentina.

As a result, altho prices are on the rise in all countries in the world, the prices in the Philippines are now the second lowest in the world. This is borne out by a world survey on prices conducted by the Associated Press in November, 1962 which showed that the highest prices in the world are in France, second in Italy, third in the United States while the lowest prices in the world are in Holland, second in the Philippines and third in Egypt.

The success of the Administration in the matter of prices has been outstanding on the price of rice and corn. In 1961, despite an importation of P60 million worth of rice from abroad, the price of rice in the non-harvest months of August to October rose to as high as P3.00 a ganta. In Manila, queues were formed to buy one ganta of rice at the controlled price as during the Japanese occupation. In Visayas and Mindanao, rice sold at P2.50 a ganta and in Palawan, P3.00. After we took over, through the newly organized Rice and Corn Administration, our Administration did not import rice yet while we bought the local produce at P11.50 a cavan, when we sold it to the public rice sold at the low price of from P0.85 to P0.95 a ganta and rice at that price was available all over the Philippines. For this remarkable performance, we are indebted to former Congressman Jose Feliciano, RCA Manager, whom we heartily congratulate. In view of the crucial task of Manager Feliciano in our program for the people, we seek your cooperation by not imposing demands on the RCA and on its management, although you may make to him requests and suggestions, because the success or failure of our rice and corn program, in the eyes of our people, is the decisive test of the success or failure of our Administration.

We have, therefore, licked organically the problem of spiralling prices which developed during the NP administration. We have done this through correct and successfully operated solutions to our economic problems. We can now feel confident that although the peoples of other countries may groan for some time under uncontrollably spiralling prices, whatever rise there may be in the prices of goods in the Philippines it is so moderate as not to go beyond the reach of the average consumer to pay. We can therefore now turn our anxieties and efforts to the constructive phase of our program, which is to increase goods, jobs and income.

During the campaign, we pledged to the people that we would stop the rise of prices in general and that we would lower the price of rice in particular. These we have done.

The NPs now clamor for us to lower the prices in general. This is the kind of colossal insincerity and deception that has caused the people to mistrust, dislike and discard the NP. They have been advocating decontrol; they are in accord with decontrol under which prices will not go down but have to be offset by the rise of income; and yet the NPs clamor for the lowering of prices, as if this could be done. In the words of one of their candid leaders, Alfredo Montelibano, “we clamor for decontrol and yet we clamor also for the lowering of prices which cannot be done under decontrol.” In clamoring for the lowering of prices as if they could do it, the NPs forget that the people will never forget that it was under the NPs that the prices rose up and spiraled even without decontrol. For them now to give the impression that they could lower the prices under decontrol is an exhibition of their calloused incorrigibility in deceiving the people. It is nothing short of amazing that the NPs have not awakened from their attitude that they can deceive the people. That they deceived the people before they rose to power and deceived the people again when they came to power was perhaps understandable although deplorable. But for the NPs to continue deceiving the people now even after they were thrown out of power shows that they are simply impossible. The only thing possible in dealing with the NP in the face of all these is for the people to continue repudiating them in the polls so that the new opposition party that will arise in their place will not repeat the incorrigible insincerity and deception of the NP.

To state the situation in common parlance, after the LP administration performed the surgical operation on the economic patient and applied the prescribed medicine, the patient is not yet well but he is feeling better and is on the way to recovery. His temperature is still high, that is why there is still a moderate rise in prices, but it is not as high as it was before the operation and not as high as it would now be had the patient continued under the former bungling NP doctor and had he not taken a new LP doctor.

With the patient now getting better and definitely on the way to recovery and good health, it would be suicide to call back the old NP doctor in whose care the patient almost died. It would not only be suicidal but criminal to elect and return the NP candidates to office. If this were done, the prices instead of moderately rising will shoot up and spiral even higher than they did during the NP regime. Wiser from their experience, the people should now forget about the NPs who in their administration gave us the worst hardships in our lives since the Japanese occupation. With the prices generally stabilized and at most susceptible to a moderate rise the only thing to do now is to support the dedicated LP administration, to continue with its sound five-year socioeconomic program and for all to work hard to speed up the full success of the program so as fast as possible, there will be more income for the people, until the income in the hands of the people will become so high and abundant that they will be able to easily afford the moderate rise of prices a condition which will at last bring the life of prosperity and abundance that we devotedly seek for our people.

From all what we have said, there is no doubt that the economy is faring well. Economic authorities both here and abroad have approved of our socio-economic program after one year of observation. In its convention on February 21, 1963, the Philippine Chamber of Commerce supported the program as a “farsighted” one. In its convention on March 23, 1963, the Philippine Chamber of Industries, also expressing support for the program, described it as “a practical, realistic and balanced approach to the problem of promoting and financing the sustained increase of our Nation’s productivity, income and employment.” On January 29, 1963, the National City Bank of New York, lauding the Administration’s decontrol policy, declared that “As 1963 begins, there is ample evidence of the wisdom of this decision. The end of the first year of President Macapagal’s administration finds the Philippines looking ahead with increased confidence.” In an editorial on January 22, 1963, the New York Times declared that “The record for 1962 has gone far to justify the hopes for progress in the Philippines evoked when reformist President Diosdado Macapagal took office there a year ago.” On December 27, 1962, US Assistant Secretary of State Averell Harriman said that “Under President Diosdado Macapagal’s administration, there is no reason why the Philippines cannot become one of the most prosperous countries of Asia.”

In the face of the testimony of these objective and authoritative observers on the success of our economic effort, the NP attacks on the economy are clearly partisan and unworthy of credence. Let us, therefore, not be taken by the criticism of the NP on economic matters, including prices. There are two kinds of economics. One is economics for the people; the other is economics for self. The only economics that the Nacionalista leaders know is the second kind, that is, the economics of how to enrich themselves “while the people go hungry.

The other, task that we assumed in accordance with the people’s mandate was the reduction and eradication of the graft and corruption that was widespread during the NP regime.

On this task, neutral observers here and abroad are unanimous that we have done a good job. The tong system is gone. Bribery of high officials directly or through influence peddlers is gone. With graft virtually eradicated at the upper and ranking echelon, we are now proceeding to eradicate it at lower and to the lowest levels. You will recall that in our address to the National Directorate of the Liberal Party in January, 1962, we said: “As long as we are president and as far as humanly possible, we shall not allow corruption to thrive again in the government to the end that in 1965, the issue of graft and corruption will not be raised against the LP.” With the cooperation of the other leaders and members of our party and the encouragement of the people, we have so succeeded in our drive against graft and corruption that we do not have to wait for 1965 for in the coming election of 1963, we can say with truth to our people that we have licked the problem of graft and corruption and that we shall be relentless until graft shall have been eliminated for good. On this alone, the people will back up our candidates because while we won clean government with clean hands and faces, the NP faces are still dirty with the soot of corruption that was so thick that they cannot scrape it off without cutting their faces.

In their desperate and vain attempt to associate the LP administration with graft that smeared all over their faces and bodies during their dirty regime, NPs have cited supposed scandals under our Administration like the Stonehill deportation, Virginia tobacco importation, the road signs contract, and the PNB swindles. The acts of our Administration in these cases are above board and have effectively protected the people’s interest. By citing these cases, the NPs have actually indicted themselves. The truth is that all these cases originated from the immorality of the NP regime and all that the LP administration has done with understandable difficulty was to take curative steps to remedy the wrongs committed by the past NP regime.

In the Stonehill case, it was the stinking graft, corruption and influence peddling under the NP regime that enabled Stonehill to build his business empire and weave his web of corruption; and it fell on the LP to deport him out of the country and smash his web of corruption. In the tobacco case, it was the rampant influence peddling under the NP regime that made possible the importation of Virginia leaf tobacco by the influence peddling Agro-Industrial outfit; it fell on the LP to formulate a procedure for the continuation of the sanctioned importation through public bidding to forestall anomaly. In the road signs case, the purchase of the road signs without public bidding was approved under the graft-ridden NP regime; it fell on the LP administration to cancel and nullify the road signs contract. In the PNB case, the swindles started and took place under the NP regime; it fell on the new LP administration to discover the swindles and to take firm and corrective action to the extent of relieving the two highest officials of the bank. If these are cases of graft that should be submitted to the people we agree to taking them to the people because it is plain that the evil lies in the NP which originated these abuses and the virtue lies in the LP which took corrective action. If there are cases upon which the people should decide in the coming polls, the people’s choice is easy—which is that, as it was the NP that originated these wrongs, in order that similar cases may not arise again, the NP and their candidates must never again be returned to public office and power in order that never again will a hard-working, work-saddled and dedicated administration like the LP be called upon to dissipate part of its precious time in finding remedies for the wrongs and abuses of the NP.

From the result of the recent convention of the NP and from former President Garcia’s recent utterances, it can be seen that President Garcia is still the predominant leader of the NP. Our people can therefore judge the two parties on the record of their respective and predominant two leaders who became presidents. If a voter can say with sincerity that President Garcia was a more honest and upright president than President Macapagal then Nacionalista candidates may be preferred over LP candidates in order to return to power the party led by President Garcia. But if on this decisive field of graft and corruption, the voter adjudges that President Macapagal has done more than President Garcia in reducing and fighting corruption, then the people have only one course to take in their interest—which is, to wipe out the unremedially corrupt NP in the coming election in order to permit the reformist and graft-busting Liberal Party to continue the drive for the moral regeneration until the attainment of complete success and victory.

The difference between President Garcia and myself is indicated by our treatment of our brothers. Because of past cases, brothers of presidents have become a public concern in our country. When both President Garcia and we became presidents, we had brothers in the government service. When President Garcia was elected, his brother resigned from the government to engage in money-making activities. In our case, I kept my brother in the government service where he can be under my official authority and responsibility, where he can be subjected to investigation and responsibility to the people in case he abuses his relationship with the President. This instance alone shows a world of difference between the NP outlook and the LP outlook, which is that while the NP leaders, their brothers, relatives and friends provide for their future by using their influence at the expense of the people, the LP leaders, their brothers, relatives and co-workers dedicate themselves completely in the service of the people to provide a future not for themselves but for the people.

Indeed, if the honor, prestige and success of our Administration depended only on our self and the immediate members of our family, our party and our people could rest assured that we shall not be found wanting. We are resolved that while I shall exert a mighty effort to help improve the livelihood of all our countrymen, on our part, as long as I am President, my family and I will not enrich ourselves even by one centavo beyond my salary as a warranty that this LP administration shall not fail our people in giving them an upright, decent and good government.

Our relentless drive against graft and corruption has been of two kinds: positive and negative. The positive measures constituted such steps as the presidential family and key officials setting the right example, considering integrity and honesty as the prime qualifications for sensitive positions, banning presidential relatives and others from influence peddling and prescribing procedures that would prevent occasions for corruption.

The negative drive constituted in the prosecution of wrongdoers as a deterrent to the recurrence of the wrongs. We could have undertaken mass prosecutions of grafters and malefactors but in view of their big number and in consideration of the socio-economic development program that we launched, we decided in the people’s interest to seek the purpose of deterrence by limiting prosecutions to significant and exemplary cases in order to avoid a nation-wide and lasting tension that might fatally jeopardize our economic and social program. Accordingly, we have so far limited punitive and redressive action against the top offenders of the following categories: (1) aliens who organized webs of corruption; (2) naturalized Filipinos who engaged in extensive venalities; (3) aliens who engaged in profiteering; (4) aliens who brazenly engaged in electioneering; (5) aliens and Filipinos who engaged in tax evasion; (6) Filipinos who misused high elective public office to advance their business interests; (7) Filipinos who misused appointive public office to amass wealth; and (8) labor leaders who exploit their followers.

Our restraint in undertaking punitive operations proved to be sound because the tension caused by the limited prosecutions was already claimed to have adversely affected the vigorous implementation of our socio-economic program, notwithstanding that thus far we have criminally prosecuted to send to jail only seven “big shots.” We reserve the right to prosecute more “big shots,” should this become necessary in the people’s interest because of (1) an inadequate deterrent effect of the cases already filed; (2) the necessity of exposing those who seek to harm the public interest by obstructionism or who lay false claims to virtues they do not possess to the deception and injury of the people; and (3) the accumulation of evidence of such nature and conclusiveness that to withhold or defer action would not be compatible with the public interest.

There is one feature of our limited punitive actions which merits notice. It is the fact that the LP administration has departed from the old way of treating the “big fishes” differently from the “small fry.” Such attitude made a mockery of the rule of law and the equality of the citizens before the law, made the bulk of the people lose their faith in the dispensation of justice and effectively hampered the growth of the country. Now, things are different under the LP administration. Now there are no more “big fishes” and “small fry” in the eyes of the law. Now if you commit a crime or a wrong, you cannot seek protection and immunity by claiming to be a “big shot” because no matter how big you are the law will reach and punish you for your crime and wrong. Conversely, now, the poorest and weakest citizen can not be done an injustice just because of his poverty or obscurity. Should this Administration become aware of any case wherein a humble citizen is denied his right or is done an injustice only because of his poverty, the entire facilities and resources of the Administration will be utilized to assist the humblest citizen in the defense and protection of his right.

In our drive for moral regeneration, we have been accused of dictatorial tendencies and dictatorship. The very outspoken manner in which this charge was made refutes itself. The very fact that the NP can call us dictator and get away with it proves that we are no dictator. Our partisan critics who had become accustomed to the dilly-dallying ways of the past mistake firm leadership with dictatorship. We have always complied with the decisions of the Supreme Court even if we do not agree with such decisions. As long as the President complies with the decisions of the Supreme Court, there can be no dictatorship in this country. We have always said that the outstanding quality of our people is their passion for liberty. The passion of our people for freedom is a guarantee that no dictator can arise in our country because while the people can tolerate alarmist and weak oppositionists, they will not tolerate any dictator. If we were a dictator, our unreasonable critics would now have long been in jail. Yet where are they? A columnist who has been viciously calumniating us continuously, instead of being in jail, has been twice invited to Malacañang dinners which he has attended. An NP senator, who in his desperate attempt to become the leader of the opposition, attacked us viciously in the NP convention, instead of being thrown in jail, had breakfast with us at Malacañang the following morning. As long as our bitter critics who call us dictators have dinner or breakfast with us, the charge of dictatorship is downright ridiculous. When our professional critics can no longer call the President dictator because they are silenced in jail, then there is dictatorship in our country. But under our Administration, that will never happen because we too are opposed to dictatorship and should there be any real threat of dictatorship we will be with those who will oppose it in order to defend and uphold democracy and freedom in our land.

Pursuing their pattern of deception and negative and sterile thinking, the NPs have also attributed to us promises which we never made. All the pledges that we made during our campaign were made in good faith and intended to be fulfilled. We are satisfied that our promises to the people have been and are being faithfully and substantially fulfilled in the light of the people’s interest. Instead of using their time mathematically measuring the fulfillment of our promises and inventing promises that we did not make, the opposition should assess whether or not our performance and actions satisfactorily meet the problems of the country. On our part, we will keep on complying with our pledges as required by the interest of the people but if at any time, we find that a plan or even a promise that we made in good faith during our campaign should be suspended or modified as the prevailing circumstances demand in the people’s interest, we shall not hesitate to act accordingly because our paramount duty is not to prove that we were mathematical prophets in our estimate of the national problems and the solutions needed but to do at all times what is in the best interest of our people.

What were our true pledges to the people? We set them out clearly in a signed article that was published in a morning paper shortly before the election, on October 16, 1961, as follows:

“1. We shall provide the nation with firm and zealous, upright and competent leadership;

“2. We shall eliminate graft and corruption, restore decency, infuse efficiency and dedication in the public service;

“3. We shall implement a socio-economic program for the prosperity of all, thru private enterprise;

“4. We shall generate maximum employment during our time;

“5. We shall undertake a massive social program that will elevate the level of living of the masses of our nation.

“6. We shall strengthen security ties with the nations of the Free World to insure the country’s security from communism and increase the national prestige before the family of nations;

“7. We shall implement a program of urgently needed reforms;

“8. We shall give special attention to the effection of a rice and corn production program which will insure self-sufficiency in the staple foods of our people, an attractive margin of profit to the local producers, proper distribution and the sale of the cereals to the consumers at prices within the reach of the masses.”

Let all fair-minded citizens judge whether or not we have complied with these pledges. The remarkable thing is that we have been able to substantially comply with them in only one year after we assumed office. Indeed, that is one difference between us and the NP. We comply with our pledges while the NPs do not. A very simple example is the case of a vociferous NP senator who attacked President Garcia’s purchase and use of the presidential yacht Lapu-Lapu but upon first invitation extended to him by the President this senator enjoyed himself in the luxurious yacht. On the other hand, that yacht is now at our disposal as President because nobody wants to buy it because of its inflated price at the time of its acquisition. Many, including the press, have urged us to use it because of its speed, safety and facilities for presidential work; but because we made the pledge not to use it and tins is a pledge that is in our power to fulfill without harm to the people, we have preferred to travel in discomfort in ordinary navy vessels rather than travel luxuriously in the yacht in line with our norm that when we make a pledge we will do it as long as doing it under changed conditions will not harm the welfare of the people.

Among these pledges that we have made, we wish to refer now to our social program to assist the masses to attain a higher level of living. Indeed, we have set this as one of the three goals of our socio-economic development program.

We have already taken various measures and we will take more in order to help the common man. Except in words, the interest of the common people has been relegated for a long time. Under the LP administration, we are resolved to help them with deeds.

In this resolve, we would like to state that our rice and corn program through the RCA was intended to assure to the masses their food. While waiting for the income of the people to outstrip the prices under our socio-economic program, we have assured our people through the NAMARCO reasonable prices of other prime commodities like milk, canned fish, canned meat, medicines and drugs. We have placed within the people’s reach “Pagasa” clothing at the lowest possible prices. We have intensified the housing program and pushed through a project to provide multi-storey tenement houses for the poorest citizens in conveniently located sites.

We have put up the EEA to give a chance to the unemployed to have an income with which to procure his bare needs.

We have paved the way for laborers to become proprietors by selling the government textile factory to the workers employed in the factory. We are establishing a university for workers.

We have also submitted a land reform measure to Congress which will abolish tenancy, shift capital from land to industry, and establish a Bill of Rights for farm tillers similar to those enjoyed by industrial workers. We plead with Congress to approve this measure in its current session. It is four hundred years overdue. Tenancy is no longer compatible with modern conditions of progress and human freedom. Many excuses can be put up to impute defects to the measure to abolish tenancy while avowedly supporting tenancy abolition in principle but all of these are hypocrisy. We can improve the measure but let us pass it in a satisfactory form. To do otherwise would be to fail in our duty and to block vital progressive reform. On our part, we have put our soul into this land reform measure that abolishes tenancy because as one appurtenant to a tenant family, we have known the degradation and impotency felt by tenants in their quest for a life of progress and dignity. We shall stake the future of our Administration on this measure. We have noted that the theme of our convention is “Unity for Reform.” If this theme is not to be hypocritical, indeed, if our party is to be worthy of the crusade that it has launched and assumed, we expect all loyal adherents of our party and its cause for reforms to support this land reform measure because such action will prove that the LP today is authentically a party of reform and progress as contrasted with the NP which is a party of privilege, reaction and retrogression.

Glancing at the national scene today, if there is one thing crystal clear, it is the fact that the Liberal Party has magnificently met the challenge of the times that cry out for reform and real progress while the NP has miserably lagged behind the times in this space era, still moving, as it were, in the phlegmatic age of conservatism and oppression of the people.

We can no longer stay the march of the time and progress which demands genuine ministration to the conditions and needs of the people at large. The LP has marched with the times. The NP, like King Canute, wants to order the waves to stop from rolling to the shore, wants to maintain the status quo and the antiquated age of privilege. The NP is the party of the past that is only fit to fade away. The LP, by the dedication, imagination, and progressive-mindedness of its leaders, with the selfless support of its members, is clearly the party of the present and the future that merits the support of the people.

It is evident that the Nacionalista Party today no longer serves any useful purpose to the people. It lays false claim to being pre-war NP of the Quezon-Osmeña-Roxas triumvirate which it is not. On its own real self as one of the wings of the pre-war NP party, it has given the country the most graft-ridden and worst administration in our history. Led now by the same leaders who were responsible for that graft-ridden and obnoxious regime, it contains absolutely no element of hope for further service to the country.

The Liberal Party, too, had its failure in the eyes of the people in its previous administration of the country’s affairs. But it responded to the challenge of the times and of the country’s needs by a program of moral, economic and social reform which it is now vigorously prosecuting. In doing so, it justified and won the people’s verdict as being worthy of continuing in the service of the nation.

The NP has acted differently. It has not changed. It is still controlled by vested interests and notorious grafters. For the people to elect candidates of the NP in the coming election is to give sanction to graft and grafters and to reaction and reactionaries. To aggravate the situation, its so-called leaders have confined themselves to exaggerated attacks against the Administration without offering any alternatives to the solutions that the Administration has applied to the country’s problems. Since the NP has lost every quality for renewed service to the country, it is best for the people to wipe it out in the coming elections in order that in its place may arise a new opposition party that can provide some hope for the people.

We therefore ask of you in this convention continued faith in your leaders, continued cooperation, continued sacrifice whenever needed and acceptance of the challenge of greatness in your respective roles in our great party. If you will do this, we shall sweep these November elections and thereafter sustain our party as the savior of our people and the greatest party in the history of our nation within our lifetime and within the foreseeable future beyond.

In 1960, we told our party that if we did not win the presidency in 1961, we would regard our life as a career of failure and shame. We won the presidency. Recently, when we were in Laoag, Ilocos Norte, we told our party supporters that we would never stop until we enabled the president of our party, Senator Ferdinand Marcos, to be installed as President of the Senate. He was elected President of the Senate yesterday. Today, we pledge that we shall exhaust our energy to help in our task of sweeping the coming elections in order to stabilize the leadership of our party in the Senate and to win the necessary local seats that will in turn assure an LP administration beyond 1965.

After the elections, we expect to meet you and with God’s grace, the people’s support, and our partymen’s cooperation, in the tumultuous exultation of our sweeping electoral victory and in line with our previous fortunate predictions be able to tell you, “We told you so!” And this shall be a boon to our people for whom we bear full devotion and whose endless well-being lies in the program, dedication, and greatness of the present Liberal Party.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.