Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Inter-island Deep-sea Fishing Association

[Released on November 24, 1962]

OUR FISHING PROBLEM

IT IS a real pleasure to be with you today. One of the jobs of a President is to meet scheduled appointments. A difficult part of this job is to attend an appointment at a time when you feel that you are just about to surrender to the weight and burden of everyday problems that demand a daily exertion of physical and mental energy. On this occasion, however, I find extreme pleasure in meeting with you, fully cognizant of the role you play in the country’s socio-economic program, that of bringing about self-sufficiency in fish.

This is a vital role because our first duty is to provide adequate food for our people. Rice is the staple food of our people. Rice invariably goes along with fish and vice versa. Ours is basically a rice-and-fish economy. It is the intent of my Administration to bring about a climate that will give hope and form, opportunity and realization, to these two vital items so directly related and indispensable to the health and nutritional requirements of our people—a sufficient and abundant supply of rice and fish to insure the health and happiness of our people.

Rice is not a serious problem any more. But fish still is. It is your task and mine to solve this problem. We can, we must, we will solve this problem.

My Administration is not unaware of the fact that the Philippines imports no less than 44 million pesos worth of canned fish a year; that our territorial waters are seven times larger than our land area; that our fishery resources are considered by experts to be one of the richest in the world; that our waters abound in fish of all kinds and description; that our coastlines are blessed with bottoms, shoals, and waters that are rich in aquatic products beyond the imagination to calculate; that our fishing industry, compared to those of other nations, has a time lag of no less than 50 years; and that you, entrepreneurs of this neglected industry, have been left mostly to yourselves.—to solve the multifarious problems of financing your projects, of operating profitably, devoid of assistance, or incentive, or protection.

Under my Administration, this neglected condition of the vital fishing industry shall not persist. Definite, positive steps have been taken by this Administration to develop a vigorous fishing industry, designed not only to attain self-sufficiency in fish, but also to enable us to export our surplus fishery products.

There was a time when the government spent millions for other industries and little for the fishing industry. There was a time when the agricultural segments of our economy, with the exception of the fishing industry, received continuous aid from the government in the form of incentives and cash. Now, the time has come to attend to the fishing industry in the manner appropriate for its development. Your industry which, heretofore, has been neglected, unaided, and to a certain extent discriminated against, will now be elevated to its rightful position of importance,—a key position that it deserves in the economic structure of our country.

This is the reason why, upon my assumption to the Office of the President of the Philippines, I immediately certified, without hesitation, the bill converting the Bureau of Fisheries into a Fisheries Commission. This was a necessary step in the development of the fishing industry of this country. The Commission, in clear, unmistakable language, seeks to remedy the shortcomings of the Bureau of Fisheries, to centralize all governmental functions in connection with the fishing industry, and to enable the government to lend and extend the kind of helping hand necessary, vital, and indispensable to fishery development. Unfortunately, the bill, as approved by the Conference Committee, failed to receive approval by the Senate. I am more than hopeful, however, that come January next year, this bill will meet with approval and thus become a milestone in the fishing industry. Because I am aware of your problems, aware of the need of a more powerful, authoritative, and expanded office, you can rest assured that I will take positive and decisive steps to improve the fishing industry.

The projected Fisheries Commission can only form the foundation of the fisheries phase of the socio-economic program of this Administration. It can only provide the vital link between this Administration and you, who are engaged in the business of fish and fishing. It can only set the basis for positive action.

Constructive steps and measures are on the way. A dredging program is now going on to restore the rivers of Central Luzon to their original state of being a fruitful source of livelihood for the thousands of fishermen along their banks. Measures are being undertaken to combat pollution of our rivers. I am satisfied to note the solicitous, able, and willing interest and help of the officials of the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources and the Bureau of Fisheries who are performing their jobs remarkably well.

Indeed, our fishing industry is very much behind the times. Our trawls and basnigs seem to get along well enough. But unless we adopt the use of modern gears and equipment, we cannot fully and advantageously exploit our fishery resources.

There is a long way to go. The important thing is that we know where we are and we know where we should go. This knowledge has led us to accelerate the acquisition of modern techniques in fishing, to the filing of a request for a UN Special Assistance Fund of 2 million dollars, for the purpose of undertaking a 5-year exploratory and training program for purse seining, trawling, tuna seining, and long-lining, marketing, processing, and electronics. The impact of this program will redound directly to your benefit, and concomitantly to that of the entire country. Modern fishing gears and equipment and the technical know-how in their operations can solve our annual fish shortage of about 250 million kilos. You have among you an example of what a modernized fishing gear can do. I refer to the Martinez brothers, who, out of their own initiative, undertook the study of purse seining in the U.S., came back with purse seine gears, started operating early this year amidst pessimistic comments on the part of even their close friends, and now, are catching as much as 50 tons of fish a night. Even with this performance, they appear to have hardly started. Their experience proves two things; that there is a lot more fish to catch, and that we can do it with modern gears. This confirms the view of experts that we are actually, with the use of basnig alone, getting not more than 20 per cent of the sardines, anchovies, and mackerels in our waters. Of the tuna, the percentage of catch is negligible, which is paradoxical, considering that we have tuna in abundance, all year round.

We realize, of course, that fishing, particularly deep-sea fishing, is not simply using the right gears and equipment. It must have its corollary facilities for refrigeration and icing, transportation, berthing, and marketing. Under this Administration, these will be made available to you in due time, sooner perhaps than you expect. I am glad to announce that your boats can now enjoy the safety of a port, exclusively for fishing boats because Pier 14 has been released for the exclusive use of the fishing industry. This should solve the many problems you have in connection with loading and unloading of gears and equipment, as well as ice and fish, or your “parking” problems.

Mention has been made of dynamite fishing. I stand four square against this method. I shall never compromise this stand with any violator. Let it be clear, therefore, to one and all, big or small, that dynamite fishing will be prosecuted to the full extent of the law and that anyone who defies this law will find it highly unprofitable.

It is said that no program of fishing development can very well succeed without direct governmental assistance in the form of cash and other privileges. There is truth in this. The development of the fishing industry is expensive. It is for this reason that more developed countries like Japan, U.S., England, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Italy, Canada, and others, have set up definite financial assistance schemes designed primarily to aid the fishing business entrepreneur. In Japan, there is the Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries Finance Corporation, wholly subscribed by the State, with the power to borrow from foreign banks and institutions, with lending authority of as much as 30 million yen. In Denmark, the Fishery Bank, a corporation established by law exclusively to finance the fishing industry, has been set up, backed up by the state. It gives loans at the rate of 80 per cent of the value of the complete vessel. In Canada, loans and grants are available to all fishermen at the rate of 70 per cent of the actual cost of the complete vessel. In England, direct grants are extended by the government for the acquisition of a new vessel, at a rate of one quarter of the actual expenditures incurred. In the U.S., the Fisheries and Loan Fund Act authorizes the use of 20 million dollars by the Secretary of the Interior for the purpose of financing and refinancing operators, maintenance, replacement, repair, and equipment of fishing gear vessels and for research into the basic problems of fisheries. Interest rates run from a minimum 3 per cent to 7 1/2 per cent.

The fishing industries of these countries attained maturity and development undoubtedly in large measure because of the assistance directly extended to them in the form of financial assistance schemes and other incentives.

If these financing measures for the fishing industry have been taken in other countries, there is no reason for not doing the same in our country. It must be realized, however, that any such scheme will involve a tremendous amount of money. It must fit into our budget structure. Two important practical difficulties present themselves in the formalization of a financial assistance scheme designed to help the fishing industry.

These are:

1. That of providing flexibility consistent with the fluctuations and hazards of fishing while retaining the two essential elements of selection and security consistent with the use of public funds for this type of assistance; and

2. That of ensuring that the facilities remain in the form in which they are provided, to serve the particular purposes for which they are designed.

These two difficulties, as a matter of fact, have been the problems of these countries with financial assistance schemes. But they are not insurmountable deterrents to the establishment of a financial assistance scheme in this country. The Administration will take steps so that you will have a Deep Sea Fishing Administration or a similar body to handle the development of deep-sea and off-shore fisheries, furnished with sufficient funds to guarantee long term loans.

All that I have said boils down to the fact that it is my purpose to help develop the fishing industry. This Administration is aware of your problems. But the industry itself is a challenge not only to the government but more so to you who are engaged in fishing. In this vital task, you will be called upon to use your better judgment, your initiative, your energy, your sacrifices and even dreams, in order to bring about a development, profitable to you and beneficial to our people as a whole.

The goal is not simple. It is the eradication of the need of importing 44 million pesos worth or 80 million kilos of fish. It is the development of scientific fishing designed to exploit our fishery resources in full and, therefore, fill in the shortage of 250 million kilos of fish for purposes of nutrition. It is the realization of a dream to derive from our aquatic reserve, a rich source of export commodities. It is the achievement of a better business for you and the assurance of food for everyone in our country. It is, in the final analysis, the fulfillment of our inescapable obligation to provide sufficiently the food of our people—their rice and fish.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.