Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Asian Press Conference

[Delivered in Manila, February 12, 1962]

THE ASIAN PROBLEM OF FREEDOM

I DEEPLY APPRECIATE the privilege of addressing this select group of journalists from the nations of Asia gathered here at the First Asian Press Conference under the sponsorship of the National Press Club of the Philippines.

It is well that the peoples of Asia, through various segments of their societies, should have more intercourse and dealings with one another. The present Administration of the Philippine Republic is commited to the policy of promoting this expanded intercourse among Asian nations both in word and in fact. It is in this spirit that I greet you all.

We, the peoples of Asia, must promote more dealings among ourselves because it is our destiny to be with, and among each other. Not only are we bound to deal with each other by the destiny of geography but by the identity of vital problems. We are all confronted generally with the common difficulties of poverty, disease, illiteracy and underdevelopment. All of us aspire to the rapid and efficient utilization of our natural resources in quest of a life of abundance in freedom for our impoverished peoples.

That is an essential qualification of our common aspiration for a better life for our peoples—freedom. We do not seek prosperity alone; we seek it in freedom. Asians who have been hit by the lash of bondage understandably love liberty. We therefore seek an abundant life in liberty. In our souls, as we thirst for both prosperity and freedom, we know that if we cannot by any chance have both, if we were forced to make a choice between prosperity and freedom, we would rather have freedom and postpone prosperity than have prosperity without freedom.

Indeed, the critical problem of Asia is freedom. This problem was partly solved for most Asian nations when after the war, one by one beginning with the Philippines, those Asian nations that had fallen in colonial bondage under Western powers obtained their independence from their former mother countries. The struggle for freedom, however, did not necessarily end with political emancipation. A residue of bondage whether economic, political, or sociological, may have remained with the attainment of political independence—a partial bondage which demanded a continuation of the struggle in a perhaps milder, friendlier but nevertheless sustained manner for such full freedom as is realizable by man, which is the dream and the right of every sovereign people.

Even as Asian nations are engaged in a friendly struggle for the fullness of freedom from their former mother countries, they have become beset by a new threat to freedom which ensues from a global ideological conflict. Setting aside the merits of the two contending ideologies, the very ideological conflict has posed a threat to the freedom of Asian countries. Those who are opposed to the communist ideology find their freedom and survival facing a more deadly menace than the tribulations of past colonial bondage. Those who seek to stay clear from involvement in the ideological conflict find their freedom of action compressed by the contending groups. Thus, the manacles of Asia have become heavier by the threat of a new ideology that seeks to spread its tentacles around the earth.

Yet the greatest struggle in every Asian nation for freedom lies and occurs within itself. Being plagued by many common problems of poverty, Asians also have a common quest: the pursuit of democracy, the political system of freedom. Asians may differ in their attitude towards the threat of enticement of a new ideology and in a number of other things; but we do not differ in aspiring to more freedom for our citizens. Instinctively, we have agreed that personal freedom can best be achieved in democracy as we operate and recast our varied governmental systems towards the enjoyment of more individual freedom, which is the essence of the democratic or free way of life which has become the common goal of our varied endeavors.

It is not out of pride but out of consciousness of the implied responsibility, that I say the Philippines has been moving forward to the common Asian goal of political democracy based on direct popular suffrage for over fifty years. It is from the wisdom of this experience that we could, as demonstrated in our most recent election, change from one administration to another without any major or minor upheaval and turmoil. We Filipinos take issue continuously with each other politically, but we are strongly united behind the concept that our noisy and continuous political squabbles are the outward manifestations of a profound passion for freedom and the peace that it requires for existence. We are united in the firmness against violence, especially the type of violence that will subvert our freedom and repress the will to exercise the right of choice. For all our political bickerings, should that freedom and right of choice ever be threatened, we are and always will be one and united in fighting—with our lives if necessary—any threat or menace to our freedom and right of choice.

In short, we are as close as any other Asian country to the goal of a vibrant democracy. One of the reasons for our having progressed towards full freedom is our recognition of the full freedom of the press. Freedom of the press has become a tradition with us, as much as liberty in general has been our national spirit and the fullness of which had been and continues to be our ultimate national goal. In our relentless endeavor in the past to establish a democracy in our land, men of the press dared the might of those transitorily in power and willingly went to jail to champion the cause of press freedom. Today, open the pages of Philippine newspapers, and you will surely read an editorial, a column, a reader’s letter, or a news item criticizing to the verge of libel and abuse the highest officials or the most distinguished citizens of the land. The following day, you will not read of those high officials and those powerful citizens taking reprisal against their critics but instead exercising the freedom of expression that is the right of all, the aggrieved official or citizen answers or hits back with the power of language against his critics.

What I am trying to say is that freedom of the press has become imbedded in our democracy as deeply as anywhere else not only in Asia but, I think, throughout the world. However others view it, we are satisfied and gratified that it is so. Only recently, I expressly announced the policy of my Administration on the freedom of the press in a breakfast meeting with the publishers of our major newspapers. It is a policy that is founded upon the profound passion of Filipinos for freedom. Our policy is that: the Administration supports fully the full freedom of the press; this Administration will not do anything to curtail that freedom but on the contrary will do everything to protect it; that as between the State regulating the freedom of the press and the press indulging in license, my Administration will prefer to risk license by the press than undertake regimentation of the press. Press regimentation is dangerous and may lead to tyranny whereas the lapse of press freedom into license is occasional and transient because freedom has innate qualities of survival, restraint and self-discipline. All these properly make freedom of the press an inviolate part of the system of human freedom itself.

In holding this Asian press conference in Manila, you may then have come to the right place. There is hardly anything more that our Government can do for freedom of the press or for that matter as head of the government, can I expound new theories of press freedom. If you who have come to this conference from other lands seek to know how to expand the frontiers of press freedom, everything that ought to be known can be obtained not from any discharge of duty on the part of government authorities but from the actual practices of freedom of the press in this Republic.

On the other hand, it is you, men of the press, who have a duty to perform to your government and your people. The important role of the press in the enlightenment of peoples, in the dissemination of information, in the extension of cultural influences, and in broadening the areas of human understanding—all these, individually and collectively, carry a concomitant responsibilty. It is a responsibility that weighs on every newspaperman for the lives, the minds, the destinies of nations, are involved. It is a responsibility that calls for the exercise of self-discipline, for adherence to truth, for justice, fairness, and even human kindness. It is a responsibility that shies away from petty, malicious, vicious and destructive criticisms. Great as your roles are in your own respective countries as individuals, greater still is your role, as a group, in the making of history. Heavy too, are the burdens of your individual and collective responsibility, and exacting are the demands on your individual integrity.

Full freedom of the press is recognized by us. It is your duty to see that such freedom does not degenerate into license, that such freedom is not abused. Freedom is a priceless boon. All those who aspire for it, whether it be freedom of the press or any other kind of freedom, must be worthy of it. You, men of the press, must then be worthy of your freedom.

There are many ways in which you can enhance that worthiness. Allow me to cite a few examples. Do not, for instance, be satisfied with superficial knowledge and thinking. Continue to learn and inform yourself for it is a curious truth that the more one learns, the more one realizes how little he knows. The more you learn, the less will there be the tendency to pontificate without good basis simply because you may have the privilege of the ready newspaper space.

For another thing, seek to develop in yourselves the virtues which you would want your officials and your people to have. It is not worthy of the invaluable freedom of the press for a Man of the Press to attribute to officials or to people weaknesses from which he himself suffers in equal or greater degree. This is even a worse offense than license; this is hypocrisy.

Thirdly, Men of the Press, I submit that the press is a noble instrument for public service. Its freedom is not for the Men of the Press only to enjoy, much less to abuse, but to put to the service of the people. This service is no less exacting in unselfishness as that which is expected of the public official or the civic and religious leader. All those who own, run and operate the press therefore must and should be unselfish and disinterested in their labors, as the public official, the civic and religious leader must and should be unselfish. As the public official is asked to act in office not for gain but for service, so, too, the men of the press must utilize their boon of freedom not for profit, material gain, or the promotion of political and business interests, but for the service of the people. To do otherwise, for a Man of the Press to go about his labors in the pursuit of material and personal aggrandizement, would be a greater misdeed than license; this would be a sordid profit venture in the guise of press freedom and the people’s service.

I need not proceed along this vein because surely the men of the press must know even more intensely than others how the press may put into play the quality of self-discipline if they are to be worthy of its freedom. I urge especially the Philippine press to exercise and manifest this self-discipline as the commensurate responsibility of its untrammelled freedom.

To the men of the press from other lands, may I say that today you are among the most important groups of men in Asia. Hundreds of millions of Asians turn to the press for guidance, for help, for justice, for information, for knowledge. For this reason, the press of Asia must be free. It should be so, for freedom cannot exist in a country without free press. In any place or land, look for a free press and there you will find freedom. I urge the consideration of the thought that as your peoples endeavor to reach out to the system of freedom which is our common goal, you can establish, as we have done in our Republic, a political system of freedom with the freedom of the press as one of its impregnable pillars. A vigorous freedom of the press will push your peoples nearer to the attainment of the system of liberty; setbacks in the exercise of freedom of the press will push the Nation farther away from the free way of life and back towards bondage.

To you, all men of the press of all the nations represented in this meeting, I give the fond greetings of the Filipino people and express the fervent wish that not only will you be worthy of the freedom of the press but that you shall, in ever increasing measure, utilize your right of freedom as a mighty weapon for the liberty, peace and well-being of the nations of Asia and of the whole world.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.