Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On Labor Day

NEW HOPE FOR THE COMMON MAN

ONCE AGAIN, we honor some 10 million Filipino workers, together with their fellow workers all over the world. But if Labor Day 1962 must be more than just a yearly ritual, Philippine labor will be well advised to use it as an occasion for some serious introspection. The fundamental problem to which it must address itself is the fact of its own weakness. There is a long unfulfilled expectation that its leaders will be able at last to surmount rivalries and learn to forge an effective working unity.

When trade unions are weak, inequality in labor relations is sharpened; trade unions tend towards truculence; and worse, they become easy prey to those who, by the appeal to narrow class prejudice, would mislead the minds of our workers and turn them against our democratic institutions.

Leaders of Filipino workers have been, in general, alert and strong-minded men, with a genuine belief in democracy and with the determination, in fact, to make democracy work by extending its benefits and its base. The record of this movement has been good and true, marred only now and then by the temporary ascendancy of a misguided few who, in the end, were repudiated by the workers themselves.

Leadership is more apt to be misused when it is exercised by separate individuals owing no loyalty except to their immediate followers, subject to no outside discipline, and beyond the judgment of even their own peers. The present fragmentation of the labor movement in the Philippines creates precisely such a situation, each union claiming: to be a regime independent of the others.

I believe that by getting united, the labor movement would be a more positive and more responsible leading force in national progress.

The problem of strengthening the trade unions, however, devolves primarily upon the unions themselves. The proper role of the government is to provide the necessary guidance so that labor will grow in directions that are free, democratic and responsible. But to the extent that government encouragement shall be compatible with the freedom of our workers’ organizations, I propose to provide a social climate where they can acquire a stronger voice in public affairs and greater participation in the formulation of our economic and social policies.

My Administration shall foster the institution of free collective bargaining. This is the indispensable means by which our working masses may be assured a fair share of the fruits of economic development.

Considering, however, that an estimated 70 per cent of our wage-earners do not as yet belong to unions of their own choosing, we shall attempt to give more life and effect to those labor laws which set the minimum standards of wages, health and safety for both factory and farm labor. The most basic of these statutes for the protection of labor, which include the minimum wage law, were reforms introduced by the previous Liberal Party Administration. These laws, unfortunately, frequently proved, in the past, a mockery of justice as they were more honored in the breach than in the observance. In the hands of a corrupt Administration, these laws became mere weapons of extortion and harassment of business firms, and injustice to the workers. We shall go hard on those guilty of such abuses. Under my Administration, attempts to traffic on the welfare of the underprivileged shall never be countenanced. I pledge my Administration to the full enforcement of these labor laws, without fear or favor.

Consistent with this policy of maximum protection to our workers, we also desire to cut down red-tape in the adjudication of labor cases. At present, even the most modest of workers’ claims have to pass through a labyrinth of judicial offices before they can be settled. I favor a system of reducing such procedures and delays, which can only militate, in time and in cost, against the workers.

As part of our over-all program to raise the living standards of our people, it is our goal to provide more adequate public housing for our wage-earners. As a matter of policy, I believe the workers and their families should be entitled to the highest priority in government-sponsored projects. We shall certainly encourage private employers to initiate housing projects for their workers. Where this is not feasible, the government will not hesitate to take the initiative.

As a matter of fact, we have submitted to Congress a bill which would set up for a beginning P15 million worth of low-cost housing for our workingmen and their families. I intend to see that this will be promptly carried out.

It is generally known that the low-income group is the first to be affected by any movement in prices of commodities. While this Administration is committed to insure those conditions that will stabilize prices, we should like to see workers, perhaps through their unions, initiate the organization of consumers’ cooperatives which will place the necessities of life within easy reach of the working masses at the lowest possible cost, and protect them against the harmful effects of hoarding and artificial prices generated by business manipulations. Government aid for this purpose shall be made available.

We are determined to expand essential public services, such as education and public health, which is one way of bringing about a fuller distribution of welfare in favor of the common man.

The Government, moreover, views with sympathy efforts being made to extend the protection of trade unionism to our harassed and exploited farm workers, particularly in the sugar industry.

I shall employ all the powers of the Presidency, moral as well as legal, to protect the workers’ rights. My chief ambition, as I have stated time and again, is to devote my life to the liberation of the common man from the shackles of want and ignorance.

We shall, however, look with concern upon any attempt to foist ideological causes upon our workers, which would lead to the undermining of our democratic institutions. I have no doubt that you are aware of this danger and of your own responsibility to our democratic society. I said I shall not hesitate to carry out the constitutional mandate for safeguarding the security of the State. To a large extent, however, the trade unions themselves are called upon to face and deal with this danger on their own. I therefore call upon our democratic trade unions, upon the masses of our workers, to exercise full vigilance over threats of communist infiltration. The full rights of the workers and their families, after all, may be enjoyed only in a democratic society.

The Government is committed to exercise economic leadership and it will do so, with all the vigor at its command, especially in the vital spheres affecting the common man. I have once said that we shall create conditions which will provide more income to our people—income for those who have none, and more income for those whose earnings are inadequate for their elemental needs. To this end, I have forwarded to Congress a bill which would generate employment opportunities in the public sector. This bill, known as the Emergency Employment Bill,* will, upon enactment and implementation, raise the purchasing power of consumers, create an effective demand in the market, induce production and generate private employment opportunities. It will attract investment because of public improvements and services essential to economic development which the Government will be able to undertake, thus fully supporting the private sector in the creation of jobs in industry. It will likewise provide direct employment to laborers in public works projects. In short, it will generate direct job opportunities in the public sector and simultaneously increase industrial and agricultural productivity.

I cannot overemphasize the fact that it is in the economic development of the country that keeps abreast with the rising population where the worker’s best welfare lies. This economic growth at the desired pace is not possible without attracting investors, both domestic and foreign, to pour their capital into business ventures that create jobs and goods. In its supreme welfare, labor can help greatly in the task of inducing investments by not foregoing their rights, yet being reasonable in their demands, mindful of the wisdom not to kill the goose that lays the golden eggs. At the same time, the investors and their management should willfully accord to their workers a joint proportion of the profits of the enterprise, mindful of the wisdom that contented laborers are efficient workers who augment the profits. With understanding workers and enlightened employers, this country, with its teeming resources, shall move fast towards prosperity for all and a more dignified life for the common man.

In the new climate of hope for the common man, I hope to see, in the next four years, a more united trade union movement. I hope, with your support, to accelerate the motion towards a higher level of life for the masses of our workers.

It is with justifiable pride and hopes for the future therefore, that I salute the workers of the country on Labor Day today. Together, we shall conquer new heights of achievement to the end that the Filipino workers and their families may realize better and fuller lives in dignity and freedom.

Congress enacted this bill on May 17, 1962, the last day of its regular session.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.