Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On the Induction of Officers of the Metropolitan Police Association

[Released on February 15, 1963]

THE PHILIPPINE POLICE

I CONGRATULATE the officers of your Association and wish you all well in the discharge of your duties.

At no other time in our history has there been a need for focusing attention on the police forces of the Philippines than now. This is so not because there are more people today who violate tranquility and order in our society but because advances in technology and changes in concepts have brought about a sophisticated society that is ruled by numerous ordinances, rules and laws. We have today in our society segments that rationalize, that justify matters in complex reasoning processes, that see many shades of gray between black and white. In view of this, there is great need for properly-trained men to implement those laws.

It is a long-recognized fact that police agencies all over the country face many problems, some of which, like lack of personnel, equipment and materials, and low rate of salary, cannot be solved by the agencies directly but by Congress or by the lawmaking bodies of the cities and municipalities concerned. The solutions, however, to some problems which need immediate attention, are within the sphere of the power of police agencies, if only all the component elements of the police organizations would direct their efforts toward this end.

A mention of some situations would be enlightening. There is the situation wherein the solution of a crime or offense lies or depends upon the testimonial evidence of a person who for some reason or other refuses to cooperate with the officers of the law. It is also not seldom that persons who witness a crime or who have personal knowledge of it are hesitant to report the matter to the proper police agency. In this kind of task, the skill of the police officer and the cooperation of the public are needed in order to achieve the goal.

In order that police agencies may have the cooperation of the public, they must show that they are worthy of public trust and confidence. To gain the cooperation of the citizenry, it is imperative that the police establish prestige—an image in the minds of the citizen that commands public confidence, public respect, and even public pride; an image that does not change with administrations. Police agencies must manifest by the results of their work that they are capable and efficient; they must prove their honesty and integrity in the performance of their duties; and they must recognize and respect the rights and dignity of the citizens.

There is a serious problem affecting the police. It concerns the elections.

Like the armed forces, the police represents the physical might of the State. As the armed forces is kept from politics, so must the police. The reason is obvious. If other officials of the government, like the school, health and public works officials, abuse their authority by electioneering, which should also be avoided, the voter or citizen has still a chance of exercising freely his constitutional right of suffrage. But if it is the chief of police and the police who will take part in partisan voting, the citizen has no chance against the terrorism because the highest law is the law of preservation. Electioneering by organized armed authorities like the police, therefore, seriously endangers and nullifies the free exercise of the right of suffrage to the grave peril of democracy.

It is for this reason that the Administration has denied the petition for the commutation of the death sentences of the chief of police and the four policemen, as well as the mayor who connived with them, who were sentenced to death for terrorizing and killing the late Moises Padilla in Negros in connection with the 1949 elections, and likewise denied the petition for pardon of the responsible political chieftain, former Governor Rafael Lacson, who was sentenced to life imprisonment. It is for this same reason why I have declined to place the choices of chiefs of police in the hands of the contending political leaders and have made my own choices. These acts serve to show and emphasize that it is the policy of the Administration, which should be likewise the firm policy of the State, to keep the chiefs of police and the police from partisan politics and voting. In the 1963 elections, I shall observe keenly whether this policy will be observed by the police and their officers, and I shall act firmly and decisively as the actuations of the police will make necessary.

As a corollary to the police not engaging in partisan politics, the police administration must also be free from political interference. Being an integral part of the administration of justice, police service must be accorded a certain degree of independence from politics so that it may carry out its basic function of law enforcement effectively and efficiently. It is sad to note that oftentimes, efforts of police agencies to apprehend law violators and bring them to our courts of justice are thwarted by politics. Reshuffle of personnel in a police organization is sometimes resorted to by politicians to prevent criminal prosecution of followers who commit crimes. Law-abiding citizens at times are reluctant to ask police assistance, knowing that the person or persons who are the subjects of their complaint have political connections.

Even matters of promotion in the police service are not free from the undue political intervention. Those police officers who faithfully perform their duty in the enforcement of the law frequently find themselves relegated to the background, while those who know how to cater to partisan pressures are given undeserved promotions. The solution to the inordinate political meddling in our police forces is addressed particularly to the statemanship and higher level of political practices of our political leaders.

Basically, the police administrator, however, can assist in the solution. You must be united in resisting and combatting political interference on purely police matters; you must not allow yourselves to be swayed by the political influence or connection of persons who are the subject of investigation; in matters of appointment in your respective police organization, you must not give preference to political recommendees unless they are fit. On my part, I shall be ready to extend my assistance to any police officer or policeman who becomes a victim of injustice or of undue pressure by any politician.

The police are no less vital than the armed forces and the constabulary; in the maintenance of our democracy and its free institutions. In a sense, the police have a profounder bearing on our democratic institution because they deal daily, directly and continuously with the citizens themselves in all the localities of the land, both rural and urban. They are the might of the state as seen and observed by the humblest inhabitants of the country. Their actuations and conduct reflect on and influence the attitude of the people on the virtues and evils of democracy which is mortally challenged by another ideology. It is, therefore, imperative that the police everywhere should literally be the “finest,” although it is a sad fact that in many localities in the country, the situation is exactly the opposite of what is desirable.

In the current session of Congress, the lawmakers of our Republic have an opportunity to consider this situation by looking into the unsatisfactory situation relative to the police in most localities throughout the country. It is not only the undue participation of the police in politics but their efficiency and general standards that constitute a serious national problem. The Congress would be doing a palpable duty if they were to consider and enact legislation to provide adequate and standardized training to the police forces of all municipalities and cities and generally elevate the police to a higher level in order that the police everywhere shall not only efficiently maintain peace, law and order but shall be a commendable demonstration of the corps of guardians of the people’s safety and freedoms which our Republic can provide to our citizens in every community.

The training of members of our various police forces and agencies should be centralized with the end in view of achieving uniform and systematized knowledge of up-to-date scientific methods of crime detection and investigation. There should be a centralized agency where all police agencies in the country should submit records of arrest, fingerprint charts of arrested persons and persons suspected of committing a crime, and other information. The centralization of criminal laboratories would also redound to the benefit of and contribute to the efficient performance of all police organizations. There should be only one laboratory where all examinations of specimens gathered in the course of investigations are made.

On the part of the Executive, we are ready to do our part and exert our utmost in a project to elevate the efficiency, standard and well-being of all police forces throughout our country. We shall also support a feature of police reform that would raise the pay of our police since they not only render service to the community but offer and risk their very lives.

Aware of the problems confronting you and knowing the solutions thereto, you should cooperate with each other to fulfill your duty as guardians and protectors of the rights, liberty and property of our people. You all need each other and you must help each other to accomplish your mission. With your cooperation, I am very sure you can in turn help us carry out the high objectives of our Administration.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.