Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Federation of Chinese Chambers of Commerce in the Philippines

[Delivered on September 18, 1962]

ROLE OF FOREIGNERS IN OUR PROGRAM

I CONGRATULATE you on the occasion of your 4th biennial convention and thank you for the invitation to be with you today. It gives me an opportunity to discuss some matters which, because of their vital nature, should be lifted from the haze of ambiguities and be presented clearly. Candor being the best safeguard against misunderstanding, this would be an opportune occasion first, to define the proper role of our foreign friends in the implementation of the Nation’s socio-economic program and second, the relations between citizens of this country and foreign friends who have chosen this land as their place of residence and business.

We can think of no better forum for such a discussion than the present gathering of the Federation of Chinese Chambers of Commerce. Your organization includes in its roster some of the most outstanding businessmen in this country and the ablest leaders of the Chinese community in the Philippines.

We have presented to our poeople the Five-Year Integrated Socio-Economic Program which our administration has launched. This will be the most important and most essential blueprint that will guide this administration during the coming years. The paramount task of the day is to increase the capacity of this country to produce those goods and services needed by our people to generate jobs for those willing and able to work, and to provide enough incomes to enable all families to enjoy a happy and healthy life.

To forestall misunderstanding, we should state clearly what the socio-economic program means to Filipinos and to our foreign friends who live in our country. Pursuant to the primacy of the rights of our own citizens to develop the resources of our country and to reap the benefits from them, we have reserved certain areas of economic activity as legitimate grounds of operation only for our own citizens. We also aim to increase the share of Filipinos in the future stream of national income and their share of the productive assets of their own economy. To achieve these legitimate aims, we wish to be clear over the way we shall pursue them. We shall do so not by jeopardizing foreign investments in this country but, on the contrary, by establishing incentives to increase foreign investments, together with those from our own citizens, and to induce both towards the most desirable directions. In other words, we shall be hospitable and helpful to all investments which, within the framework of law, serve to accelerate the rate of growth of our economy.

In order to drive home the point from these remarks we ask indulgence to refer to the analogy well-known to students of economics, namely, the Legend of the Pie. There are two ways of increasing a person’s consumption of a pie. One is to grab somebody else’s share of the same pie. The trouble with this method is that it makes someone’s gain somebody else’s loss. The other method is to bake a bigger pie, and give everyone a chance to gain, and where one’s gain need not mean somebody else’s loss. We subscribe to this second method. While our citizens aspire to increase their own income and their own productive assets, and to spread these out equitably among the population, we aim to do so not by grabbing from others what is rightfully theirs—a method which our Constitution forbids—but by increasing the rate of growth of our national income and the level of our productive assets, in order to have more goods and services to go around. For this we need a higher rate of investments, both from our citizens and from our friends here and abroad. Our program rests on the premise that our citizens’ stake is in strengthening our economy. The same is true of our foreign friends who reside and make their living in this country.

We will now refer to the relations between our citizens and foreign friends, particularly the Chinese community. If we rise above the present occasion and assume the perspective of economic history, we must mention the prominent role that the Chinese have played in the creation of productive assets in the country. The frugality, patience, and the capacity for hard work of the members of your race have been part of the historical experience of this country since those early days before the coming of Spain when the intrepid sailing vessels from China brought traders and immigrants to our shores. They have consistently been successful in trade and industry in this country since then.

Within the last five years, from 1957 to 1961, the combined Chinese investments in single proprietorships, partnerships, and corporations have amounted to 175.6 million pesos, or 17.4 percent of the total, with Filipinos accounting for 78.8 percent, Americans for 1.6 percent, and others for 2.2 percent. The savings and investments of our foreign friends have contributed substantially to the economic developments of the Philippines, and will continue to do so in the future. Of these foreign investments, by far the largest proportion belongs to the Chinese. Taking foreign investments alone within the same period, the Chinese account for 75 percent of these investments in single proprietorships, for 94 percent in registered partnerships, and 86 percent in corporations. Last year, the Chinese constituted 96.4 percent of all alien registered retailers in the Philippines.

These facts are, of course, neither strange nor new to us. The members of your race are the largest single foreign group that has chosen to adopt the Philippines as their home, to work here, to live here, and to die here. Many of your race have elected to become citizens of this Republic, and others have assimilated themselves into our culture and society so effectively that their descendants, although carrying recognizable traces of their original Chinese names, are Filipinos in their values and attitudes. The rest of you, on the other hand, have chosen to preserve your own cultural identity, and it is as Chinese rather than citizens, that you reside and make your living in the Philippines.

You and I should agree that the extensive economic activities of foreigners in this country have lately raised some apprehensive concerns on the part of our citizens over their rights to manage their own economic destiny in their own land. Some of these fears are emotional, imaginary and irrational, while others have a foundation in fact. We shall not, on this cordial occasion, go through the embarassing exercise of spelling these fears out in detail and what their basis might be. We would like, however to redefine our mutual relations on the basis of two propositions which, we hope, will so serve to translate themselves into such day-to-day conduct and operations as will make for a combined effort on the part of all of us to achieve for this country—ours by possession and citizenship, yours by adoption—the elimination of poverty and ignorance, the spread of educational opportunities, and the enjoyment of a higher standard of living for all, politically, economically, culturally, and spiritually.

The first proposition we wish to make is this: that this country will always remain a hospitable place for legitimate business, that is to say, for those economic activities which, within the framework of the law, help to hasten the economic progress of this country. We appreciate whatever honest efforts our foreign friends are exerting to increase the productivity of our country and to help provide employment and income to those who inhabit this land. Let this dispel any worries on the part of the foreign business community here and abroad. This nation will deal with them with dignity, with fairness, and with full adherence to the principles that govern relations among men in free and civilized societies.

We maintain, however, that those who do business here, or generally, those who choose to live here and enjoy the hospitality of our country, have their own responsibility to uphold. So we present our second proposition, namely: that aliens and foreigners must respect the aspirations of Filipinos to exercise sovereignty over their own land both in the political and economic spheres. We welcome those who reside here and make their living in good faith and with full respect for the laws of this land. But we definitely look with disfavor upon those who seek to subvert, undermine, circumvent and make a mockery of our laws. The concrete cases are obvious to you and to the public and need not be mentioned. Some of the worst offenders, condoned and blessed in the past by highly-placed official circles, have recently felt the full force of the law under a new administration that aims to maintain the dignity of this country, the supremacy of its laws above any individual, and the integrity of the public service. To those who treat our citizenship laws lightly and with cynical contempt, we offer no welcome. To those who defy our immigration laws, we offer banishment. To those who strive to corrupt our public officials, the law will be severe. But to those who strive to be constructive and law-abiding in the land of their adoption, we offer the warmest hospitality which has been our proudest trait as a people.

We are not against foreigners. On the contrary, because of our background in foreign affairs, we are internationalists. Specifically, we have a standing invitation to foreign investors in our socio-economic program to come and assist us in developing our rich resources, preferably, in business ventures with our nationals. But as we demand of our own countrymen that they comply with the laws and give due regard to the public interest, we expect no less from foreign friends who would help us develop our resources or would live with us in our land. We shall always welcome legitimate foreign businessmen but not carpetbaggers, corrupters, manipulators, law violators and unscrupulous persons who would be a disgrace in their own homeland. To legitimate foreign investors, whether those who are already here or those who may hereafter come, we not only extend invitation and welcome but also a warranty against the confiscation and expropriation of their business enterprises and we guarantee the repatriation of their profits and, if they choose, even of their capital. We pledge to them the full and equal protection of the laws of this land to both citizens and foreigners alike.

The events of the past few months should be sufficient proof that this administration is determined to shake this country out of its complacent acceptance of graft and corruption as a fact of life and as a condition for success, and to establish afresh the rule of law and morality in the public service. It is only under an atmosphere where the law reigns inviolate that the residents of this country—both the citizens who own it and the aliens who live here by their own free choice—can cooperate to reshape this land into one that is prosperous enough economically, and strong enough politically, to preserve itself from the encroachments of those forces which, more than a decade ago, swooped down to enslave the whole mainland of China and now seek to extend their sway and destroy the freedoms of the peoples of Southeast Asia.

We take pride in our heritage as an honest and good-hearted people. Chroniclers of our past recount that in ancient times, when Chinese traders passed the port of Manila to the South Seas, they would leave their wares at the wharf with price tags and, on their return voyage, they would find the money corresponding to the goods taken beside the goods that were not bought. We cherish tales like this because we want to do things the honest way. During the enemy occupation in the last war, the forces of evil caused a moral breakdown among our people from which we have continued to suffer.

Now we have made a call to our people to summon their latent tradition of decency in order to go back to the honest ways of our forefathers, to seek progress and forge a way of life that is founded on freedom and integrity. Towards this moral regeneration, we seek the cooperation of friends from other nations who have chosen to make our country a common home. Indeed, in a land with a rich promise of abundance such as ours, there is no need for chicanery to achieve material success unless one were moved by inordinate greed or disposed to evil. In lands barren of resources and compelling a struggle of survival that cannot afford respect for other laws, the weapon of dishonesty may perhaps be warranted in the strife for life. But this need not be so in a country like ours that has resources adequate for three times our number and where God has provided enough for anyone who is willing to live by the honest sweat of his brow.

May we say that you in particular who or whose forbears have come from a nation that for centuries has excelled in trade and business, are most welcome in our midst because of your know-how and qualities that can be of help to us so long as you support and assist our desire to use the ways of integrity. Together we can convert this country into a haven of an abundant life in liberty not only for our brothers in our nation but also for our brothers in the family of mankind who are willing to make common home with us in unselfish and honorable companionship and brotherhood.

We ask for understanding and open-mindedness on the part of everyone—both citizens and non-citizens living together in this country. Our non-citizen friends should understand and respect the Filipinos’ primacy in the running of their government and in the development of their resources. Our citizens, on the other hand, should realize that there are individual rights which are not contingent on citizenship at all or on similar legal prerogatives but are inalienable from the human person: the right to live and to make a legitimate living, to be free, to pursue happiness for himself and his family—and that these rights shall be guaranteed and safeguarded by the law of our society for everyone who lives in this country by the law, whether he be a citizen or not. Of this, everyone can be sure, so long as this country upholds democracy and what it stands for.

Together, we can make this land a place of joy for all of us who live here, if we work together in good faith, decency and honor. This is the objective of this administration. It is up to you to play your role. If you are convinced of the merit of this pattern of cooperation and living, it behooves you to spread the creed to all your countrymen throughout the country. We need the understanding cooperation and help of every single foreigner in this country from the highest leader of your federation to the most obscure of your own nationals living in a remote place somewhere in our archipelago. We ask you to reach everyone of your nationals throughout the country and use your good offices upon him to understand the crusade of this administration and to do his part in his locality. Should you and they do this, it shall be your satisfaction to see that this administration shall not seek to remove any of your nationals from the country but shall ask you to stay and to help in wider fields of endeavor to make the Philippines a happy home for nationals and foreign friends alike.

We have bared to you our goals and the premises upon which we seek their fulfillment. We urge your Federation to exert its leadership in cooperating with us, for the sake of our common welfare. We urge your aggrupation which includes some of the most respectable businessmen in this country, to come up with creative ideas on how best to harmonize the relationships between the Chinese community and the rest of the country in the achievement of our aims. This is the challenge we wish to leave you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.