Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the PNB dinner

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, July 22, 1963]

CHANGE—THE PATTERN FOR PROGRESS

WE CELEBRATE this evening two occasions of significance to the Philippine financial world.

Tonight, we mark the start of the PNB’s forty-seventh year of existence, a period that has seen the Bank grow from its small beginnings in 1916 to an institution whose resources now total more than one billion three hundred million pesos and whose role in setting the tempo and direction of the country’s financial system has become not only important but irreplaceable. At the same time that we commemorate the Bank’s forty-seventh year of life, we celebrate as well the commencement of the existence of its investment subsidiary, the National Investment and Development Corporation, an agency conceived and organized by the PNB as an instrument for providing our entrepreneurs with the long-term loan and equity capital that they so vitally need and so woefully lack.

In more ways than one, tonight’s joint occasion is an extremely symbolic event. The inauguration of the NIDC on the same day that PNB celebrates its anniversary serves as an eloquent manifestation of the Bank’s unrelenting adherence to the creed of service that has ruled its decisions and policies over the years. But beyond that, the joint affair symbolizes as well the inescapable fact that the pattern of progress is the pattern of change —of the traditional giving way to the new—of new ideas, new institutions evolving or departing from the old.

The realization that tonight’s celebration personifies progress through change strikes our mind with singular impact. For it is precisely the concept of growth through change—of economic advance through innovation, reform or peaceful revolution—that lies at the core of the Five-Year Integrated Socio-Economic Development Program.

Our blueprint for economic progress commits us to the attainment of certain socio-economic goals, goals which are in the ultimate analysis translatable into our driving desire to grant our people a life of prosperity and dignity under freedom. To achieve this basic end, the Five-Year Program assumes that profound changes—changes that would approach the magnitudes of a peaceful revolution in some instances—must take place in the structure and directions of our economy and in the values and the motivations of our people.

During these times, when the thunder and emotionalism of partisan political wranglings continues to beset the nation’s ears, when our people, bombarded with the unending diversions of often uninformed critics, remain continually in danger of losing sight of the basic long-term goal that we have set out to achieve, it may be profitable for us to pause and ponder once more on some of the far-reaching changes that have been envisioned as necessary to the success of our plans for national progress. And so we ask ourselves: What are the changes needed to enable us to achieve our socio-economic objectives and assure for our people the gift of a better life?

The first change that was envisioned—and one to which this government has by now been irrevocably committed— has to do with a reorientation in the nation’s approach to economic development. Such a reorientation involves two elements. The first characteristic of the new approach is the integrated framework within which national economic planning and action is to be pursued. In the past, the country was a continuous prey to the conflicting policies and decisions of the various governmental sectors. Today, the Five-Year Program constitutes the master plan against which all governmental decisions affecting the economy are measured.

The second element of the changed approach to growth, a development that we have emphasized time and again because of its importance, is the emphasis on private initiative as the primary movant in economic growth. We all are intimate with the manifestations of such a shift in concept. The decision to decontrol; the removal of the strictures on international financial transactions and export activities; the restoration of freedom in the choice of enterprise, with the government merely persuading, rather than controlling, the directions of private investments; the withdrawal as far as practicable, of governmental intervention in business decisions and operations, are today’s pervasive economic realities and we need not dwell too long on the fact that they exist.

A second basic reform contemplated under the economic program has to do with the substance of our laws affecting the fabric of our financial system, our scheme of tariffs and taxes, our system of landholding, foreign investments, commerce, mining and industry. Many of the desired reforms in this area were included in the legislative program presented to Congress during the last session. Among other objectives, the set of economic bills that we advocated had been designed to restructure old laws or introduce new ones in order to improve government finances; remove investment bottlenecks; increase the mobility of foreign and domestic capital specially as they referred to priority ventures; increase the effectiveness of financial institutions, both public and private; redistribute the burden of taxation in a more equitable manner, specially among those who stand to benefit most from our development efforts; encourage the growth of basic manufactures and extractive industries; protect the investing and depositing public to promote savings and investments; and secure a just and workable system of land redistribution both as a resolute forward step in our continuing search for social justice and as a preparatory measure for a profound shift of emphasis to industrialization.

In a nutshell, the legislative measures were conceived and proposed to effect those changes in our substantive laws that alone could make possible the attainment of the socio-economic targets outlined under the Five-Year Program. The fate of many of our economic legislative proposals are quite well known to you and should serve as food for thought on the wisdom, even necessity—if any single administration is expected to carry out any program of action—of placing both the executive and the legislative departments under a common direction and responsibility.

In this connection, it is timely that the Nation is starting an electoral campaign which constitutes the periodic ritual in which the nation’s goals are reviewed, the qualities of our leaders are reassessed and the national virtues are refreshed in our democracy. It is our hope that in these elections, our sovereign people will accord to us the normal working conditions in a democracy under which all presidents before us from President Quezon to President Garcia worked, namely, that the president should work out his program with his party having the majority in both chambers of Congress.

As this is not a political gathering, I will only say this: That in this campaign, the goal of the opposition is to make the air foul with the stench of the corruption that they allowed to fester in their administration, in other words, to continue the degradation with which they compounded the hardships of our people. On our part, we shall strive to continue clearing the air of the stench of graft and selfishness so that in the invigorating climate of free enterprise operating in integrity, we can promote economic and social progress in which every Filipino and the Nation itself may rise with a new dignity, enjoying a good life derived not from graft and mischief but from honest toil.

Corollary to the change in the approach to economic development and the change in the fabric of our economic laws, we have commenced the extensive overhaul in the structure and orientation of offices under the Executive Department in order to improve the administrative machinery for economic decision-making. Since we took over the stewardship of this government, all executive decisions affecting the economy have been directed towards securing maximum integration among government offices in the formulation and implementation of consistent economic plans and monetary and fiscal policies. Among the concrete manifestations of this objective we may point out, among others, our decisions ( a ) to set up a Presidential economic staff designed to operate as an economic clearing house and to ensure that specialized departmental plans and programs fit into the pattern set by the Five-Year Program; ( b ) to define more clearly the specific responsibilities of each public agency and corporation within the framework of the master economic blueprint; ( c ) to adhere to the practice of programming public works and developmental services funds in accordance with socio-economic rather than political priorities; and ( d ) to integrate the investment policies and operations of government financial institutions to support priority industries through the creation of an inter-institutional Loans and Investment Council.

One of the most far-reaching changes envisioned under the Program—one that is of special significance to tonight’s audience—is the concerted move for the reform of the Philippine financial system.

Finance, as we are all aware, constitutes the medium by which we secure control and possession over the nation’s real resources. Labor, materials, capital equipment, foreign exchange, managerial and technical talent—in short, all the factors of production are moved and directed by those who control the movement and direction of money. If we are to achieve our envisioned investment and industrialization targets, the defects and weaknesses presently existing in our monetary financial programs must be removed or remedied.

We have already commenced and intend to pursue with all vigor such a program of financial reform. Our efforts in this regard will cover three categories:

The first type of reform will entail decisions for the reorganization of the nation’s existing financial set-up to eliminate bottlenecks in capital formation and production arising either from the lack of financial resources or the inaccessibility of such limited resources as are available to socially feasible enterprises. It was for this purpose that we have moved for a drastic increase in both the authorized capital and borrowing capacity of DBP. Towards the same end, we have also tried, through the medium of inter-agency arrangements, to achieve a more selective and rigorous budgeting of funds within the control of SSS, GSIS, DBP, PNB and other government financial institutions. We have likewise precipitated the common formulation of investment policies and criteria by the financial entities mentioned and encouraged them to place increased reliance on high-grade project evaluation studies, rather than on collaterals alone, as a basis for extending assistance to private industry.

The second reform in our financial set-up covers changes designed to facilitate the entry of foreign capital. This objective, one on which we have spoken recently, we are trying to achieve through ( a ) the passage of a foreign investments act under which foreign capital will be welcomed and protected, ( b ) the expansion of the government’s foreign borrowing authority for capital investment purposes, and ( c ) the removal of provisions in our tax and banking laws that act as undue deterrents to the entry of foreign capital.

The third type of financial reform we are pursuing is aimed at developing new types of financial institutions, instruments and procedures to meet the gaps or remedy the weaknesses in the financial system that deter public saving’s and the channeling of such savings to priority ventures. As is true with all underdeveloped countries, the lack of long-term investment capital constitutes one of the most pervasive characteristics of our economy. To compound this paucity in investible funds, the Philippine financial system has lagged miserably in the past in precipitating the development of new and technically advanced financial institutions structured to make the long-term accommodations necessary to accelerate capital formation.

This administration has moved decidedly to remedy this particular gap in the institutional framework of our financial system. Immediately upon our assumption of office, we crystallized and accelerated, through instituted government support, the establishment of the Private Development Corporation of the Philippines, a firm which though designed to be privately owned and managed, was yet intended to assist in achieving the investment targets mapped out for the private sector by the Five-Year Program. It is common public knowledge that the PDCP’s ample starting resources of P110 million is the direct result of the assistance extended by the U.S. Agency for International Development and the World Bank through the representation and assurances extended by the Philippine government.

We need not emphasize of course that PNB’s investment subsidiary, the National Investment and Development Corporation, whose formal entry into the Philippine financial world we inaugurate tonight, constitutes the second major step taken under the leadership of this administration in order to expand the member of long-term lending institutions in the country. The advent of the two agencies, the PDCP and the NIDC, in tandem with our other efforts to restructure and strengthen such financial institutions as the DBP, SSS and GSIS will definitely have an impact on the scale and tempo of our investment and industrialization program on all levels.

There are changes indicated in our economic program of course, other than those we have cited here. The Philippine economy is so complex, its problems so widespread and inter-related, that any steps to remake a specific area must necessarily produce their repercussions in several others. Among a host of others, our investment patterns, our commercial and industrial policies and our foreign exchange program must all understandably undergo revisions in varying degrees in order to fit their outlines into the changed character of our monetary financial and public administration programs and, consequently align them with our master guide of economic growth that is the Five-Year Program.

But beyond mere changes in the structure and orientation of the economy, our total scheme for growth envisions that corresponding reforms must have to be made in non-economic areas as well. It is in this light that we have advocated and we have labored not only for economic reforms but also for a rebirth in the conscience and moral values of our people. In a democracy where the continuing strength of institutions—social, political and economic—is premised on the continuing virtue and self-discipline of the people in whom resides the sovereign will, social and moral advance will at all times precede or at least develop abreast of economic progress. In its truest sense, our economy cannot be transformed except where the people themselves—together with their scale of values and motivations—undergo a transformation.

As our nation’s moral fibre is a function of economic growth, so is the character of our national leadership an ingredient of national progress. Everyday of the last eighteen months that we have been in office, we have become increasingly convinced that before we can reform the economy and before we can transform our people, we must first of all achieve a change in the character and orientation of our national leadership—not a change in the character and orientation of one man alone—but of the nation’s leadership as a whole. History has demonstrated with implacable clarity over the ages that free societies can be moved to great deeds only where the needed type of leadership can be given them. To rally and to weld this nation into a vital and potent force for socio-economic change, to marshal this country’s spiritual and material resources in support of common objectives, to meet and overcome by democratic means the fierce opposition of those whose political and economic empires are threatened by progress—these are objectives that can be attained only if the nation can be offered a leadership that is neither self-seeking nor weak nor directionless, but strong and possessed of that vision, that integrity and political willpower by which free peoples are governed and guided to greatness.

These then are the changes, the reforms, the transformations—in the economy, our people, in the character of our national leadership—by which we shall be able to achieve our ultimate national goal of securing a better life for our people. They are changes for which we shall have to labor long and hard and painfully. The layers of despair and apathy, ignorance and poverty that have gathered over the centuries do not dissolve at the sound of pious words and noble behests. Traditions, no matter how wrong or anachronistic, die hard. And the status quo, no matter how distorted or ubiquitous, always gathered around itself its own set of adherents who are willing to fight for the preservation of a social, legal and economic framework in which they are the mighty and the privileged.

This nation cannot afford to perpetuate much longer those defects in the economy and the government, those weaknesses in our people’s moral make-up and this nation’s leadership, which operate to frustrate and to block the attainment of our people’s fairest hopes for the future. Whatever the cost to us—whatever the sacrifices, the labors, the level of resolution that will be asked of us—we shall continue to strive for those changes that we have indicated as essential to the fruition of our socio-economic aims.

With the blessings of a merciful God, with the support of all those who believe in the nobility of the cause that we espouse, I have the fullest faith that we shall be able to attain, to the fullest measure, those social and economic transformations upon which all our schemes for national progress must ultimately rest and endure.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.