Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the PMA Graduation

[Delivered in Baguio, March 24, 1963]

AFTER GRADUATION

WE ARE THRILLED as much as anyone to participate in the graduation exercises of the institution in which are reared the Nation’s military leaders. We congratulate General Orobia and the faculty for turning out this impressive group of graduates. Above all, we congratulate the graduates and their parents who have sacrificed for them. Special felicitation goes to a graduate whose excellent performance not only merited for him the highest academic honor but has highlighted the indissoluble bonds of friendship and comradeship between his great country and our country—Cadet Eckwood Solomon, Jr., of the United States.

Indeed, it is a rare privilege for you to graduate from the Philippine Military Academy. Your alma mater has already produced outstanding military leaders who have capably and gallantly upheld the defense and security of our country and whose names are now inscribed in the Nation’s roll of heroes. It is your duty to follow in the trail that they have blazed for you; and it is the challenge that you face to blaze new and even improved trails of devotion to duty and heroism in the unknown jungle through which our Nation must pass to its rightful destiny.

Until the moment of heroism strikes for you in your forthcoming career, there are many ways in which you can render outstanding service to your country which is not given to the average citizen. As an officer of the army after your graduation, you have an opportunity to contribute in a distinguished way to the task of nation-building in which we are all engaged. While doing your duty in keeping law and order or in strengthening our defenses, you should perform beyond the call of duty by helping our countrymen who come your way when you can assist and guide in order that they might find their rightful place in the sun. Inspire them and show them the way. In so doing, you can find joy in the thought that, through your efforts, you have perhaps soothed a sore spot and turned potential desperadoes into law-abiding and useful citizens. In this manner, you are making easier your prime task of maintaining law and order and strengthening the national morale to meet any emergency.

At this stage of our national development, it is not enough that the army protect our people from within and without. You must avail of every opportunity to share with our countrymen their hopes and aspirations. You have been trained in problem-solving, which training and proficiency you should use to the full for our people. You may show them, for instance, how best to build a camarin , or where to sink an artesian well, or how to get the mayor to act on a petition and how to do countless things with the superior education and training this Academy has provided for you.

We in the Free World live to build, not to destroy; and we have armies to protect what we build and uphold the freedom that we enjoy. In the Philippines, our armed forces have not only been called upon to protect, but also to help build the Nation. To this end, the military organization has embarked on a project designed to make the armed forces as self-sufficient in its food requirements as possible. This project is known as the Socio-Economic-Military Projects or SEMP, and we are happy to say that it has been a great help to the government not only in the form of savings but in giving our soldiers the necessary knowledge and training in undertaking productive enterprises.

The Armed Forces of the Philippines can go farther than that and take an active part in the intellectual and moral upliftment of the Nation. In this job, we need soldier-scholars, men with a wide range of knowledge which, while beneficial to military science, can be effectively geared to our national efforts of reorienting the attitude of our people to meet the challenge of democracy and enabling them to tread the path of economic, intellectual and moral progress.

One way of making the soldier-scholar in this institution is to foster among its students a consciousness for research that will make them seek knowledge far beyond the scope of their books. Maybe a cadet could be required to produce one study each year. For instance, a province-by-province study of our country like a history of Mountain Province, or an economic study of Cagayan or a terrain study of Palawan or a treatise on folklore and customs in Bukidnon or papers on the tactics used by Lapu-Lapu in the Battle of Mactan, General Del Pilar in Tirad Pass, and the other Filipino generals during the days of the Revolution.

Up to this day, our Armed Forces do not have any historian. The AFP has yet to come out with a history of Filipino participation in the last World War which should be interesting to the present and the coming generations and important to our planners. In other countries, even units as small as a battalion have histories to speak of.

These are but a few of the problems which the Armed Forces of the Philippines can attend today. It is to be hoped that from among you, the graduates, will come out in the years to come one or two or three soldier-scholars, historians, scientists and economists who will fill the vacuums existing in the Armed Forces today and who will add luster to the PMA’s already glorious heritage not only in the field of battle but also in other fields of knowledge dedicated to the building of a strong and great nation.

One thing that we trust you know is that you belong to a noble race with a great history and with an opportunity for an even greater future. In the love for liberty, the Filipino people is second to none. Our forefathers were tribal kings who sailed in dangerous seas to our shores in order to escape despotism in other Malayan lands. It was not a surprise, therefore, that the first known Filipino hero, Lapu-Lapu, defied the Spanish conqueror, Ferdinand Magellan, in the island of Mactan in 1521 and killed the invading warrior in combat because out of his love for freedom, Lapu-Lapu could not accept the subjection of his people to foreign rule. The annals of our final subjugation to alien rule through superior force of arms for over 350 years are littered with countless and suppressed revolts which refused to be permanently suppressed because the Filipino people would never accept willingly and supinely the deprivation of their liberty. Finally, in 1896 Andres Bonifacio and Emilio Aguinaldo started the successful revolution which culminated in the proclamation of Philippine independence on June 12? 1898.

It was in that bloody revolution when a united Filipino Nation was born to independent and sovereign statehood, inspired into unity by the sublime martyrdom and patriotism of the Malayan and greatest Filipino hero, Dr. Jose Rizal. It was then that the Filipino flag was pieced into a shape of beauty by Filipino women who joined their husbands and sons in facing the dangers of belligerent strife. It was then that the National Anthem was first heard amidst the din of rifle and cannon fire. As American independence was not a gift from England but was a natural right of the American nation to liberty proclaimed by American heroes on July 4, 1776, Philippine sovereignty and independence was not a gift from another country but was the natural right of the Filipino Nation duly proclaimed by Filipino heroes and earned through their heroism, sacrifice and blood.

Fate later placed the Philippines under the magnanimous tutelage of the United States in democracy. Neither the American magnanimity nor the material benefits derived from American rule could suppress the Filipinos’ love for liberty. Finally on July 4, 1946, the United States, a champion of the freedom of all peoples, recognized the independence of the Filipino Nation as England finally recognized American Independence in 1783.

That was 17 years ago when the Filipino people separated from the household, as it were of their foster-father and tutor in democracy. Now, although our respect, gratitude and affection for our foster-father and tutor subsist and will endure, we have to live a life of our own. Now, our future and destiny are mainly in our hands.

Fortunately, we are not without resources in the maintenance of our own independent life. We are a middle-sized nation of thirty million people. More fortunate than most nations in the world today, we have land and natural resources which can comfortably sustain a population of one hundred million. We have a rich spiritual heritage from our galaxy of heroes whose acts of sublime patriotism are comparable to those of any nation in the history of man.

Above all, our traditional love for freedom has become a way of life. More advanced in democratic practices than many of our neighbors in Asia because of our fortunate American tutelage, our passion for liberty is second to none not only in Asia but all over the world. That is why we have dared to prosecute our program of economic and social progress in freedom at a time when other nations around us are losing their freedom, and more importantly, why our daring pursuit of progress in liberty is making headway to the surprise and amazement of the world.

In synthesis, you belong to a Nation who is entitled to a sense of greatness from her noble past and who has a place of her own in the common search for peace, freedom and prosperity in its God-ordained sphere. This is not a Nation whose voice was meant to be ignored or to subconsciously echo that of others. This is not a Nation that will stay subdued in the shadow of an anonymous and a colonial past but will seek the sunshine of a new role and responsibility among nations. This is not a race who will keep its silence in the face or arbitrary transfers of rights to which it is better entitled in favor of those who have inferior or no rights at all. This is a people who will not resign itself to poverty and misery who will not be lulled away from the required herculean effort by centuries-old and foreign-cast habits of complacency.

This is a Nation willing and capable of greatness and of the qualities demanded by such greatness. Our country’s quest for prosperity in freedom and rendezvous with greatness demand character, hard work, organization or discipline, sacrifice and patriotism. You have these qualities; and all our people have them although in some the virtues are latent, because of the lethargy induced by centuries of unshackled bondage. After you come out from the academy, summon these qualities that you possess and arouse them in those of our people in whom these virtues are superficially dormant, awaiting only an awakening from dedicated youth and leaders. As the present constitutional leader of our Nation and giving voice to the aggregate cries of our heroes from the birth of time to the present moment, we call upon all our countrymen here and everywhere to bring forth out of their noble natures mighty exertions of hard work, character, unity and sacrifice so that together we shall, in this finest hour in our history, erect upon the foundations of our glorious past a better and greater Nation which shall be able to provide the needs of all our people for an abundant life in freedom and, at the same time play a role not without distinction and glory in the collective search of nations for a life of peace, justice and well-being for all mankind.

This then is the nation to which God gave you the privilege of birth. It is at this stage in its role in mankind when you graduate from this institution, excellently equipped to do your part in accomplishing the Nation’s task. You face not only a field for service, not only a chance for heroism, but also a limitless opportunity for greatness as the. Filipino Nation moves onward, blessed by the grace of God and sustained by the qualities of its people, to fulfill its rendezvous with destiny. May God bless you to become worthy of your rare opportunity which is not given to every man and to every generation.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.