Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the Opening Meeting of the 19th Session of ECAFE

Economic Abundance Through Freedom

ON BEHALF of the government and people of the Philippines, I am pleased to welcome to Manila the delegates, advisers and observers from the member countries of the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East, from other member States of the United Nations, and from various international organizations. We wish to thank you for accepting our invitation to hold this session of ECAFE in our capital city and we hope that you will find your stay with us both pleasant and fruitful.

The Philippines is one of the staunchest adherents of the United Nations. We had the honor to be one of its founding members in San Francisco. One of our countrymen became the President of the 4th General Assembly—General Carlos P. Romulo, the first Asian to be elected to that exalted post. In 1950, when the world organization called for united action to put down aggression on the Asian mainland, ours was among the first member States to answer the call by sending a Filipino contingent to the distressed country, in spite of the stringency of our financial resources. In that year, too, it became our privilege to be one of the co-sponsors of the historic Uniting For Peace resolution which bolstered the efficacy of the organization in the event of inaction by the Security Council in the face of a threat to international peace and security by authorizing the General Assembly to take recommendatory action. We regard our permanent delegation to the United Nations as one of the two most important diplomatic missions in our foreign service. Our delegates are active in various organs and agencies. Philippine delegates have been elected to serve as Chairmen of the main committees of the General Assembly, and we have served in all the three Councils—the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the Trusteeship Council. In the Trusteeship Council, we have consistently and stoutly given our support to the right of self-determination of peoples. We have bought United Nations bonds for the operation of the organization. Today, we have another military contingent in the Congo under United Nations auspices. We have done all these because of our conviction that the United Nations is so far the best hope of mankind for the preservation of peace and for the protection of the rights of small and middle-sized nations. Because of our faith in the peaceful purposes of the United Nations, we have solemnly pledged support to it in the furtherance of those purposes, and in the fulfillment of that pledge we are ready to offer all that is within our power to give—in complete honor, and if need be, with our blood.

In line with our steadfast support for the United Nations and its agencies, we have been particularly happy to be associated with ECAFE. One of the earliest ECAFE sessions was held in our summer capital of Baguio in 1947. Since that time, we have played host to various committee meetings on such topics as trade promotion, water resources development, highway safety, etc. Now we are honored to become host to an ECAFE session for the second time. As a token of our appreciation for thus being honored and of our support for ECAFE, I ordered the release today of the sum of P200,000 as the first payment on our financial participation in the Mekong River project of ECAFE. I express the sentiment of our people in stating that while supporting the United Nations generally, we are particularly ready to do our part to promote the objectives of ECAFE and to insure its success.

We are particularly enthusiastic about ECAFE because we are in the throes of wrestling with problems, some of them age-old and others the results of modern conditions. We are doing this by means of a 5-year program of economic and social development which I launched last year upon assuming office and which has been adopted officially by our Congress as this country’s development plan. While our direction and goals have been firmly set and a good start made, we have a long way to go and I would not wish to minimize the magnitude of the problems that confront us.

The developing and the underdeveloped countries of our region have had to learn one hard lesson of economic development. It is that we cannot measurably raise our standards of living unless and until we reach and pass the threshold of industrialization. An exclusively or preponderantly agricultural economy is synonymous with economic backwardness and servitude. If we want more and better food, clothing, homes, schools and hospitals for our peoples, we must in some measure industrialize. We must abandon the romantic idea that our God-given specialty is the production of rice, sugar, copra, lumber, rubber, coffee, tea, etc., while factories and trade and transport are the business of the economically advanced countries. For this is precisely the attitude that will insure that they will continue advancing while we remain retarded.

We Filipinos take pride in certain things. We take pride in having led the first national anti-colonial revolution in Asia. We take pride in our political system, by which orderly changes in government are brought about by the free expression of the will of the people, by votes and not by violence. For our struggles against imperialism and militarism we have repeatedly paid a heavy price in blood and treasure, but we have never stopped to count the cost. These we believe to be among our major contributions to modern Asia. The qualities which sustained us in our struggles for liberty in the past are now marshaled in the struggle against poverty, ignorance and disease.

Fortunately, this is a struggle which we share with all humanity, and in which we march hand in hand with other countries and especially with our neighboring countries in Asia.

Economic and social questions have become the major concern of governments everywhere. This is especially true of Asia which, because of rising population pressures coupled with rising expectations, is beset with problems of economic development more serious than those confronting any other region of the world. Fortunately, ECAFE after seventeen years of existence has become the greatest meeting ground for Asians for the study and discussion of such problems. In ECAFE, individual nations learn that they are not alone in facing the problems of economic growth. They have an opportunity to discuss these problems with other countries similarly situated, so that out of these deliberations—the most comprehensive economic deliberations concerning Asia—shall emerge sound studies as well as concrete proposals to assist the countries in the region in overcoming the obstacles to growth.

It must be a source of pride to all of you that, as I have been told, ECAFE resolutions never need a show of hands; they are always passed unanimously. That so many countries with diverse political systems, varying cultures, racial origins and widely differing traditions should be able to arrive at such a fruitful consensus is indeed heartening. It proves that it is possible, in an atmosphere of good faith and good will, to enlarge the areas of cooperation amongst us and to reduce the margins of discord—provided, always, that we bear in mind the purposes and principles of the United Nations as well as the specific goal for which ECAFE was founded.

We are all learning the lessons of economic development together—the developing countries as well as the highly industrialized countries, those of the East and those of the West, those whose economies permit a minimum of government participation as well as those that rely in extensive government intervention in the economic process. There is no single answer to the economic riddles that face us. We have found out that there are many approaches to a problem and that each of these approaches has its own virtue to recommend it. It is probably encouraging that the end-result in most Asian countries has been a mixed economy, with the government involved to a lesser or greater extent in the production and distribution of goods and services. This practical result must surely signify that national leadership in Asia today is neither committed to rigid formulas nor bound by pre-conceived systems, but is pragmatic and experimental, adopting those methods best suited to each country’s situation and environment and discarding those which do not fit.

One beneficent result of the work of ECAFE is surely the fact that we have come to accept as a common article of faith our need for closer intra-regional economic ties. Such ties have been, for various reasons, rather tenuous in the past. They are growing at present and we hope that they will flourish in the future. While it may be premature to talk of an Asian common market, for instance, it is certainly not premature to talk of less sweeping sectoral arrangements in the economic field by which countries in the region can be drawn closer to one another. This is desirable not only for sentimental and political reasons, but also because the hard economic facts of life as they are unfolding in other regions compel us to think also along similar lines. A long-term study; has just been made of the relationship between the ECAFE region and the European Common Market. Common market arrangements or free trade areas are growing not only in Europe but also in Africa, Central America and South America. At the same time, discriminatory systems which cut across regional lines but which nevertheless have analogous effects continue to subsist, such as Imperial Preference.

Countries in our region may feel the need to forge some kind of economic arrangement in order to meet the problems posed by such regional and supra-regional groupings. This is necessary when such groupings encompass one kind of economy; for example, if they should be made up of predominantly industrial countries. But the need becomes all the more imperative when such groupings comprise countries having complementary economies. This is the case with the association of overseas territories to the European Common Market or the continuation of preferential trading arrangements by British Commonwealth countries. It is not only that there may be a diversion of trade from “economically non-aligned” countries, but that there may be a distortion in the productive structure of developing countries resulting from the diversion of funds from capital-surplus countries to associated overseas areas to the exclusion of those not so associated.

The economies of modern technology also seem to make it imperative that we seek foreign markets for our manufacturing industries. The scale of modern manufacturing often makes small national markets uneconomic and the expansion of foreign markets is therefore called for. We ourselves, after experiencing economic growth of about 6% a year in the early part of the last decade, found later on that our rate of growth was slowing down. It is clear from this experience that wider regional markets would raise the level of economic activity in various countries, and that supra-national sharing of markets is a topic that could stand extended scrutiny by ECAFE.

These are indeed weighty and pressing problems, and we are thankful for an organization like ECAFE which provides the best possible laboratory to devise ways of meeting them.

Earlier I spoke of our struggle for a higher rate of economic growth in our country. This is the only way in which we can achieve higher standards of living in Asia. Productivity must outpace the increase in population, for unless it does, our peoples are doomed to eternal poverty. This involves a constant struggle, a struggle against the lethargy of mind and body which, in many of our countries, has been encouraged by the heavy weight of tradition and by the free abundance of nature. It is a struggle, in short, by which we seek economic abundance in freedom and through freedom. In this endeavor, we are inspired by the conviction that there is no iron law which compels any Asian man or woman to accept the chains of political servitude in exchange for a bowl of rice. We hold that it is possible and desirable for an Asian to eat his bowl of rice in freedom and dignity. We hold further that over and beyond his bowl of rice, the Asian is entitled to enjoy the rights to education, health, culture and all the other freedoms proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

To the achievement of this goal we invite your cooperation, our brothers and neighbors in Asia. We welcome you with warm hearts and we extend our hospitality to all who have come here in the name of the United Nations.

I wish you every success in your deliberations on the important questions inscribed in your agenda. It is now my great pleasure to declare open the 19th Session of the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.