Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the League of Governors and City Mayors

ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL AUTONOMY

IT IS A GREAT PLEASURE for me to be addressing the provincial governors and city mayors of the Philippines gathered here in your annual convention. For the interests of local governments and local officials are close to my heart. Decentralization of government and local autonomy are basic platforms on which I sought the mandate of our people. The restoration of as much governmental power as is practical to the local units of government is one of the main goals of my Administration. And the economic development of specific regions and individual provinces is an essential part in the Administration’s economic program.

The League of Governors and City Mayors was not formed by the Constitution. It was not created by legislation, nor by presidential decree. The League is an association of free men, organized at the initiative of the governors and mayors themselves, formed for individual advancement and the common interests, for the welfare of both the communities which you represent and the Nation which they compose.

This fusion of individual initiative and free cooperation is the essence of democracy. Freedom without discipline is anarchy; discipline without freedom is totalitarianism. Freedom and discipline together is democracy.

This spirit of democracy, of initiative and cooperation, of freedom and discipline is the spirit on which the Administration relies for the success of its program. We do not believe that cooperation should be imposed from above. Nor do we believe that individuals should be left to themselves without direction or purpose. We believe that it is the mission of leadership to inspire cooperation, while bringing forth, by example and by providing the proper environment, the full flowering of the individual personality towards creation and achievement. It is through their individual initiative and free cooperation, through their own capacity for self-reliance in free communities, that we seek to incite the people to greatness.

Your display of the spirit of initiative and cooperation is all the more meaningful because it is manifested by the political leaders and chief executives of our provinces and cities.

The growth of the individual and common achievement in voluntary cooperation can be realized, certainly not through the imposition of an all-too-powerful central government, no matter how benevolent, but through the smaller communities through which the people can effectively govern themselves and whose governments, in a much truer sense than the national government, are verily their own.

The main problem of provinces and cities and all local governments today is basically power and freedom, the problem of being strait-jacketed by an overcentralized system of government.

A brief glance at the history of our people will tell us that it was not always thus.

You will recall that our forefathers settled in these islands in small self-reliant communities called barangays , through which they traded freely with their neighbors and with merchants from across the seas. These communities were ruled by headmen who, while perhaps not popularly elected, were respected and freely obeyed by the people and whose opportunities for abuse were greatly curtailed by the social sanctions and pressures imposed by the closely-knit communities.

The government of the barangay , though crude, was nevertheless effective for its own purposes because it embodied the personality and aspirations of the people.

Then the Spaniard came, with his sword and his cross. While bringing us the blessings of a new faith, the Spaniards, in the accepted tradition of the big power intent on efficiently governing its colony, set about gathering all governmental powers in Manila. It is one of the classic methods of colonialism to centralize government in the capital, to deny the subject people the benefit of strong local governments, the better to subjugate and the more efficiently to control them.

It is significant that one of the most glorious achievements of the Philippine revolution against Spain was the framing of a Constitution in Malolos, which called for the abolition of a main feature of colonial rule—the centralized system of government.

Article 57 of the Malolos Constitution states:

“The conduct of the interests peculiar to the town, the provinces, and of the state belongs respectively to the popular assemblies, to the provincial assemblies, and to the active administration, with reference to laws, a upon the basis of the most ample decentralization and administrative autonomy.”

In Article 82, the same Constitution sought to restore the right of self-government, administration and taxation to the local units of government.

But the First Republic gave way to the pressure of Dewey’s fleet in Manila Bay and the force of American arms. The Americans, indeed, gave to local governments a measure of autonomy. They instituted municipal elections. But with the consent of Filipino politicians, they retained in the capital a great portion of the powers of administration, legislate and taxation.

The Filipino had a chance, like the patriots at Malolos in 1899, to change all this, to transform the people’s colonial mentality of dependence on an omnipotent disposer of power into a spirit of self-reliance and initiative, when in 1934 we framed our present Constitution.

A delegate to the Constitutional Convention, Exequiel M. Santos of Nueva Ecija, wanted our people to seize this opportunity to wipe out the vestiges of colonialism. He was a former provincial governor like you, and he urged that the Constitution provide for greater local autonomy. He said.

“I say, Mr. President, that the question of local autonomy is important, because granted sufficient autonomy, our municipalities and provinces can not only effect greater local improvements, but the said instrumentalities of our local governments can lead their inhabitants to greater progress in agriculture, in commerce, in industry and in culture.

“. . . . The powers in our present governmental system are so centralized that a province or municipality to be able to do something towards its own development or on matters of its own concern will need the approval of the Central Government. Should it happen that the Central Government is in the hands of the opposite party or of the opposite belief, then it is altogether doubtful whether that municipality or province can carry on that project. Then imagine, Mr. President, a provincial governor, elected by the people and carried by popular mandate to the highest executive seat of his province, subjected to the jurisdiction of an insular official, whose appointment he owes not to the people but to another appointive official.”

The Constitution as finally drafted by the Convention and the past political practices since then only confirm how prophetic these words were.

Only two days ago, one of your colleagues was quoted as complaining against the excess of power in the Manila Government and the lack of it in the provincial governments.

What do I and the Administration intend to do about this? you ask. Listen to the Reform Program of the Liberal Party, drafted last year:

“Government powers will remain in the national government to the extent required to implement national policy and to meet local needs beyond the capacity of local initiative and autonomy.”

“The bulk of basic power will be restored to the people through local governments. These will be given powers of administration, policy determination, taxation and such others as are needed to provide for the optimum social, economic, cultural and political growth of their communities.

“This dispersal of power will enable small communities to provide for their local needs which heretofore have been catered to by the national government through the Pork Barrel System. The Pork Barrel System will be abolished.

“Public works projects will be undertaken by the National Government in consonance with the over-all economic development program. Serious consideration will be given to measures which will result in the automatic release of funds for projects upon certification of the Auditor General on the availability of funds.

“The power of appointing local officials shall be progressively transferred to local governments.”

This is a commitment of the Liberal Party and of my Administration. I assure you that it will be fulfilled in due time; indeed its fulfillment has already begun.

However, we are all aware that political decentralization would be an empty gesture unless accompanied and supported by economic decentralization. The benefits of increased local autonomy cannot be availed of, increased political power cannot be effectively exercised by local units, unless the economic base for this autonomy and this power is developed. Regional autonomy must be accompanied by and based on regional development.

I have submitted to Congress my five-year socio-economic program. This is a program for over-all national development. We have established targets in time. But we have not laid down priorities as to space. We have yet to evolve detailed plans and timetables for specific areas. These entail separate studies for each area; for conditions, resources and stages of development vary from region to region.

Of what shall a region be composed? What factors shall determine the composition of an area intended for development?

This would depend on the kind of development desired, on the nature of the projects envisioned, or on the characteristics of the general area.

The boundaries of a region for purposes of development may be determined by psychological and ethnological factors, such as language, culture and traditions. Thus, the Ilocano area may be considered, or the Muslim area, etc. Or the boundaries may be legal in nature, such as provincial boundaries. Or the division may be based on economic factors; for instance, the tobacco area as a whole may be considered for development.

The beginning of these studies has embodied in a five-year public works program which I shall soon submit to Congress but the intensive and extensive studies have to be continued in order to come up with complete and intelligent plans, based on full facts and expert analysis.

The drawing up of these studies and these plans and their actual implementation demand a high quality of leadership from you, the leaders of our biggest political subdivisions, as well as from community leaders outside the government. Leadership from you is required in the marshaling of organizational and technical talent, in inspiring your people to think creatively and to work with all their strength and energy, in the formation of capital, in providing your people with the vision and an example in unselfishness and sacrifice.

This is the challenge with which I confront you today. Accept the challenge; show us what your communities and regions, under your leadership, can do. I pledge to provide you with all the available resources of the national government and to help in securing aid from foreign sources. But the intellectual and physical energy has to be supplied by the people in the barrios and the towns, and the vision and the leadership and the inspiration by you, their leaders.

Again, you may ask; but what in concrete terms does the New Leadership, what does the new Liberal Party administration intend to do about decentralization of government?

I will tell you what I will do. I intend to support measures that will place in the hands of local officials the responsibility for and the authority over governmental services that are purely local in nature. This means turning over to local officials the right to direct and supervise these services, the power to appoint the personnel for them and the funds to finance them. Some of the services I have in mind are health services, agricultural extension, and even education.

But with authority must come responsibility, and part of this burden is the responsibility to finance these services. To enable local governments to discharge these new obligations, their financial position has to be strengthened, and for this the resources of their funds have to be expanded.

To do this I am proposing that the power of collecting certain national taxes and of appropriating the proceeds therefrom be transferred to local governments. Whether these should be provincial, municipal or other local governments has to be closely studied.

I am sure you agree with me that these measures would be great steps toward that glorious goal of returning the power of government where it belongs—to the people.

These steps would impose much graver responsibilities on governors and mayors than you now bear. But I am sure that all of you will only welcome them, for with them you can be of even greater service to our beloved people.

The challenge of economic and political autonomy is great. It will require all the initiative and spirit of cooperation which I know you possess. But the stakes are just as great. For the decentralization of political power and the development of the various regions of our country, presently so burdened with poverty and hardship, promise to bring forth a new Filipino; self-reliant, head erect, marching toward prosperity and genuine progress.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.