Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the First Filipino Retailers’ Regional Convention

[Released on May 5, 1963]

RETAILERS’ OPPORTUNITY AND RESPONSIBILITY

YOUR ASSOCIATION and all those who are associated with you in the retail trade enterprises are faced with two things of far-reaching importance to yourselves and to our people: an opportunity and a responsibility.

On the principle that the enterprise consisting of the immediate distribution to our people of their needs is a prime concern of the Nation, there is universal acceptance of the need of helping Filipino retailers to undertake this enterprise in a satisfactory manner. There is disagreement on whether in other fields of economic endeavor, it is right that only Filipinos shall be allowed to engage therein but in the retail trade enterprises, there is no disagreement that only Filipinos shall be allowed and assisted. It is our purpose that in consonance with this national feeling, this exclusive right of Filipinos to undertake and to be assisted in the retail trade business should be given the fullest support and impetus by my Administration.

This exclusive right of Filipinos to handle the retail trade opens to you a vast opportunity.

We possess the potentialities of success in retail trade. Our businessmen are imbued with inherent business acumen and ability. They are industrious and progressive. Yet because of years of alien domination of our retail trade, Filipinos need government support to help them gain control of the distributive system of our economy.

The Filipino retailers need government assistance and protection on a continuing basis.

As we move under our Administration to strengthen the national economy and build a prosperous life for all our people, we have had in view the advancement of this opportunity for you.

Having always in mind the adverse effects on our economy of the preponderant control of aliens over our domestic as well as foreign trade and the imperative need of bringing the prices of prime commodities within the reach of the common masses, we have envisioned in our five-year socio-economic program measures that will strengthen the position of Filipinos in commerce and industry.

In the domestic commerce in particular, we have given encouragement for greater Filipino participation therein through more liberalized credit facilities and more extensive support and patronage by government agencies. We seek also to strengthen the position of Filipinos in the wholesale trade because if this is controlled by aliens, the Filipino retailers will still be at the mercy of such aliens. In addition, we have taken steps to provide a better marketing system for the smooth geographical movement of goods and services in general, which will embrace improvements in transportation, the country’s road network and warehousing.

We have likewise included in our program of domestic trade improvement the more realistic and effective implementation of nationalization laws, the synchronization of functions of all those government agencies having to do with such implementation, and the realization of the wholesale cooperative provided under R. A. No. 2023, together with the establishment of more cooperative banks.

We will see to it that the Anti-Dummy Law, the Rice and Corn Board Law, the NAMARCO Law, the Retail Trade Nationalization Law, and the Filipino Retailers Fund Law shall be implemented strictly in accordance with the spirit and letter of these laws so as to do away with the nefarious practices and methods of circumventing our trade nationalization laws.

We have been taking one step after another toward the realization of our economic objectives, as far as the financial resources and instrumentalities of our government would permit. In compliance with our pledge, we have done everything possible to arrest the rise of prices of prime commodities. Through our swift action in putting the Rice and Corn Administration in motion, which distributes on a nationwide scale our country’s two staples—rice and corn—we have stabilized the prices of these cereals and kept them within the reach of the common people. If this distribution is done and is still being done by the agency itself and not by private retailers, it is not because of lack of confidence in the retailers but because of the desire of the government to have a close supervision of such function, whose success or failure strikes at the very root of our economic peace and stability. Studies are being made so that at the earliest possible time the distribution will be transferred to private retailers.

Time is of the essence in the discharge of this vital function. Despite the lifting of economic controls, we are glad that we have been able to keep within reasonable levels the prices of essential goods, like milk, canned sardines, corned beef and life-giving drugs through our prompt action in forming a Technical Committee on Prices, which authorized the NAMARCO to import a sufficient amount of such products to last through this year as a short-term measure intended to alleviate the plight of the low-income group of our consumers. The distributors and retailers of the NAMARCO are still doing the duty of dealing out these prime commodities mentioned throughout the country. I am glad to note the similar role being played by the member-retailers of the association sponsoring this convention and similar organizations for the benefit of our country and our people.

True to its role as a promoter of the Filipino retail trade and as a stabilizer of price of essential commodities, the NAMARCO has under our Administration opened new regional offices in various parts of the country. This expansion measure will be for the benefit of Filipino retailers in the places affected, who will now be nearer their source of supply, and, consequently, of the consuming sector being served by them. The NAMARCO has also expanded its activities with its 2,000 distributors all over the country, catering to the needs of about 30,000 Filipino retailers.

Other phases, of the program for the acceleration of the Filipino retail trade being earmarked for implementation include (1) a training and education program for retailers; (2) handling of large quantities of basic commodities locally manufactured for distribution to such retailers; and (3) assistance to wholesale merchants who will serve the requirements of small retailers. The education measure has to be effected, because it was found out that not few Filipinos had failed in the retail business for lack of knowledge and experience in this undertaking. Local manufactures, on the other hand, must reach consumers in the remote areas so as to develop the market for them. For obvious reasons, Filipino wholesalers and retailers will have to be brought together.

To improve our transportation system and solve to a certain extent our warehousing problems, which will redound to the retailers’ benefit, expenditure for such public utilities has been included in the P44.5 million loaned by the Development Bank of the Philippines for public utilities and services in general.

We have been witnessing the gradual though steady dropout of aliens from the retail trade by virtue of the operation of the Retail Trade Nationalization Law. In this connection, this Administration has further tightened the enforcement of this law by banning aliens from working in retail establishments, except technical personnel.

The government also continues to extend credit assistance to Filipino retailers through the implementation of the Retailers’ Fund Law by the Department of Commerce and Industry, with the help of the Philippine National Cooperative Bank. It is most important that such retailers’ loans be spent for which they are issued and that they be paid back on time. It is also significant to note that under the Retailers’ Fund Law, Filipino retailers are further benefited by requiring importers of prime commodities to sell to them at least 30 per cent of their imports at the same mark-up as their sales through their present trade channels.

The Filipino retailers need more liberal and adequate financing to enable them to meet the strong competition of alien retailers, who are backed up by a strong financial assistance system. Republic Act No. 1292, otherwise known as the Retailers’ Fund Law, provides an appropriation of P20 million for use as a guarantee fund for loans granted to Filipino retailers. With the end of multiplying the guarantee capacity of this P20 million fund to about P60 to P80 million, I shall request the Monetary Board to study the feasibility of rediscounting the loans granted to Filipino retailers.

In addition to this assistance to Filipino retailers, I shall consider the feasibility of depositing some government funds not only in commercial banks, but also in the Philippine National Cooperative Bank and in rural banks all over the country so that retailers in the rural areas do not have to come to Manila to be able to get their loans.

We should also mention the assistance or protection being extended by the government in the interest of the Filipino retail trade through the functions and activities of the Bureau of Commerce, the ACCFA, and the rural banks.

We look forward to the day when the retailers will realize the advantage of banding themselves into cooperatives after the manner of those established in the Scandinavian countries, in which the so-called wholesale cooperative society can perform the three-fold function of manufacturer, wholesaler, and importer and take charge of processing, distribution, and marketing of practically every kind of commodity needed by the people. I know that it will take much time and effort and patience to have something like such cooperative federation in our country, but considering its benefits to the members and the country in which it operates you should always regard it as an ideal goal worthy of your sacrifices. You should organize and get united on a nationwide scale so that you shall enjoy the benefits of organized and coordinated action in the various aspects of your common interest, including the efficient procurement and marketing of goods and the training of your personnel.

As we look in retrospect and review the strides that have been gained in the struggle of our people for participation in the country’s retail trade, we cannot help feeling optimistic about its future.

It is true we have not forged ahead very fast, but we know at least that our people are awakening to the challenges of our peculiar circumstances. This convention of yours is a clear manifestation of some sort of solidarity on your part, which is indeed a must if you will have to succeed. In no instance is unity a greater source of strength than in your case, because besides being a matter of necessity, your services are indispensable to the well-being of our people and the economic progress of our country.

But if you have this vast opportunity before you, you face also its corresponding responsibility. In life, it is not all receiving. It is both receiving and giving.

The progress of the retail trade movement in our country has been retarded by causes for which nobody else can be blamed but some of our own countrymen. It is of common knowledge that in the past some NAMARCO distributors betrayed the trust reposed in them as such by channeling then allotments to the blackmarket. Acts like these not only deprived retailers of the goods to which they were entitled but also tended toward the undue rise of prices at the expense of the consuming public.

It appears that some borrowers from the Filipino Retailers’ Fund had not used their loans for the purpose set forth by the law. Some have not paid their loans regularly for unjustified reasons. But worst of all, it is unfortunate that some of our countrymen appear to have consented to act as dummies of aliens in violation of the Retail Trade Nationalization Law, which, as you all know, is designed to wrest control of the retail trade from the hands of aliens. This is an unfortunate commentary on the patriotism and morality of those countrymen of ours who are guilty of this offense. We should practise patriotism not only in time of war, but also in our struggle for economic emancipation, particularly during this crucial period of our economic development and adjustment to a free enterprise economy.

There have also been complaints against some consumer cooperatives who are allegedly taking illicit advantage of their tax-exemption privilege by selling their goods to non-members of such cooperatives. This is to say nothing of the practice of smuggling being pursued by some of our countrymen. All these acts of dishonesty must be stopped, for they are surely setting back the ascendancy of Filipinos in the economy of our country, prejudicing gravely the well-being and destiny of our people.

It is such acts of venality that have induced me to wage a campaign for moral regeneration in this country, which must cover public officials and employees and persons engaged in commerce and industry. We feel that our dream of a prosperous Philippines cannot be realized unless our people intensify the practice of the virtues of industry, simple living honesty, honor and love of country.

To help combat the problem of high prices of commodities from which the masses of our population have been suffering, I appeal to all producers, importers, wholesalers and retailers to reduce as much as possible their margin of profit so that the consuming public shall be liberated from the burden of high prices. Businessmen should be content with a minimum mark-up and should depend more on fast turnover for their profit in accordance with modern techniques of merchandising. It is of common knowledge that retailers who are able to reduce their prices to the minimum through efficient business methods are the ones who succeed in business.

I would like to emphasize my appeal to you on this matter. As we endeavor to help you, we ask you to help also our people. You are no doubt aware of the conditions of poverty and hardships in which most of our countrymen live. In our Administration, we are engaged in an endeavor to effect a massive breakthrough for our masses to get out of the rut of poverty and misery in which they live. After what has been done in the past year and four months, we are convinced that this breakthrough can be effected. But there is a time lag before our impoverished people, after the breakthrough, can reach the high and safe ground from where they shall enter the green plains, of a decent and comfortable life. We shall exert our utmost to make this time lag as short as possible; and in that time lag we need your assistance and cooperation to help our people by lightening their hardships.

You can assist us and help our people by avoiding as much as you can an increase in your prices and by reducing your profit as much as possible to the minimum commensurate to your capital and effort. I hope you will always remember that every centavo of decrease in the amount that a poor man pays for his needs means so much happiness to him and his family and every centavo of increase means another nail in the cross of his hardships, worries, and unhappiness. There is a wonderful feeling from a consciousness that you have made a poor man and his family happy. That wonderful feeling coming from a sense of consideration and compassion for the unfortunate is worth much more than any reduction in monetary profit. It is an investment in the grace and approval of God who will reward you for it with more profit from some other source and with His assistance when in life’s cycle of joy and sorrow it may be your turn to encounter misfortune.

I congratulate you for holding this convention which gives a most suitable opportunity to all the delegates here to mull over the problems confronting our retail trade and find out their proper solutions. You should combine your forces toward the attainment of your common goals. You should always bear in mind that you are performing a most vital function to our people. Whatever you do as retailers will affect the economic destiny of our country. It is, therefore, your duty never to sacrifice national interests and public welfare for the sake of individual advancement, so that we shall soon behold our country in peace, progress, and prosperity.

I have brought out to you some of the problems of our retail trade and how the government is endeavoring to extend assistance to Filipino retailers. The rest is in your hands. Our success or failure in attaining our desired goal mostly depends on you. I ask you, therefore, to cooperate wholeheartedly with the Government in our common struggle and aspiration to shape and control our economic destiny for the prosperity and welfare of our people and for a better life for the common man.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.