Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the Rice and Corn Production Contest Award Ceremonies

[Delivered on August 23, 1962]

THE RICE PROBLEM

THE SUBJECT of today’s rites is of outstanding significance to the life of the nation. Despite the efforts periodically brought to bear on the problem by the government, the recurring shortage on foodstuffs, principally rice, fish, milk, meat, and poultry, remains one of the country’s most crucial problems. Consumers usually pay high prices for rice and corn, the main staple foods, while on the other hand the producer barely manages to recover his cost of production. How to produce enough of the cereal to bring its price down to the easy reach of the common people and at the same time ensure the producer a reasonable return for his labor and investment, would be a fair statement of the rice problem.

It is a paradox that this land of ours, naturally endowed with fertile soil and abundant rainfall suited for the raising of crops and livestock, must persistently be confronted with the grave national problem of under-production in its foodstuffs, principally rice and corn. Production has not increased proportionately with the growth of population. As a result, the consumer must continue to pay a high price, while the producer continues in a state of difficulty. To achieve self-sufficiency in rice, the country must adequately increase its rice production every year. With increased yield, the producer reduces his cost of production and, therefore/can afford to sell his palay at a lower price. This state of affairs will continue as a grave disease gnawing into the body of the national existence unless positive and bold action is taken immediately. This problem must be faced with determination and fortitude. It is ironical to talk of progress and prosperity if we cannot even provide the rice and corn that our people need in their daily lives.

The Administration is committed to the objective of increased food production. It will exhaust its resources toward this goal. Present rice areas are considered more than sufficient. As a matter of fact, the marginal portion of the present rice area can be released from rice and devoted to other profitable crops if only the productive areas can be made to produce substantially more through the application of modern and improved farming methods; such as, the use of irrigation water, better seeds, fertilizers, control of pests and diseases, weeding, and better methods of planting.

The paramount solution is to make the hectare produce more than what it usually does. To this end the Administration will see to it that more irrigation systems are constructed. More support will continue to be extended toward the multiplication of newly developed high-yielding varieties of seed and their distribution to the farmers at nominal cost. More funds will be made available for the procurement of fertilizers for resale to as many farmers as possible at subsidized price. To minimize the depressing effects of pests and diseases on crop yield, their control will be given continued and prompt material support. The Administration will see to it that scientific research is intensified with the aim of discovering new and more efficient methods of production.

The education of the farmers on the improved and scientific ways of farming will be accorded maximum attention and material support. The urgency of this undertaking is accentuated by the apathy of the Filipino farmers toward new ideas. Under this condition, farmers’ education is naturally a slow process. So, the sooner and the more intense the national effort is geared to the acceleration of the national progress along this line, the better for the country and our people. This Administration is at present in the midst of an expanded public information campaign aimed at indoctrinating more people in the tenets of modern and efficient farming practices. This program also embraces corollary undertakings such as forest conservation and reforestation which are intended to minimize devastating floods and their resulting adverse effects on farm production. More barrios and farmers must be reached by the government men if the rate at which farmers assimilate new ideas were to be accelerated. With constant contact between the farmers and the government men, a more rapid change is expected from the obsolete and inefficient ways of production to the improved and scientific methods.

Floods which occur rather regularly result in millions of pesos worth of crop losses. The latest floods in Central Luzon, Eastern Visayas, and Southern Mindanao had caused millions of pesos worth of crop losses, especially in rice and corn. The Administration has taken prompt action aimed at minimizing the adverse effect of these inundations through the strengthening of the flood control and forest conservation and reforestation programs of the government. Meanwhile, affected areas will be extended aid particularly in the form of seeds at cost. More government men are assigned in the affected areas in order to intensify the extension of technical guidance to the farmers so that with improved farming practices they could recoup their losses and thus rehabilitate themselves as soon as possible. The Social Welfare Administration and other relief agencies attend to the more immediate needs of the victims for food, shelter and clothing.

The networks of farm-to-market roads will be expanded to reduce considerably the depressing effect of high transportation cost on increased farm production. The accumulation of agricultural surpluses in certain areas resulting in low prices and income for the farmers is intended to be remedied. Cooperative marketing efforts will be intensified primarily to enable the farmers to get better prices for their products. The rice procurement and distribution program of the Government is working hand in hand toward the goal of better income for the farmers and reasonable consumers’ price for the masses of the people.

The Administration fully realizes the positive role of supervised farm credit in the development of farm production and income. The progress so far achieved in this direction by the government-supervised and rapidly growing rural banks, the ACCFA, and other financing agencies will justify more vigorous action along this line. More participation from the private sector, as exemplified by its role through the rural banks and other private banking institutions dealing on agricultural financing, is being encouraged.

The Rice and Corn Production Contest is a corollary project to the national food production effort of the Administration calculated to spread the benefit of better farming. I congratulate the members of the National Rice and Corn Production Contest Committee who have painstakingly guided this contest. I congratulate as well the farmer winners of the contest who have proved the attainment of record rice and corn yields heretofore considered practically impossible. These outstanding achievements in rice and corn production are most gratifying, to say the least They should leave no doubt in our minds that on the adoption by the Filipino farmers of improved and scientific methods of production in place of the age-old inefficient methods they have been used to, lies the early attainment of the national goal of self-sufficiency in rice and corn. Close to 2500 rice and corn farmers have demonstrated that through industry and science, increased farm production and income is a natural consequence.

The Administration is squarely behind the objective of the rice and corn production contest. Today, I will therefore issue a proclamation extending the life of this national undertaking for the next three years.

To give more impetus to the national food production campaign, I will also issue on this opportune day an executive order creating a National Food Production Campaign Committee to be headed by no less than the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources and the Secretary of Education.

As a parting thought, I reiterate the burning obsession of the Administration in the attainment for all our people of a fuller and happier life in the years to come.

In all sincerity I appeal to each and every one of you to help spread the tenets of modern farming to those of our farming population, farmers and landowners alike, who have continually ignored the march of time and persisted in their antiquated ways of farming. Everyone will realize that much of the needed material resources are available to them. What is needed most is their determination to improve their lot.

If during my incumbency, I shall have succeeded in achieving for our people substantial progress in their aspirations for food, clothing, and shelter, I shall consider my administration and my lifelong endeavor a success.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.