Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On the Occasion of the Laying of the Cornerstone of the Multi-storey Tenement Housing Project

HOME FOR THE HOMELESS

WE must provide the elemental needs of our people, which are food, shelter and clothing. We have attended to food, by successfully solving the rice problem and launching a massive project for more fish production. This ceremony marks the launching of the administration’s program which now proceeds to provide our people with shelter by enabling our poorest citizens to live in sanitary dwellings.

Inaction and apathy in the past left unsolved the grave housing problems of the poor and the homeless of our country. This grave neglect is underscored today by the rank squatter and slum problems of the city of Manila. No less than 10 per cent of the city’s million, or 100 thousand, are poorly housed, 33 thousand of whom live in barong-barongs. Tondo alone, in a 1960 survey, has no less than 10 thousand of its 351 thousand population dwelling in this gahstly condition.

There are fast rising in Manila, Makati and other places magnificent houses which compare with the best and finest homes in the world. These dream homes do not bespeak true progress but only accentuate social injustice in our land unless and until we extricate our less fortunate countrymen from the slums and shanties where they exist like livestock and enable them to stay in hygienic houses where they can live like the human beings that they are.

Dedicated to a better life for the common man, the present administration can no longer tolerate such utter negligence committed against the poor and unfortunate among us. Nor can it ignore the danger that brews daily in the blighted homes of squatters and slum dwellers. To remain apathetic is to encourage the creation of a social ferment which, bottled into violence, can blow up bomblike and rock the very foundations of the free institutions of this Republic.

Here, we lay the cornerstone of a multi-storey tenement housing project. In this building, which will be completed soon, 385 families of the impoverished and underprivileged will be given the opportunity to be housed in decent and respectable quarters, within which they can build respectable homes. This is only the first of multi-storey tenements that this administration will erect. Three more tenement buildings are programmed for immediate construction.

The simple rite we performed this afternoon sets off the work toward the fulfillment of an important phase of the pledge I have given our people in seeking and winning their mandate. To them I vowed to find ways and means to provide more food, better clothes and more comfortable dwelling. I mean to fulfill that pledge.

In the context of the ferment in Asia today, sincere concern over the welfare of the poor and impoverished acquires greater significance. For it is only the well-fed and prosperous that can appreciate the meaning of freedom and rally to the defense of free institutions. The poor and suffering are deprived of moral conscience and that impedes them from cherishing the price and meaning of freedom. Poverty has guts but is unable to appreciate ideology. Its only ideology, if at all, is the satisfaction of its hunger.

In our time, it is the legions of the impoverished, anxious for better food, clothing and shelter, at whatever cost, that caused and continue to cause the loss of free regimes and institutions in Asia and in Europe and the Middle East to communism.

The poor is also a responsibility of citizens who are better situated. This principle should be followed even in an enterprise as simple as a tenement housing project. This, whose cornerstone we laid today, is a housing venture for the lowest-income groups. Occupancy will be on a minimum rental basis.

Tenancy is not meant for always. Progress and prosperity in due time will be visited upon the tenants of low-cost housing projects. By creating better and better opportunities for employment and income under our socio-economic program, it is expected that tenants of these quarters will finally earn more than they would have been earning when they shall have occupied these quarters. When that time ripens, it will be the duty of those whose livelihood has prospered to give way to those less blessed. Thus tenancy in these housing projects will continue to serve the needs of the poor.

It has come to my knowledge that in a certain low-cost housing project of the government, certain tenants who have amassed wealth one way or another continue to occupy their respective quarters. This practice does not serve the purpose for which a housing project for low-income groups is built. It does not express civic consciousness. Nor does it serve the needs of the less fortunate among us. Henceforth, it shall not be tolerated. This administration shall not tolerate this in the tenement housing projects it will construct. Nor will this administration condone the exploitation of the needs of the poor to promote partisan and political ends.

We face today serious problems that result from poverty. Crimes, disease, and ignorance flourish wherever poverty is acute. The citizenry serve their own ends by showing deeper and deeper concern over the well-being of the less privileged.

To the well-situated and affluent among the citizenry, therefore, I appeal for more civic consciousness, deeper sympathy for the plight of the underprivileged, and honesty and purpose in every endeavor.

On a national scale, this administration is putting teeth to a socio-economic program which seeks to improve living standards for all our people. The housing project is only an aspect of that program. The program is of such magnitude that it cannot succeed without the full support of the citizenry. A mass of poorly housed citizens, not to say poorly clad and fed, can hardly be expected to play a role in the implementation of the program, except for what labor employed from their ranks can accomplish.

We must succeed in substantially reducing, if not eliminating entirely, poverty, ignorance, and disease among our people. We have to succeed because we wish to secure peace and order for greater national undertakings, broaden the backbone of democracy in our country, and insure for posterity a sound regime of liberty, justice and economic well being for all.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.