Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Society

[Delivered on March 16, 1962]

THE MAGSAYSAY REVOLUTION

IT IS WITH A SENSE of special gratification that I have come to join you today on this memorable occasion. For I realize that nothing could be more fitting than that an organization should be launched to perpetuate and give life to the ideals of a great man on the anniversary of his death.

The entire Nation and the whole world are wont to talk, even now, five years after his death, of the Magsaysay Revolution. What precisely is this revolution? Let us examine its nature. Let us look into it so that we may further advance its revolutionary cause and give the assurance, for our children and their children, that its fruits shall forever be enjoyed.

What indeed is the Magsaysay revolution?

Ramon Magsaysay burst into the glare of public view at a time when the world immediately around us was in a state of unrest, of ferment, of upheaval, if not of actual revolt.

Prostrate after a long and sapping war, and further debilitated by a continuing struggle against Western colonialism, our part of the world was being threatened by a new colonialism, by the menace of communism, which had overrun China and was then bent, as it is still bent, on extending its deadly tentacles as far west as Pakistan and as far south as the Indonesian archipelago.

The aggressive designs of communism had split Korea, had torn into pieces the land of that Nation and the bodies of its people, spilling the blood of men from many lands.

In Indo-China, the hills of Dien Bien Phu and the jungles of San Neua were being reddened by the mingled blood of communists, nationalists and colonialists, and of the millions to whom politics meant nothing, as that peninsula of four states and many tribes was being torn by fierce and blood strife.

In Indonesia the communists, stepping into the confusion sown by the violence and hatred between the Indonesians and the Dutch, attempted to seize the government at least once, and went on a continuing campaign to seduce the people in the widely scattered islands with the honeyed words “peace” and “nationalism'” to which they attached a deceptive and false meaning.

In Burma the newly established independent government was shaken to its foundations by a civil war that had been stirred by two communist factions. In Malaya and Singapore the years immediately following World War II were plagued by communist-led strikes, riots, assassinations, kidnappings and terrorism. In Thailand the pro-Western government of Phibun Songgram had to resort to repressive measures to head off communist agitators.

Here in the Philippines, drained of hope by poverty, misery and injustice, led by intellectuals from the universities, the peasantry was up in arms, looking up to Mount Arayat as a symbol of deliverance, of elusive justice, of a better life. They proceeded to spread fire, terror and death in the barrios, so that the very highways were unsafe. Finally, the Huks had become so bold as to be active within Manila and plan to seize the national Government itself.

Such was the Philippine and Southeast Asian scene upon which the imposing figure of Ramon Magsaysay emerged. Into this scene of violence and upheaval, of ferment and revolt, he brought his own revolution.

But unlike the bloody revolutions which carried many another leader into power, the revolution that swept Ramon Magsaysay to the leadership of his country was a revolution of peace, of hope and of love.

He restored discipline into the Armed Forces and the people’s faith in them. In an atmosphere heavy with corruption, he breathed forth a fresh clean air of uprightness and justice. To the landless he proceeded to give land. To a people in despair he gave hope. And with their new-found strength the people raised Magsaysay to the Presidency of his country. Magsaysay had turned the people’s eyes away from Arayat, turned them back to Malacañang.

He turned the people’s eyes not only to Malacañang, not only to the President, but even more to Magsaysay the man. Magsaysay embodied the people’s hopes in a time of despair, the people’s soul in a time of disintegration, the people’s desire for constructive change in a time of revolution.

The people looked to him for leadership, for direction, for support. He had taken on the image of a savior. He had become another of a long line of strong men, of forceful rulers, of heroic leaders—Sukarno of Indonesia, U Nu and now Ne Win of Burma, Abdul Rahman of Malaya, Ngo Dinh Diem of Vietnam, Sihanouk of Cambodia, Sarit Thanarat of Thailand, Chiang Kai-shek of Formosa, and in Korea from Syngman Rhee to Park Chung Hee.

The question may be asked: is not such dependence by a people on the personality of one man corrosive of the principles of democracy? Did the forceful and extremely personal leadership of Magsaysay amount to a virtual dictatorship?

Which leads to a further and crucial question, one posed by the French philosopher Jacques Maritain in one of his many books: “Are the people to be awakened or to be used ?” The answer to this question would mean the difference between a dictator using the people for his own glorification and a strong leader upholding and strengthening democracy with an awakened people.

Magsaysay knew that the people had to be awakened if they were to be permanently saved, if the fruits of his initial revolution would not be lost with his own passing.

The Magsaysay revolution, therefore, did not stop at turning the people’s eyes from Arayat to Malacañang. Magsaysay extended it by proceeding to turn the people’s eyes from Malacañang to the people themselves—to their own talents, to their own hearts, to their own strength.

This is the essence of the Magsaysay revolution.

Having held in his hands the tremendous powers of the Presidency of the Philippines, he began to restore a significant measure of this power to the people themselves.

He gave the common people, the people in the farms, in the factories and in the piers, a sense of their own importance, going directly to them, to their own homes and barrios, eating with them and listening to their sorrows and their troubles.

Magsaysay set a pattern for political campaigns, in which he shook the hands of the common people and put his arm around them, and in which the solutions to the problems of the barrio and its people occupied the foremost place in his political platform. So that from then on, politicians could not deviate from this pattern, could not omit the problems of the common people from their platform and programs, without courting defeat at the polls.

Magsaysay gave the people a feeling of their own power. But he knew that that feeling, if allowed to remain a mere sentiment, would only be as an opiate, a drugged dream from which the people could very well eventually awake with violence.

So he proceeded to give substance to this feeling, by beginning to transform this sense of power into a political reality. The only way to do this was to shed off some of the powers of the central government and transfer them to the lower levels of government to which the people felt closer and through which they could more effectively govern themselves.

The main question of democracy is a question of power, and Magsaysay sought to answer it by beginning to restore power where it properly belongs in a democracy—to the people. He certified to Congress legislative measures which would grant greater autonomy to the lower levels of government, down to the barrios, and stir up the dormant initiative and self-reliance and unexercised strength of the smaller communities which had been left out of the stream of government activity.

But Magsaysay met his death, five years ago, on the lonely slope of Manungal, and he was not to see the maturing of his revolution. For after all, what real revolution can find final fulfillment within the lifetime of man? But Magsaysay did start a revolution, which was all the more glorious for its being peaceful, and demonstrated once and for all that strong and forceful leadership is not necessarily hostile to democracy.

The American historian Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., laid down the following criteria for determining whether “heroic leadership” leads towards democracy or away from it. He wrote:

“A regime genuinely desirous of moving in a democratic direction will concentrate on developing appropriate institutions. It will increase both the quantity and the quality of education. It will work for an equitable distribution of income and rising mass living standards. It will demand the emancipation of women and children. It will encourage a free and honest press. It will train public administrators. It will eliminate graft and corruption. It will pull men of talent and vigor from every class of the population into the governing process.”

I believe that there is no doubt that the Magsaysay regime met these very valid and excellent criteria. For my part, I say now that the present Administration is categorically committed to the fulfillment of these criteria.

As one who occupies the position in which Magsaysay labored for the Nation, we not only uphold the ideal of arousing the strength of the people as the decisive implement for their welfare but belonging as we do to the common people whom Magsaysay aroused to an awareness of their potentiality and proper destiny, the ideal of the Magsaysay revolution is a flame in our being.

We are committed to the spread of education and the raising of its quality, to the more equitable distribution of income and the raising of the living standards of the masses, to freedom of the press, to the preservation of the sanctity of the civil service. For the achievement of moral regeneration, we shall be inflexible that no man shall be spared or held above the law. We have begun and intensified the work of eliminating graft and corruption. We have been harnessing talents from all walks of life into the government service.

Above all, we are committed to the advancement of the Magsaysay revolution—the noble revolution of gradually surrendering as much governmental power as possible to the people for the attainment of a life of abundance in freedom for the masses of the people.

We have already begun to do this. We are pledged to do much more during the four years of our stewardship.

Thus are we pledged to match a strong and vigorous leadership with the true liberal spirit. This means nothing less than the maturing of the revolution begun by Magsaysay, a revolution which would assume leadership and power—but power not for one man, not for one party, not for any interested group, but to be exercised by the people for the Nation as a whole.

For the attainment of its substantive reality, the Magsaysay upheaval consists of two processes: first, liberate the people to enable them to assert their sovereign will in determining the leadership of their political society so that they shall have a government truly by the people; and second, liberate the political society from the shackles of the privilege so that the people shall have a government truly for the people.

In ascending to the Presidency, Magsaysay began the first process; in our own ascendancy against odds more appalling perhaps than those which blocked his path, we completed the reality of the initial process.

It has now fallen upon our shoulders to bear the weight of starting the second process. We shall not shirk the task.

Magsaysay sparked a revolution which would in essence and in fact make of our democracy a government truly by the people and for the people. In this Administration, it is our sworn task to carry on the Magsaysay revolution towards its final triumph. With God’s grace and the faith of the people who alone are our master, we are resolved not to fail for we cannot fail the people who, as was true of Magsaysay, are our very soul.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.