Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the Faculty-Students’ Convocation on President’s Day

[Delivered on December 18, 1962]

THE ROLE OF THE U.P. TODAY

WE HAVE a difficult task in our country today. The goals upon which this Administration is embarked, to which all our energies are directed, call for a sweeping revision of many of our accustomed ways, for they involve no less than the re-shaping of our national character and the replacement of outmoded policies that had run their course, with new social and economic programs of action that will affect every facet of national life. These goals are not less yours than ours. Your institution has an undeniably crucial role in this endeavor. I recognize and value the part you will play, in the unfolding of the Five-Year Integrated Socio-Economic Program which I prepared in my first year as President, for which I shall draw upon every resource of our people to implement as I begin my second year. You may therefore expect my unceasing call for the services which I know you are uniquely equipped to provide in order to make of this program a vibrant reality.

In my blue-print for development, it is not surprising that there is not a single topic for which the state university and its manifold programs may not be tapped in a positive way. You shall be an important contributor to the skilled manpower needs of this program. Your staff shall, on occasion, participate directly in our programs, or act as consultants, or as surveyors of advice that your research may generate.

Aware as I am that your primary mission does not lie in the training for vocational skills, I have sought to secure this need by my project in establishing the Labor University which will reach out into untouched segments of our society and give the opportunities for advancement to those who would otherwise never have the chance to get the training for much-needed vocational and technical competence, in the same manner that you have so successfully trained for intellectual leadership two generations of Filipinos all over our country. The Labor University is meant to complement the state university, in an endeavor where its facilities would be unwisely allocated. My program will, therefore, need your services in the area of your proven competence, where I shall exhort you to still greater and more superior performance. For this, I am prepared to bring to bear the appropriate support. This is in the area of managerial and executive leadership in all spheres of critical importance to our nation, particularly in agricultural and industrial development, fiscal and monetary policies, commercial and trade policies, social welfare and manpower policies, regional development, public administration and other fields where you will be expected to lend your shoulder to the wheel.

I have previously made reference to the University of the Philippines in connection with administrative governmental reform, specifically as regards the proposed Executive Academy in your Institute of Public Administration, and also in relation to this Institute; research and training in local government. But if I have not singled out for mention any other area, it is because I considered it axiomatic that the state university would be continuously engaged in advanced work in the basic sciences and in the arts and in all applied fields of technology and sciences. We are a nation of many universities and much valuable work is being done in all of them. But nowhere else in this country can be found the vast assemblage of skill and talent that is yours. Nowhere else can be noted to the same degree—that of pre-occupation with excellence which impels your scientists, your teachers and your artists, as they daily seek to force back the wall separating apathy and ignorance from knowledge and sensibility. You shall be called to lead where your imagination makes you turn, and where we ask you to turn. It is for this reason that I am quite pleased to hear from your president about his project to transform the state university into a dynamic agency for the production of new ideas, to a truly creative center, for which a new emphasis on research and graduate training will be needed with the start of the five-year development program this coming year. I fully endorse and support this project.

This pleases me personally because it will ensure a continuing reservoir of skill and talent from which we can draw the requisite hands that will man the Five-Year Integrated Socio-Economic Program as it gathers momentum. As we grow in industry and commerce, in agriculture and in trade, the need for trained men and women will grow as an exponential function of the increase in our activities. Our schools and our technical institutes must be ready to meet this need. The state university cannot of course begin to supply the hundreds of thousands of trained labor that will be needed every year, not even with the other universities combined. What will be needed, especially from the state university, will be the men and women who are trained in the higher skills: management, scientific, and intellectual, that is, the skills that will direct the labor toward the goals we have set for this nation.

Let no one gainsay, therefore, the Administration’s commitment to higher education. From the beginning of my incumbency, it has been clear that our nation’s stake in higher education is a measure of its claim to greatness. On the development of our intellectual resources rests our future achievements as a people. You all know the aspirations of our people for higher education. It is one of the values that make the farmer in the field and the worker in the factory work a little harder so that he can send a son or daughter on to college or university. The youth of this land are infected with the same passion. We cannot short-change their hopes, their dreams of glory, at the same time that we exhort them to greater levels of achievement.

You have heard also of my concern for the moral regeneration of our people. This, as you know, I consider an essential pre-condition to success in all social, economic, and technological programs the government may wish to launch. Let no one believe for a moment that success is theirs, until they can say with pride that they have eliminated the dry rot that saps the soul of our people today. Here, on this topic, I want to add another dimension to my thoughts about higher education. It is my contention that higher education is not devoid of those values that alone give meaning to the life of the individual and his group, that render him useful to society, and similarly make society meaningful to him. It is for this reason that I do not for a moment doubt the moral integrity of the man who has thoroughly undergone the liberalizing and the enlarging experience of higher education, for morality begins with the mind, and becomes whole with action.

I want you to know that the Administration is prepared to translate its concern for higher education into active and substantial support. The resources of our government shall be brought to bear on the numerous but not insurmountable obstacles blocking the agencies of government, including yours, in the realization of their goals. I say this with the full realization that by so committing them I ensure the success of any program designed to promote the welfare and the prosperity of our people.

That these obstacles are heavy I have become painfully aware of, as a result of the efforts of Dr. Romulo to bring them to my attention and to plead the state university’s cause to me. I find that much as we take pride in your being the premier university in this region, we must also take note of the handicaps that hobble your institution’s effort at excellence. I am told, and it shocks me to hear it, that your faculty’s salaries are among the lowest in the world, that they are four or five times less than those of the University of Malaya, the state university of a neighboring country. It is equally disheartening that, considering that the germ of all new ideas and effective implementation of plans is original research and creative work, the present allotment to research within the financial structure of the University does not exceed one per cent of the total budget. This is a mere pittance compared to the research budgets of comparable state universities in the United States and elsewhere.

Likewise, it is to be deplored that relatively so few of your staff are engaged in scholarly activity other than teaching, where in universities abroad almost every scholar is busily engaged in one or more researches or creative undertakings. We do not of course aspire to the same levels they have reached in more affluent universities. But I want it known that at our present stage of development, research cannot be considered a luxury, and that it is an important element in our search for those conditions that best suit our character and our desires.

Your university shall have a new mission from today. And in carrying out this contemporary mission, your university must be prepared to allot increasingly greater shares of its facilities and energies to the task of uncovering new sources of strength for our struggling masses and our leaders. From now on you are mostly done with the tedious job of dispensing knowledge that was mined in other countries. Instead, I will charge you with the imaginative task of advancing the boundaries of knowledge, in order to effectively contribute to the solution of the ever-widening variety of human, technological, and scientific problems of this nation and this region. Your university must be prepared, and equipped, to assume this mission thrust upon you by a new vision inspired by the shift of events in our country. Your obligation as scientist and scholar, administrator or artist, is no longer only to yourselves or to your profession, but also in great measure to your society and ultimately to the whole of humanity. This you will accomplish by yourselves. By so doing you are giving substance to a program began by Dr. Romulo, and designed to give the Filipino the strength to raise his head, tall and erect, among the concourse of peoples throughout the world. I charge you then with the mission to translate nationalism into your studies, your thoughts, and your creations.

I trust, therefore, that you shall not allow the past to stand still. It is gratifying to hear that you are determined to move ahead with change. As I visit with you today, as I move among your stately buildings and attractive grounds, made more distinguished by the record of our 34,000 alumni all over our country, I note with a great deal of satisfaction the spirit, the signs of change that immediately strike the eye. I am now confident that they are symbolic of more fundamental changes in the life of this great university, and, by extension, in the life of the people whose mind, whose conscience, you represent.

As I listened this morning to the report on the present state of the state university and the plans for it, the thought occured to me that this is a different university from the one I knew in my student days as a freshman at the old campus in Manila. There is a new surge, a new purposiveness, evident in the planning and the vision that illumines that planning. It is a sense of dedication that I would wish everyone to have: the faculty, the students, the employees, and the administration of this university; it is the same dedication with which I charge the rest of this nation in supporting the programs and policies of the administration. Dr. Romulo has grasped the core of my own programs in his blueprint for this institution.

I want you to know that he will have my full support in the furtherance of his enlightened plans for the State University. This I have decided not only because he was my personal choice for the university presidency, not only because he has my trust as a friend and fellow alumnus, but also because in furthering any progressive plans for this university of our people I shall also be taking a giant step forward in the fulfillment of my own goals, which are those of the nation.

There is one objective which I trust Dr. Romulo will be able to do, which is to prevent the U.P. from nurturing cells of communism. I am not saying that the U.P. has heretofore been infiltrated with communists. It is not necessary to go into that. It should be sufficient if Dr. Romulo prevents the infiltration of the U.P. by Red ideologists.

It is not my purpose to take up the merits or lack of merits of communism. It is enough to say that it is the traditional and bipartisan policy of the Republic since its founding sixteen years ago to be opposed to communism. It is therefore the national policy to keep our country secure from communism.

In the sustenance of this national policy, our country has been more fortunate than some Asian countries, including Korea, Laos, Vietnam, and India, which have been threatened and troubled by communism. You will note that the Asian countries upset by communism are located in the mainland of Asia while the Philippines is segregated from the Asian mainland by sea. This is a vital source of security advantage for the Philippines—the fact that it is separated from the Asian mainland. It is the same advantage enjoyed by Japan, Taiwan, the Borneo territories and Indonesia, all of which countries are comparatively safer from communism than the countries located in the Asian mainland.

It is out of consideration for the value of this security advantage of the Philippines of being segregated from the Asian mainland that our country has pursued the national policy of keeping communists out of our territory, except only those who come under authority of the United Nations of which we are a co-founder and ardent supporter. To adopt a contrary course which would enable communists to have an opportunity for influx into our country, would be tantamount to throwing away our security advantage of geographic segregation which God in His Infinite Wisdom has given to us. From the national policy of keeping the communists out of the country in support of a strategic importance of the national security springs the corollary policy of preventing the infiltration of communists in vital institutions like government circles, information media, labor unions, schools and universities.

In view of the integrated nature of the defense of freedom, the security advantage of the island nations of Japan, Taiwan, the Philippines, the Borneo territories, and Indonesia should be a matter of common concern to these countries. This means that in the same manner that each of these countries endeavors to keep off communist domination from itself, it is to be expected that each of these countries shall view with concern and opposition the domination or potentiality of domination by the communists of the other aforesaid island countries, whether by aggression, by infiltration, or by any kind of arrangement.

I am nostalgic for bygone days when the U.P., more specifically its students, were a vibrant participant in the national effort, including the shaping of national policies. Those were the days when President Quezon used to go to the U.P. campus to sound out the reaction of the U.P. population on burning issues and U.P. student leaders went out to express themselves before forums in Manila and in the provinces to have the voice of the Filipino youth felt in the national endeavor. Those were the days of Wenceslao Vinzons and Teodoro Evangelista.

The U.P. students may do well to perpetuate the tradition of their predecessors. There are many matters on which the U.P. students can concern themselves as a vital force in the national life. The problems of corruption, economic growth, social progress, political reform and others require the vigor and idealism of selflessness youth leadership from the state university that has reared the country’s top leaders. As the nation grows, its quality grows. As the nation’s quality grows, the quality of its leadership must grow. I cannot therefore accept that you U.P. students today are inferior to your predecessors. In keeping with the principle of growth, you should even be better. The nation awaits you and Godspeed to you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.