Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the National Economic Protectionism Association

[Released on February 23, 1962]

“MADE IN THE PHILIPPINES”

DUE TO THE PRESSURE of urgent matters required in setting up a new Administration and launching its program in a setting where an unfriendly political group is in control of the legislative branch of the government, I have been constrained to minimize my speaking engagements and to decline numerous requests for my appearance at their affairs. I have, however, accepted here this invitation and made an exception in your case by coming here this noon because I particularly believe in the importance of your organization and the validity of its objectives. I wish to let you know that my Administration is ready to help your organization in the attainment of your goals within the context of our over-all socio-economic program.

The NEPA has a laudable history. Twenty-eight years ago, a group of merchant pioneers ventured to launch a campaign to draw the attention of Philippine consumers to the products of our native industries. They called it economic protectionism and its intent was to popularize the study of economics along with its practice. The founders of the movement had no formal instruction on the subject but they drew from the experience of other countries and from actual practice.

I pay tribute to the achievement of these men, through the National Economic Protectionism Association which they founded, in their capacity as private citizens in formulating a concept for a sound national existence. Their efforts have been so fruitful as to have established the worthy connotations which the word NEPA carries today.

NEPA is not only the name of the goods that come out of the factories, ever growing in volume and number and enhancing in quality and size, from local raw materials and products. NEPA also indicated the use of such articles and their popular acceptance on the part of consumers. NEPA comprises, too, the handling and packaging of such goods for general distribution and all the services connected in this enterprise in one form or another. Consequently, we cannot turn our gaze anywhere and at any time without encountering NEPA.

This pervading presence of NEPA gives wholesomeness and vigor to our economic effort. It is a stimulus for the development of a sound economy, for the achievement of the goal of our economic efforts and the stimulation of the required production.

Years ago, only a few people owned native factories or dealt exclusively in native manufactures. Times have changed. Not only have products “Made in the Philippines” ceased to be represented by a few manufacturers, such as shoes, slippers, abaca ropes, copra and coconut oil, weaving hats, old-fashioned native textiles and furniture, but there has today grown a greater variety of Philippine business enterprises in the field of manufacturing, including drugs, canned foods, paints, fertilizers, steel products, flour mills and paper mills.

Besides these purely industrial groups, NEPA has extended to investment and commercial banking, insurance and credit management which have become integrated in the business world. Notable are Filipino shipping executives, mine owners and operators, transportation men, log and lumber operators who, together with the other groups, have promoted a more alert, synchronized and vast business activity. No longer do we count only with a single business chamber. We now have a variety of individual business chambers, like those of industries, rice, mines, sugar, textiles and others which in their totality represent an impressive business that is now in Filipino hands.

This transformation has taken place in a little over a quarter of a century since the foundation of the NEPA. The success of NEPA is remarkable considering that the last war had practically wiped out all our advances in manufacturing by destroying almost all our factories at tremendous expense to native capital.

What is more vital in the progress of NEPA has been the growing contagion of its spirit among our people- Centuries of colonialism have developed in the Filipino an appetite for foreign things and a corresponding lukewarmness for domestic creations. Lately, there has developed a bend in this unfortunate attitude. Now, more of our countrymen have turned to the use of locally-made articles. What is more significant, more and more Filipinos express pride in the creation and quality of Filipino products. The momentum of NEPA is definitely moving towards a crescendo. The Administration will lend its effort to maintain and heighten this momentum. For the health and vigor of our economy as we pursue the rapid economic growth that our duty to the impoverished masses has called for, I urge our countrymen to take a new and appreciative look at the products of local industries and to increasingly patronize them. Every Filipino who increasingly patronizes products made in the Philippines performs not only a deed of wisdom but an act of patriotism. As a Filipino, I shall find highest happiness on the day, when Filipinos, holding admiringly in their hands a local product, shall say with pride, “This is made in the Philippines.”

The past achievement of NEPA provides a rosy prospect of its vital role in the national economy as the economy has now taken off under our Administration from the traditional type of economy to a flight towards maturity. To spark this takeoff we have dismantled the provisional controls which were instituted in 1949 due to the excessive importation of consumer goods and, which, although meeting an emergency problem, were restrictive of free enterprise and healthy economic expansion.

To those industries which thrived under a controlled economy and which now feel that the abolition of controls may affect them adversely, I would like to quote what the late Manuel Quezon said on a similar occasion.

“The only sound basis for a national economy is productive enterprise. Experience counsels that this field be left largely to private initiative. This is a postulate of the profit system and the institution of private property. Our Constitution is committed to this social philosophy. No other system has been found so far to be of practical permanent value. In this regime alone can the natural human impulses have free play and be put to advantageous use. Other system may, perhaps, temporarily increase production and add efficiency to the economic machine, but only at the cost of the suppression of the liberties of the people.”

Thus we have put an end to the system of economic controls. The decision has been described as the most drastic and constructive step taken in the last decade concerning the national economy. I wish to assure everyone that the decision was arrived at, as dictated by the most enlightened interest of the Nation, to be the proper solution for the harmful problems that plagued the system of controls and for the removal of the shackles that prevented a healthy and natural growth of our potentially rich economy. In instituting decontrol, we have followed the only basis of all my actions and decisions as President of our country, which is, that I seek no personal benefit of any kind and seek only and always what is good for our country and people.

The existing industries need not have any misgiving that with decontrol, government assistance and interest in their growth and welfare will in any way be diminished. It is definite that NEPA has come to stay as it is now well-defined in the sphere of our national economy. In an atmosphere of free enterprise, existing industries will be accorded credit facilities for productive ventures and constantly widening markets for the products of all such ventures. For the purpose of providing ample credit facilities for productive enterprises, I have taken steps to augment the lending capacity of the Development Bank of the Philippines from the assets of the Government Service Insurance System and the Social Security System. In addition to this, I have also taken concrete steps to establish a private industrial development bank to insure wider availability of industrial and productive loans. I have directed that in the granting of loans by the government lending institutions, preference shall be given to Filipino businessmen.

The soul of our socio-economic development program is truly NEPA. Agriculture is Filipino. Mining requires at least 60 per cent Filipino ownership; indeed, some mining enterprises are purely native-owned. In trade and distribution, Filipino ascendancy is steadily in progress. In the key field of industry, more foreign capital is needed but the determined policy is for factories that use locally produced raw materials.

Above all, the cherished objective of all enterprises is to concentrate the benefit on the masses of Filipinos in order that they may at last know the joys of an abundant life. To the extent necessary to help us hasten this blessed day of abundance for the masses, participation of friendly foreign capital may be regarded as part of the external physiognomy that reflects a blending humanity in this space age but behind the blended exterior the deep reality, the soul, is indestructibly Filipino.

The system of free enterprise in which we pursue our people’s economic, social and spiritual well-being is, therefore, fundamentally and imperishably NEPA, the true and cherished dream of the Filipino Nation.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.