Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On Army Loyalty Day

[Delivered on September 26, 1962]

LOYALTY TO DEMOCRACY

MRS. MACAPAGAL and I are grateful to you for this occasion which is related to my birthday which takes place on September 28th. This event has been set for today altho my natal day takes place two days from now because in accordance with my practice since my obscure childhood and youth, there will be no celebration on my birthday. National leaders, members of the cabinet and personal friends have asked me to give them an opportunity to commemorate my birthday but I have declined all their thoughtful offers. Because I feel that I am part of our Armed Forces and that our Armed Forces and I are fighting together for a common cause, the only exception I have made is to appear before you today.

As I look back at the past nine months of my incumbency, I have specially cherished my responsibility as commander-in-chief and as part of our military organization. One of the acts which I will always fondly recall was my act of approving the base pay of the enlisted men in our Armed Forces. As I am now providing for multi-storey tenement housing for the poor in our congested areas, we must be relentless in the administration’s other project of providing better living quarters and housing for the enlisted men and their families. Having previously increased the pay of the enlisted men, I shall next take immediate steps to increase the pay of the officers of the various services of our Armed Forces.

This day is traditionally Loyalty Day when the Armed Forces attest their loyalty to their Commander-in-Chief as another warranty of the stability of our democratic institutions. Today, I invite you not only to reaffirm your loyalty to your Commander-in-Chief but for us to reaffirm together our common loyalty to the Constitution, the democracy which it enshrines and the sovereign power of our people which is the source of life and strength of that democracy.

We mark this day with notice that the efficiency of our Armed Forces has been enhanced. I have gone through the mid-year report of the Secretary of National Defense and have found it to be an impressive narrative of achievements never before achieved by our military organization. The reason for this is not difficult to find. Our soldiers are conscious of a good reason for working hard under our administration. Theirs is a living answer to Dr. Rizal’s searching question: “Don’t you realize that that is a useless life which is not consecrated to a great ideal? It is a stone wasted in the fields without becoming part of any edifice.” Officers and men of the Armed Forces, I feel sure that you and I, our loved ones and the generations after us, will be proud of the structure of a better Philippines that we are now building together, a haven of a decent and contented life for our people.

We must reafirm our common fidelity because as ever, our democracy is threatened from without and from within. The threat from without is a common responsibility of ourselves and our allies in the free world against the ideological enemy. The clouds of danger are darkening in the skies over Cuba. I believe and pray that war will not yet come. But if it is God’s will in His Inscribable wisdom that it will come and because we as a people are passionately dedicated to freedom, we can assure our allies that as in the past, the Filipino soldier under our command shall be ready to fight, if necessary to die, in order that democracy might live.

It is the threat to democracy from within, however, that we should particularly guard against today. The menace does not ensue alone from the ideological foe but also from those country-men who would show concern over democracy with their words but endanger it with their deeds. Wittingly or unwittingly, these compatriots endanger the security of our democracy by their idolatry of its forms and weaknesses in preference to its qualities of strength even if in so doing it would fail to achieve the well-being and prosperity of our people, thereby making our system by its failure and impotence a prey to the communist vultures which alertly await its weakening and decay in order that they may strike the mortal blow of conquest and tyranny.

Our country is passing through critical times. Because of the retrogression of the past which placed the country on the brink of disaster, ripe for a take-over by the awaiting ideological enemy, moral and socio-economic reforms became imperative after the people staved off the impending collapse through a herculean assertion of their sovereign will in the last polls.

In obedience to the sovereign mandate and to insure our democracy against renewed disintegration and defeat, we have launched needed reforms and set out to implement them.

As expected, the forces of reaction have moved and mobilized to resist the march of progress. The politico-economic royalists who before vied for the spoils of exploitation and who now saw their common position of privilege threatened have combined their forces to use their vast economic power, the complex information media which they erected and controlled for just this eventuality, and the flaws of the law in order to maintain the status quo. In their overweening power, they have even used as shields a weak and helpless part of the working masses whom they have sought to exploit. For their part, the politicians and their mouthpieces who have lost the privileges of corrupted power have joined the resistance to reform and progress by making unbridled use of licentious criticism which one critic has defined as the right to make criticism “which is not necessarily right and constructive and may be foolish.” Of one thing, we can be certain: That efforts of these forces of status quo will be wittingly and unwittingly joined with those of the awaiting communists who are always ready to join them in weakening the ramparts of democracy, a circumstance which the defenders of the status quo will disregard so long as they can destroy the forces of progress and preserve their accustomed spoils and privileges.

In this situation, the unswerving loyalty of the Filipino soldiers to democracy and order against communism and chaos is a beacon light. Politicians who almost delivered this country to communism through graft and maladministration have shown that they are not concerned with the safety of democracy as long as they can overcome their political foes and they can have the selfish privileges that can be derived from power. Economic vested interests which have thrived from misuse of public authority have shown that they will cling to their pedestal of monopoly against the cause of democracy. Even some of those who have posed as champions of the workers have shown amenability to joining hands with the vested interests to the detriment of a healthy democracy in order to obtain crumbs from the feast table of privilege. Only one man and one group has been unfaltering and steadfast to the cause of freedom—offering at the altar of democracy not the lip service of the politician, not the blasphemous avowal of the economic exploiter, not the betrayal of the false champion of the worker—the Filipino soldier who has offered not merely his loyalty in life but his blood in death to keep democracy safe and true for our country!

The Armed Forces have lent their strength and their talents to bolster the national effort in our war against poverty and economic injustice, against the political misuse of wealth, against graft and corruption, and against the vices which sap the nation’s moral strength. Not a single bullet has been fired by the Armed Forces in this war against evil and yet its victories have been outstanding and constructive. This is evidence of the growing maturity of our democratic government where the soldier is a true citizen keenly aware of his country’s problems and who earnestly desires to lend a hand towards the solution of those problems. Our experience stands in sharp contrast with less fortunate countries where the citizen is forced to be a soldier in order to be used as an unreasoning tool of totalitarian regimes.

We welcome every idea that aims at the welfare of our country, that contributes constructively to the common good. But when the idea is obviously aimed at gaining for its proponent the dubious distinction of having hit the President or aimed at agitating the masses against the administration irrespective of resultant harm, the nation will never gain by it, the nation—that you and I and all of us in the majority are pulling together out of the mire in which it had been sunk by corrupt politicians and avaricious vested interests will go back to perdition.

Let us carry on in the Armed Forces with deeds of heroism in peaceful action added to the saga of courage and valor you have written with your blood in combat. The problems of our country call for a new type of soldier, one who can fight well both in peace and in combat. The Filipino soldier of today must be prepared to display the type of heroism that PC Captain Diamongan Mangondato and his men and Sgt. Remigio Mabagos and his men have shown, and at the same time fortify himself for action along another battlefront where one who has less courage and who errs may not lose blood but may lose his soul, a disaster more costly and disgraceful than misbehaviour before the enemy. Let us all strive to develop this new kind of heroic soldiery in our Armed Forces in order to help our country and people ascend to the high and safe ground of hope and progress. Our course of combined arms must not teach the soldier a proficiency in the use of gun and bayonet and equipment alone, but must also instill in him a confidence in the armor of an incorruptible morality. Not the type of morality that stands on such dubious propositions as that which claims that because a man is high in social standing and has sufficient publicity agents, his ill-gotten wealth must not be touched. If such a man is shocked because his illicit deeds hidden under a veneer of new-found saintliness is uncovered, he has only himself to blame. For the military man, I expect him to have a life of virtue from the time he starts as private to the time he becomes, if possible, a general. I know that the Filipino soldier with his genuine virtue, even after he had reached the apex of his career if he is found to have been an offender in his earlier days, would be willing to pay for his offense.

The spokesmen of the status quo attribute to us acts that supposedly endanger democracy. Always adhering to the Constitution and the law of the land as enunciated by the Supreme Court, we have only sought to make our democracy work in order to create conditions of equal and fair opportunity for all our people to attain a better life. In other words, to make our democracy, within the Constitution and the law, a benign implement for the well-being of our people and not an instrument of torture for their misery. On the other hand, what have our critics done and what do they now propose to do? For some eight years, they exploited the weaknesses of our democratic system in graft and abuse until our people almost lost their faith in democracy itself. And now that moral and socio-economic reforms are being attempted as an imperative act of dedication to the well-being of our people, instead of putting their shoulders to the wheel so that there may be a total and national effort for survival, they sow discord and confusion by making hollow claims of loyalty to the cause of democracy which they had before betrayed, unmindful that if we fail in this moral and socio-economic program for a better life for our people, our system of government will lose favor in the sight and patience of our people and the democracy which our critics glorify by their words will meet death by their deeds.

Amidst the chronic betrayal of democracy by others, we shall not despair. We and those like you who are with us in upholding democracy because we truly love freedom, including the effective freedom to achieve a better life, will not be daunted no matter how hard the fight and no matter how strong reactionary foes may be. Knowing the invincible valor of the Filipino soldier and his unfaltering loyalty to democracy and the Constitution upon which it stands, we know that as long as one soldier is alive, democracy shall not be dead in our land.

You have dedicated this occasion to my birthday. Again I thank you from the depths of my heart. In thanking you, I would like to state that what will give me happiness is not that September 28th shall be remembered as my birthday but that with your help and the help of all good citizens, my administration shall be remembered as a day of birth for a more genuine and effective democracy in our country that shall mean not continued privilege for a few but equality of political and economic opportunity for all our countrymen.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.