Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On the inauguration of the Metropolitan Bank

[Released on September 4, 1962]

THE ROLE OF BANKS

IT is a pleasure to participate in the opening of the first commercial bank to be established under my Administration. This is an opportunity to re-state the goals that we as a nation are aiming for, the tasks that face us in pursuing those goals, and the need for us to unite freely and spontaneously in fulfilling our aspirations.

Although this is an affair of one particular organization, we would like to address ourselves to the banking community in general. The banks have a specially important role in the economic development of a country which, like ours, aspires to strengthen itself economically within a social framework where the individual is guaranteed his freedom to choose his own calling, his own areas of occupation, his own form of enterprise, subject only to the rights of others and to the limits established by law which assure fair and equal opportunity to all.

By pooling the savings of individuals and business and rechannelling them into productive investments, the great banks of such countries as England and Germany lubricated the processes of production and marketing which built them into the powerful nations that they are today. Conversely, the pattern of production in many of today’s underdeveloped countries were, during their colonial days, also abetted by the lending policies of expatriate banks in colonial territories, which favored investments in the traditional export crops for which there was, in the nineteenth century, a vigorous world demand. Thus, history tells us that the banks have, in their own way, helped the industrializing countries in hastening their own growth, and the underdeveloped countries in specializing in raw materials and primary exports to meet the needs of the advancing nations.

We mention these things to show that the direction of a country’s economic history—whether desirable or not—is a result of a conjuncture of factors of which the banks are among the most important.

In our own country’s growth, especially in the post-war period, the part played by banks has been prominent. In the future, their decisions will help determine the rate of growth of our nation’s productive capacity and will influence the structural changes that will take place in the economy. The decisions of banks to lend or to withhold funds are critical factors that help decide which industries, which enterprises, which trading activities shall appear on the economic horizon, and which shall not. We shall accordingly spell out the proper responsibilities of our commercial banking system as viewed from the perspective of the national goals which we have set before us.

The primary task that the country faces today is to increase production and employment to provide a higher income to our increasing population and to supply them with the goods and services which they need for a happy, decent life. This task being urgent, we have made it the primary responsibility of this Administration to provide the necessary leadership in mobilizing the resources of the country towards this end. We cannot afford to waste either our time or our resources; we must achieve the most that we can with the means we can muster. We have therefore drawn up and presented to the people an integrated socio-economic development program.

This Administration is now in the process of implementing a consistent program with two broad projects: 1) maximizing the benefits to be gained from the disposition of public funds to eliminate the wastes, inefficiencies, and haphazardness which result from the absence of a will to impose a common set of priorities; and 2) to provide the proper climate for private business to engage in its functions of developing the country and its resources.

The country should allocate its resources in a manner that would maximize the benefits to our people. Accordingly, we aim to increase the production of those commodities that constitute an important part of the wage-earner’s budget. We aim to increase the available services for which the common man has a need, such as electric power, water supplies, health facilities and schools. We aim to increase the efficiency of our productive processes, both in agriculture and industry, to conserve and develop our natural resources, and to increase the stream of future investments. We aim to pursue our national economic development in as rational a manner as possible, always assuring consistency and balance between our targets and our resources.

To meet the needs of our growing population, our gross domestic product must increase at a compound rate of 6 per cent over the next five-year period. This means that gross domestic investment must increase from the present rate of 12.8 per cent to 16.1 per cent of gross domestic product. To keep our growth within non-inflationary bounds, it is estimated that a rate of domestic savings of at least 14.8 per cent of gross national income should be generated, with the rest of our investment requirements to be covered from external sources.

There are two broad manners in which the commercial banking system lubricates the process of economic growth. The first is by gathering the deposits of savers into large pools of investible funds. The second is by channeling these savings into loans and investments. This function of acting as intermediaries between savers and investors is an indispensable part of increasing society’s productive capacity. Altho these are familiar facts, we would like to set these facts in the context of our national goals and to suggest that the leaders and managers of our banking system reorient their perspective to include not only the corporate balance sheet, which is important, but also the demands of an optimum pattern of development for the nation as a whole.

First of all, the government and the private banking system together should intensify their efforts at encouraging savings, in order to have more financial resources available to the productive sector. Our rate of savings in the past has not been althogether sufficient, and it is our job to help the public realize the critical role which their deposits in financial institutions play in the process of increasing the country’s rate of growth. This Administration pledges its assistance in any plans which commercial banks may pursue to encourage the public into developing habits of thrift and entrusting their savings to the banks.

Secondly, we would earnestly ask that in their loans and investments operations, our commercial banks reorient their horizons. True, they are first and foremost business corporations, basing their decisions on profits prospects as balanced against costs and risks. Yet, because of their central position in the savings-investment process, decisions help determine how the resources of the economy are to be allocated: Which fields are to be favored with funds, and which—if the expression be pardoned—are to be starved.

Hence, the banks decide to a large extent whether or not the investible resources of the country are to be directed to the initiation or expansion of those industries which are most desirable from the point of view of the economy as a whole. Hence, the need for them to balance and temper their own interests and the interests of their business clients with a sensitive concern for the needs of the nation as a whole. This means, among others, the adoption of a long-term point of view in their lending policies. This entails taking a more positive and forward-looking approach in their allocation of loan-funds, subject always to the resonable dictates of financial prudence and the safety of their depositors. This means, most of all, keeping their plans always consistent with the social criteria for allocating resources as the Administration may adopt and harmonizing their decisions with the long-run interests of the community as a whole rather than of particular groups. No bank should operate for the purpose of sustaining the financial activities of particular politicians or individuals.

In a free society, the Government can only set the broad guidelines for such matters as the distribution of credit. The specific decisions must be made by the private institutions themselves. This Administration will study the possibility of providing credit inducements in those fields which are most socially desirable, as well as various measures for increasing the private profitability of those fields that contribute most to the social welfare. Privileged fiscal treatment, protective commercial policies, subsidies to important but undeveloped industries, government guarantees to certain types of bank loans, building the infrastructural requirements of vital ventures are among the measures to be considered.

Our common concern, in other words, is to assure the optimum use of savings for productive investments. In their disposition of funds, both the private sector and the government have to observe a common set of national priorities. Our private commercial banks, because of their roles as financial intermediaries, owe it to the nation to cultivate to the utmost a national-growth-consciousness.

Ours, of course, is a free society. Private business must make its own decisions. Yet free enterprise, which we uphold, by no means precludes but in fact strengthens the freedom of private business to temper its own interests with those of the nation at large. It is only through such a free partnership between business and government that we shall build the structure of a productive prosperous nation that can provide a better life for all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.