Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Jose Abad Santos Memorial Society

[Delivered on May 2, 1962]

JOSE ABAD SANTOS

IT WAS TWENTY YEARS AGO on May 2, 1942, when Jose Abad Santos willfully gave his life for his country but it is only now that the whole Nation has acknowledged his stature as a martyr and hero because the national life during the postwar years was dominated by leaders whose claims to patriotism were the antithesis of Abad Santos’ sublime heroism. Now that those leaders are gone, enshrined in the fond memory of the Nation for their own service to country, it is fitting that the veil of wariness and indifference that has enshrouded the peerless martyrdom of Abad Santos be torn asunder in order that he shall take his rightful place in the memory and love of his people as the outstanding Filipino martyr of the second World War who ranks with Jose Rizal.

At the outbreak of the Second World War, Abad Santos was one of the most outstanding Filipino leaders. With a rich academic background of studies both in Philippine and American universities, sterling record as a public official and a former Secretary of Justice, he was the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court who was at times mentioned as a compromise candidate for the presidency of the Commonwealth to prevent a fight among the triumvirate of Filipino leaders, Manuel Quezon, Sergio Osmeña and Manuel Roxas.

Shortly after Pearl Harbor was bombed he was tapped by Quezon to go to Corregidor as a member of the War Cabinet, and in the tunnels of that bastion, he administered as Chief Justice the oaths of office to President Quezon and Vice-President Sergio Osmeña on December 30, 1941. On February 22, 1942, three days after his fifty-sixth birthday, he left with the Quezon family for the Visayas. He was accompanied by his eldest son, Jose, Jr., who was then a lieutenant of the United States Armed Forces in the Far East and who had served as one of the junior aides-de-camp of the President.

The Quezon party boarded the submarine Swordfish and landed in Antique, where Justice Santos took the S.S. Don Esteban for Iloilo. On March 17th the President while in Negros Occidental received a request from General Douglas MacArthur to leave for Australia. Asked if he wanted to accompany them, Abad Santos replied that he preferred to remain there to carry on with his work, and stay with his family.

He returned to Cebu shortly thereafter, as he had been named acting head of the Commonwealth Government by the departing President who had entrusted him with half a dozen cabinet portfolios for the job. The enemy had left the Visayan islands pretty much to themselves during the first few months of the war, but now that he had received reinforcements from Malaya after the fall of Singapore, his forces of occupation began to press at a dozen points in the Visayan islands. On April 11, 1942, two days after the fall of Bataan, while Abad Santos was traveling in an automobile from Barili across the mountainous hump of the island to Carcar in the company of his son and the late Colonel Benito Valeriano, a platoon of Japanese soldiers jumped their car and captured them. For the next three weeks, at close intervals in the beginning, Abad Santos was interrogated by intelligence officers of the invading army.

What the subject of these interrogations was, we cannot be certain, for not even his son who remained imprisoned with him can say, although once he heard his father firmly reply: “I cannot possibly do that, because if I do so I would be violating my oath of allegiance to the United States.” What were the Japanese asking him to do? Order the Filipino soldiers to surrender? Convince the civilian officials to collaborate? Accept a post in the puppet government? Whatever it was, he refused to do so. The United States flag was still flying over the beleaguered island of Corregidor, American sovereignty in the Philippines still existed, and he could not be recreant to his oath of office pledging allegiance to that country.

The late President Manuel Roxas, who was then a brigadier general of the USAFFE and was with him in the Visayas, believed that the charges against him were that he was responsible for the printing of emergency currency notes used effectively by the guerrillas in their resistance movement, and for the burning of the City of Cebu and the destruction of bridges and other public works. The latter accusation, of course, was ridiculous for the “scorched earth” policy was followed and executed by the retreating USAFFE forces and civilian officials had no part in it. In this connection, it was likely that the enemy used no physical force or torture on him, undoubtedly because of his high position and the quiet dignity of his personality.

A lover of peace, the last war distressed him greatly. He firmly believed that wars were caused by the brute that is still in man, by leaders who follow the law of the jungle and who try to build their power through force at the cost of the destruction of civilization and lives of millions of human beings. To General Roxas he once confided: “There will never be a lasting peace until the common humanity of man of all races and climes shall have been accepted and made the basis of international policies; there will never be a lasting peace until the common man shall have risen to his rightful heritage of dignity and power in shaping the destiny of mankind, and his freedom, welfare and happiness become the concern of all nations of the world.”

At the end of that month, April of 1942, father and son were suddenly taken by boat to Parang, Cotabato, in the company of an enemy military force. The next day they were loaded on a truck for Malabang, Lanao, to the north along Illana Bay, where they were confined for three days at the former Constabulary barracks.

The climax came suddenly and without warning. After lunch on May 2, the Japanese interpreter named Keiju Fukui told Abad Santos that he was wanted at the local enemy headquarters. He returned shortly thereafter to announce to his son: “Pepito, come down. I have something to tell you.”

Father and son then went to a nearby nipa shack where the former calmly announced: “I have been sentenced to death. They will shoot me in a few minutes.”

Horrified, the son began to weep. “Do not cry,” said the father, “What is the matter with you? Show these people that you re brave! This is a rare opportunity for me to die for our country, like Rizal—not everybody is given that chance.”

He asked that the children live up to his name. Then the pair knelt to say a brief prayer—one last embrace—and off the elder man was gone with his captors. Some minutes later a volley of rifle fire could be heard. Later in the afternoon Fukui returned to lead Pepito to the place of execution, a circular mound of earth that made the son suspect that his father might not have been executed. Were not graves long in form to cover the length of a dead man? For many days young Pepito hoped that his father had been whisked away for some unknown reason, until the conviction grew that corpses could be unceremoniously dumped in a bent position when his executioners are ashamed and in a hurry. He recalled what Fukui told him, after looking around to see that they were alone: “Your father died a glorious death.”

Why the sudden execution? Why was Abad Santos taken to Lanao? It is possible that the enemy wanted to use him in their work of pacification or that his case had been referred either to Manila or Tokyo for decision, necessitating a fortnight’s delay, and when the radioed answer came the sentence had to be carried out without delay? General Kawaguchi, commander of the Imperial Japanese Forces in Cebu, was reported to have disclaimed responsibility for the harsh decision, blaming his chief of staff, Colonel Kawakami, for it. Another report said that Major General Hayashi, commander of the Japanese Military Administration in the archipelago with headquarters in Manila, handed the final decision. It matters little as to who was responsible for the execution of Jose Abad Santos, for it turned out to be the gravest political blunder that the enemy committed in the Philippines during the last war. It made a national hero and a martyr of a gentle jurist, a soft-spoken patriot who had never harmed anybody. It created a rallying point for the resistance leaders to propagate among the people the fierce spirit of liberty that would expel the invaders from Philippine shores.

We are honoring today Jose Abad Santos because he possessed those qualities which make any man of any race great—the refusal to sacrifice his convictions for earthly gain and honors! He was a man who lived—and died—for his principles. Like the other hero-martyrs in our history, like Rizal, Burgos, Zamora and Gomez, given the choice of life with dishonor, he preferred death with honor! It is significant that these hero-martyrs in our country were men of peaceful pursuit—doctors, priests and lawyers—and that we Filipinos have enshrined them in our hearts perhaps a niche higher than the soldier-heroes who also gave their lives against the enemy, such as Generals Candido Tirona, Gregorio del Pilar and Vicente Lim.

In an age that is fast moving towards closer cooperation among nations, one facet of the heroism of Abad Santos merits to be recorded. It comes from the fact that he refused to collaborate with the Japanese foe because, in his own words, “I cannot violate my oath of allegiance to the United States.” This makes him truly not only a Filipino but American hero. Symbolic of the historic ties of friendship and alliance for freedom between the two nations, he may be said to be the supreme Fil-American hero. Since the Philippines and the United States were then engaged, as they continue to be, in a heroic struggle for the freedom of all mankind, Abad Santos was in the broader perspective one of the heroes whom the whole world will enshrine in its grateful memory and affection.

The supreme worth of Abad Santos’ martyrdom was in the revealed grandeur and strength of his character which was the sum total of his life and career. His was a character so strong and magnificent that it could have been expected that he would rather willingly and gladly die than do what he did not believe in.

That is why there is the more reason we should emblazon his name in indelible letters of true greatness and immortality in our time and for all coming generations to enshrine as a reminder that a people’s future and greatness lie in their character. For it is sad but true that the Filipino character is undergoing a critical trial of disintegration or renaissance.

Why do I say this? The evidence has been all around us. Many have regarded public office not as a mode of service but as a means for the amassment of wealth. Leaders have posed as servants of the people but have thought only of promoting their political ambitions without regard to the public welfare. Soldiers have shown more fervor for the remuneration for their role in the service to country than pride in an act of patriotism which is its own best reward. Businessmen have sought their advantage over the general well-being of the economy and of the population. Labor leaders have given more loyalty to those who had political and economic power with which to dispense favors than to the effective struggle for the rights of their wards. Newsmen who have pontificated about public office as a public trust have received material favors from those whom it was their duty to objectively write about.

During my term as the outcast second highest official of the land, I felt apprehension that our people were losing their courage and character when outstanding civic and business leaders, despite their outrage over the malfeasance of those who were in power, nevertheless avoided talking to me or being seen in my company out of fear of reprisal against their interests. Here are the top leaders of the community forsaking their convictions in fear of losing measly material benefits while Filipinos in times past gave their lives for their convictions. More than anything else, it was the fear that the degeneration of the Filipino character might become permanent which goaded me to struggle against uneven odds so I am grateful to the Divine Providence that we won in that contest for now the Filipino character can achieve a rebirth of nobility and strength through the common effort of all good citizens.

The tending weakness of the Filipino character may be described as a propensity to follow the line of least resistance. This means making money through the use of influence rather than through the application of know-how, integrity and hard-work. This results in political leaders doing favors for those in charge of media of information rather than doing the right thing and being ready to uphold it. This induces civil service men to seek the backing of politicians rather than improve their efficiency to advance their career. In its supreme test, this meant for some during the Japanese occupation collaborating with the enemy to save one’s life or keep away from misfortune.

The distinguishing sinew in the robust character of Abad Santos was that he did not believe in following the line of least resistance. He believed in pursuing what was right through the right way, no matter how hard the road, no matter what the cost would be, including life itself.

In these troubled times when the world is darkened by clouds of a new and ominous tyranny, Abad Santos is symbol of free man, an apostle of democratic ideals, who did not hesitate to sacrifice himself on the altar of liberty and human dignity.

We need today to stamp the image of Jose Abad Santos, his strength of character that would be willing even to give up his life for his conviction, upon the national consciousness in order to prevent our people from degenerating into a nation of moral cowards and sycophants.

Rizal was the purest martyr of his time when he sought the nation’s freedom because he gave his life in an uneven fight against oppression. Abad Santos is the noblest martyr of our epoch during which we have sought the strength of a government of the people because being a model, upright and faithful public servant he willfully gave his life for his principles.

Abad Santos justly belongs to the ages but the lessons of his life and martyrdom must begin its vitality with us. It is a homage to his memory that on our part we shall try to be the upright and faithful public servant that he was. It is a tribute to his greatness in martyrdom that in leading our people, we shall, like him, spurn the line of least resistance in seeking the well-being of our people but we shall pursue the right and true path, no matter how hard and trying the road, no matter what the cost.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.