Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On Quezon Day

[Delivered on August 19, 1962]

NATIONAL QUEZON DAY

TODAY, we are commemorating throughout the nation the birthday of one of our greatest heroes, Manuel L. Quezon. It is only this year that his birthday is being celebrated nationally. I have proclaimed Quezon’s birthday as a national day of celebration because in my judgment, President Manuel Quezon is one of the six greatest national heroes of the Filipino race.

Who are these six greatest Filipino heroes? The greatest of them was Dr. Jose Rizal, who was not only a martyr but was the one who aroused the national consciousness of our people through his writings, notably the Noli and Fili. Among the other five are included, General Emilio Aguinaldo, the leader of the successful revolution against Spain; Andres Bonifacio, who started the revolution against Spain altho its leadership fell later in Aguinaldo’s hands; Lapu-Lapu, the Filipino tribal leader who defeated the invading Spanish forces and killed Ferdinand Magellan; Jose Abad Santos, the outstanding Filipino martyr of the Second World War; and among the six, the last to be mentioned but not the least in stature and greatness, the father of the present Republic of the Philippines, Manuel L. Quezon.

Quezon Day is a day of remembrance. It is a day of dedication to the ideals and pursuits of the hero we have come to honor, for here indeed is another proof of the adage that the history of a nation is largely the story of its great men.

During the concluding decade of the last century, the Philippines found itself at the vanguard of the nationalistic movements in all Asia. Poorly armed, we dared to fight one of the greatest colonial empires in all history. When final victory was already within our grasp, we established the Malolos Republic which was the first of its kind in this region. Hardly had we started to breathe the air of freedom, a war to defend it was forced upon us by another great power. Although we lost the war in the end, we at least proved to the world that the concept of a Filipino nation was not a myth. For the first time in our history, our people fought as one to assert our right to govern ourselves and to decide our own destiny. History now tells us that the Philippine-American war was one of the most sanguinary in the annals of colonies, no less bloody even than the infamous Boer war in Africa.

While it is true that we gave up the armed struggle against our new antagonists after three or four years, our sacrifices were not in vain. We won at least the assurance that the Philippines was for the Filipinos. It was insinuated when we laid down our arms that the freedom we lost might be restored to us after we had demonstrated our competence to govern ourselves in the democratic way known to our conqueror—the republican system of the United States  of America.

Quezon, whom we are here to honor on his birthday anniversary, led us in the peaceful but most difficult struggle to win back the independence we had lost in the field of battle. The difficulties and obstacles that met us at every turn for almost four decades were no less formidable than those encountered in war. They did not only call for courage and patience but also statesmanship and a vision of the highest order. Never before in all history did a colony win its independence except by the force of arms. Yet here we were, under the leadership of Quezon, set and determined to blaze a new trail for all mankind to see—a peaceful struggle for independence, not by the use of bullets, but by demonstrating competence in the art of self-government.

How ably and well he led us is now history. We at last have regained our independence. And more, we have set an example for all other colonial peoples, many of whom have now also obtained their independence or are fast on the way to achieving it. We can now say, therefore, with justifiable pride that Quezon is not only our national hero but also a hero for all peoples throughout the earth who traversed or are traversing the difficult road of colonial existence. He is truly one of the great world heroes of freedom.

Quezon was neither a genius nor a superman. He was an ordinary mortal like all of us. But he was quick to perceive and understand the principles implicit in the concept of nationalism against the background of political developments during our lifetime. To him, nationalism did not just mean love of country, but the dignity of his race and the right of his fellowmen to equality with other peoples.

One of the legacies he left us was his staunch refusal to submit to the indignities that other races would inflict on us, just because we were Malays. Like Rizal, del Pilar, Bonifacio, Abad Santos and countless other Filipino heroes, he believed in the dignity of the Filipino as a people, and the right of his countrymen to equality with other peoples. He had shaken off the colonial mentality that some of us are still afflicted today, and held aloft the torch of Filipino nationalism for all the world to see and for future generations of Filipinos to emulate.

Quezon’s compliance with his obligation in the task of nation-building was more than sufficient. For us, the task will be difficult; in all candor, I must say that it will require a lot of sacrifice and a clear manifestation of rugged individualism. As Quezon the Nation-builder said in 1935 when he solemnly took his oath of office:

“Our life may not be one of ease and comfort, but rather of hardship and sacrifice. We shall face the problems which lie in our path, sparing neither time nor effort in solving them. We shall build a government that will be just, honest, efficient, and strong, so that the foundations of the Republic may be firm and enduring—a government, indeed, that must satisfy not only the passing needs of the hour but also the exacting demands of the future.”

While he fought in the battlefield of peace for the independence of his country, he also fought for the freedom of his people from poverty and economic bondage. He started the movement for social justice for the masses, in words of the Constitution drafted under his leadership, for the economic security of all the people. Today, the battle for social justice rages. It is an hazardous fight because it is being resisted by powerful men and groups who would install and perpetuate instead a system of monopoly and privilege. We have picked up the good fight. Inspired by the hero’s dream of social justice, we shall wage the fight to the bitter end no matter how moneyed and powerful are the opponents and how formidable the odds, because we are not fighting for ourselves but we are fighting for our people who have long deserved the boon of a better life.

August 19 shall be a red letter day in Philippine history for all eternity. It is the day dedicated to the memory of the leader who brought into being the Republic of the Philippines. But today in this Republic, our people still live in want. In remembering Quezon, it behooves us whom he left behind and who came after him to exhaust our wisdom and energies to the end that the freedom that he won for us shall not only mean independence from a foreign power but shall also mean freedom from want and misery for our countrymen.

To this task, we solemnly pledge and consecrate ourselves as the best tribute that we can pay to the father of the Republic. I pledge myself to the fulfillment of my concomitant obligation in the task of nation-building. You can do no less. Together we must toil so that Quezon’s dream for a better life for all may be realized.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.