Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the ceremony for the turnover to the new Chief of Staff of the AFP

[Delivered on September 1, 1962]

EQUALITY BEFORE THE LAW

TODAY we are witnesses to an event which would normally be significant enough, a changing of the guard in a most vital outpost of our home defenses from an outgoing to an incoming chief of staff but which now, under a national setting in which it is being done, bears extraordinary and even historic significance.

This ceremony is normally significant enough because it is at this post where the eyes of our people are turned for assurance that all is well in the fort. It is at this post where the eyes of even the humblest second lieutenant are turned with the hope that some day he may also be called to be the No. 1 guard of our defenses.

And it is also at this guard where the eyes of the enemy are turned, perhaps even at this very moment, for signs of weakness in our camp.

You will all readily understand, therefore, that the choice of the soldier to occupy the post of chief of staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines is a crucial decision.

It has been more so at this stage in our history when the nation is moving, as it strives to do today, in a tremendous and heroic effort to get out of false and decadent attitudes and practices towards fresh and true values that can provide the sinews of hope and strength for our people who understandably aspire in a fast-moving world to prosperity and greatness.

There has been decadence in our land in past years. Among the vital sores of this decay is a crucial failure of the rule of law which is fundamental in a democracy. The rule of law which is the guarantor of the equal opportunity which free men cherish has been nullified by the predominant system of monopoly and by entrenched personages and groups who have established and maintained a privileged position by receiving special treatment in the operation of the law.

When there is one law for the many and another law for the privileged few, democracy which we aspire to implant and maintain in our country in the soil of Asia not only becomes a farce but it conduces to the multiplication of political, economic and social injustices that prevent true progress for the country and prosperity for the people.

In our administration, therefore, we have not shirked the duty of assaulting the strongholds of privilege in order to maintain the primacy of the law and the fair and equal opportunity for all citizens which the law upholds and protects. Whereas before in an empty gesture of righteousness, those who wielded the arm of the law struck invariably at the small and defenseless citizens, now in our drive for moral regeneration, we have started to smash at the big ones in their pedestal of privilege to restore the principle that in a true democracy, no man is above the law and that whosoever commits a transgression, no matter how wealthy, powerful and influential, is not so big as to be beyond the reach of the law.

If we uphold the principle of the primacy of the law in the land, it should be more so in our armed forces which are the physical guardian of our mights or liberties. A contributory cause to a past feeling of demoralization in the ranks of our military organization has been the unequal application of the law, the creation of exceptions to the law for particular individuals, which is symptomatic of the system of privilege. Upon assuming the Command of the armed forces, therefore, we felt it our duty to enhance in our military organization adherence and respect for the law which in turn enhances discipline and morale. This policy has been applied rigorously in the implementation of the law providing for the retirement of officers. As long as the law in its present state stands, it must be applied equally to all. Apart from the difficulty of regulating exceptions to conform to reason and justice, such exceptions impair the morale of ranking officers from whom are withheld expected opportunities for deserved promotions.

A great leader of our armed forces has manifested anew in this instance his sterling qualities as a soldier and as a patriot when he expressed support for the policy of making no exceptions to the operation of the officers retirement law. We refer to the outgoing chief of staff, Gen. Pelagio Cruz, who is one of the finest soldiers of the land, second to none.

Our people are grateful to General Cruz for his stint of service as a military leader. Enjoying the highest prestige for his quality of leadership and integrity he has led our armed forces with marked excellence and distinction. To him goes the deserved love and thanks of our people and the admiration and affection of his Commander-in-Chief. He has capped his military career with honor and has thereby honored the military service with his name. To no greater glory can any soldier aspire. The Administration and I have such esteem for General Cruz that I am happy to announce that we have succeeded in prevailing upon him to continue serving our people in the administration as Presidential assistant on military affairs in Malacañang in which he shall undertake vital troubleshooting missions for the administration which call for ability, devotion to duty and integrity.

In the selection of the successor of General Cruz, we have also adhered to the primacy of the law. You will recall that upon assumption of our responsibility as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, we declared that in order to boost and maintain a high morale among the officers and men, we shall in making promotions discard favoritism and follow the criteria of seniority, merit and justice. To us, these criteria have the force of law in our armed forces. In accordance with these criteria, the decision for a worthy successor to General Cruz fell deservedly in an able and distinguished officer who, we trust, will not fail our country and people, General Alfredo Santos.

To be second in command, the decision fell on an equally fine officer, who, too, would grace the position of Chief of Staff if we could but have two chiefs of staff at one time—General Pedro Molina.

Examining the record and background of General Santos, supplemented by information from reputable persons who have known him intimately, as well as from personal observation, we are confident that General Santos will succeed in his responsibility. Having examined also carefully what critics—for all of us have critics—have to say against him, we reiterate our full confidence in the integrity and capability of the new Chief of Staff to be the leader of our Armed Forces under our supreme command.

We are told that the new chief of staff is the first integree to become one. In this connection, we wish to say that in making the choice of the new head of the armed forces, we did not make any distinction between integrees and professional officers. We disapprove of cliques of any kind in our military organization. There should be only one clique, which is the entire armed forces organization itself, to which single clique all officers, whether reserve or academy and professional in origin, should belong, with loyalty to only one organization as they owe loyalty to only one country and to only one Commander-in-Chief as the symbol of the country.

The new chief of staff, we trust, is well aware of the fact that he will have a more trying job in his hands than any of his predecessors ever had. We are in an era in the history of our Republic in which all of us will have to work harder to make up for the failings and ineptness of the past in laboring devotedly and honestly for the economic uplift of our country, providing not only a sound base for our national security but also for a richer life for our people.

We have waged an assault upon the bastions of privilege and vested interests to give a chance to the common citizens to attain an improved life. From one of them, we seek the return of unduly-gotten 4 hectares of residential land that was intended for the homeless and from the other, illegally acquired five thousand hectares of farm land for distribution to the tenants and other landless citizens. We are determined that as we engage in the vigorous development of our rich natural resources through the system of free enterprise, this bounty of our land shall not be cornered and monopolized by a privileged few but shall be spread as common blessings from God to all our people.

We have sought this same objective in our Armed Forces of opening the gates of a better life to the common man. It was therefore a source of joy and inspiration for me that I approved the increase in pay for our enlisted men. We must carry on this endeavor for the less fortunate among our countrymen. We commend General Cruz for launching a project to provide our enlisted men and their families with better quarters and housing facilities and we hereby direct General Santos to carry out this project for improved living conditions for the enlisted men and their loved ones.

Our armed forces have a grander mission today. It is more than a mission—it is a crusade or part of a national crusade. It goes beyond keeping vigil over the security of our territory. It extends to assisting actively in the successful implementation of a vast socio-economic program that we have launched for the attainment of progress and prosperity. It goes to upholding and helping maintain the restoration of true moral values within the military organization and among our people. Fundamentally, it means helping to establish and safeguard the security of effective opportunities for all our people, principally the enlisted men and the common citizens, to the end that ours shall not be democracy only in name but shall be a democracy in fact which assures not only security from aggression, not only freedom from foreign domination, not only political liberty but above all an effective security from want and to enjoy in freedom an abundant life for all our people.

We are proud of our Armed Forces and this feeling is now the bounden responsibility of the new Chief of Staff— to maintain with honor, with dignity and with reason. To General Santos we say, “Carry on, and God bless you and the Armed Forces of the Philippines.”

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.