Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Sixth Annual Convention of the Philippine Association of Private Schools

[Released on May 13, 1963]

THE ROLE OF PRIVATE SCHOOLS

I FEEL privileged to be among the private school educators of this country. The occasion is appropriate for acknowledging publicly my lifelong gratitude to those instructors in private schools responsible for my professional training and education. The occasion also affords me a setting to express my views on private education its contributions to the building of this Nation and its responsibility in the implementation of the five-year socio-economic program of my administration. At the very outset, I wish to state that I need the whole-hearted participation of private schools to ensure the success of the program.

I took time out of the strenuous schedule of my official duties and have accepted the invitation to speak at this Sixth Annual Convention of the Philippine Association of Private Schools for two reasons: first to acknowledge the great and gallant role which the private schools play in the education of our youth and second to experience the pleasure of appearing before men and women who render valuable service to our country. I have always had the highest regard for those who, like you, stimulate the young in the love and pursuit of knowledge, or who otherwise channel the youth’s energies and enthusiasms toward the realization of ends designed for the common welfare. Well, indeed, has it been said that the most potent of all indirect influences in the development of a sound citizenry of a country is the influence of good, dedicated teachers.

It is no secret to you that our national government sets aside between one-third and one-fourth of its annual total appropriations for purposes of education alone—and that it has continually been increasing such outlays. For the next fiscal year, 1963-1964, the sum of P532,270,170 shall be needed comprising one-third of the government’s income. The consistent, substantial increase in the sums allocated for public education is significant—more so if it is viewed in the context of the world’s efforts to educate its children. This is to say, if we compare such increase with trends in the financing of education in other countries. The International Yearbook of Education , published by the International Bureau of Education, Geneva, and Unesco, Paris, noted down that, in regard to expenditure for education in 1960-1961, Australia’s rate of increase was 9.6%; Burma’s, 4.1%; China’s 21.3%; Indonesia’s, 15%; Iran’s, 18.2%; Japan’s, 10.7%; New Zealand’s, 11.1%; or Malaya’s, 19.8%; while that of the Philippines was 25%.. In other words, we have been increasing our allocations for public education at a faster ratio or tempo than the aforesaid countries. This is an achievement in itself—and should be to us and our people, whose passion for education is a byword, a source of distinct, indubitable pride.

But even with this generous attention which our government gives to public education, there is still much to desire in this respect. I shall be the first to say or admit that, often for reasons beyond our countrol, we have not done enough. Our population is expanding to such proportions that there will be an average of 960,000 children reaching school age every year. Subtracting the normal loss in graduation and dropouts, the total student population of the country will continue to increase at the rate of no less than 600,000 each year. That is why, in my integrated socio-economic program for the country, there is the requirement for the provision of facilities, during its 5-year period, for at least 350,000 children of school age. This will mean the opening in five years, of about 77,300 additional elementary classes. The appropriation for such classes will inevitably run into several hundred millions of pesos.

It is precisely in realization of this fact—that one of the most vital and critical areas of development in our socio-economic program lies in the field of adequate educational facilities—that I have sent to the Congress now in session a coordinated elementary school financing program. This is a carefully studied plan which, while it creates new sources of revenue on both the local and the national levels, would transfer financial responsibility for the intermediate grades to the local governments. It is my belief, that, by such and other essential measures seeking to create special funds as well as to replenish such funds, our annual elementary school crisis will soon enough become a thing of the past. But, of course, such a stirring hope notwithstanding, we should be frank to state that these measures cannot possibly provide a panacea for all our other educational ills.

While it is gratifying that our country spends a large part of the government’s income in education, it also means that the cost of providing for public education is becoming prohibitive. Herein lies the still untapped potential for private schools. Serious thought must be given to the idea that to lessen the load of the people in sustaining the mounting cost of public education, the government should strengthen the private schools by providing them with increased basic assistance so that the private schools will assume an even larger share of the responsibility of educating the youth of the land. Towards this end, at the proper time when the government’s administrative machinery may be revamped, particularly after updating the Constitution, I support the idea of creating a separate Department of Private Education.

How do private schools stand in the context of our educational endeavors? The Constitution of the Philippines, in its Section 5, Article XIV, laid down the fundamental objectives of education in our country as follows: “To develop moral character, personal discipline, civic conscience, and vocational efficiency, and teach the duties of citizenship.” Concurrent Resolution No. 8 of the Second Congress of the Philippines amplified these objectives in a document—consisting of ten more or less specific aims—towards which, as a sort of framework, the schools could direct their activities and functions. And the Revised Philippine Educational Program adopted by the Board of National Education, in conformity with the mandate of the Constitution, enjoined the implementation of what it listed as the five basic policies of education in the Philippines. Assured that all these objectives and policies are in the familiar knowledge of our private schools, colleges, and universities, there would be no need for elaboration.

Education is inextricably linked with economics, but it should perforce have a wider connotative reference or pertinence than that. Education may sometimes intrude into the sphere of politics, local or international, but except when the security and well-being of the state so dictate, the men charged with the responsibility for education should not allow motives other than pedagogical to determine the course of their actions. That is why, while I wish you every measure of success in the deliberations of your convention over its theme: “Nationalization of Private School Administration in the Philippines,” I should nevertheless wish that you will view such subject from as a dispassionate and disinterested angle as possible, or consider calmly, if meticulously, every essential factor bearing upon it.

In the matter of enrollment as of 1960-1961, except in the case of elementary pupils, 85 or 90 per cent of whom are in the public schools, 64 per cent of the student population on the secondary level and 88 per cent of the student population on the collegiate level study in the private schools. Private schools have continued to increase in number and enrollment from 30 in 1913 with an enrollment of 2,500 to 2,219 private schools today with a combined enrollment exceeding one million. Of the over half million high school student 62% are enrolled in private high schools and of the over 300,000 college students 90% are enrolled in private schools. From these figures it can be seen that the role of private schools in the improvement of the social life of the people cannot be underestimated. There is a private school in practically every town in the Philippines and being mostly high school and college they wield tremendous influence in the country. In 1961-1962 there were 283,000 collegiate students in our private schools.

Private education in this country has a long and brilliant past. Tracing its roots from the selfless endeavors of the early missionaries, it had developed into a system the superior of which cannot be found elsewhere. From this standpoint, the Philippines may be regarded as the most fortunate country in Southeast Asia. Blessed with an indigenous culture that values education highly, we have provided a fertile soil for the seeds of democracy to grow and flourish.

The educational system in the Philippines during the Spanish rule gave to the Philippines its leaders, reformers, and propagandists of the Revolution of 1896; among them, Jose Rizal from the Ateneo de Manila, Emilio Jacinto from the Colegio de San Juan de Letran, Apolinario Mabini and Manuel L. Quezon from the University of Santo Tomas.

Acknowledgment should be made to the contributions of that great country, the United States of America, to private education. From the beginning of the American rule, the liberty-loving Americans accorded private education the necessary climate for growth and development. We should likewise mention the labors of patriotic Filipinos towards the close of the Spanish regime who, imbued with the highest patriotism and love of country and laboring under the most difficult of circumstances, established private schools which became the nurseries of nationalism. The work of these Filipinos was continued with more vigor and energy during the American occupation. These Filipino-established schools stood as bulwarks against the total foreignization of the Philippines by fostering nationalism arid culture and by conserving Filipino traits and ideals. The private schools represented by the more than 300 delegates to this 6th Annual Convention of the Philippine Association of Private Secondary Schools are among its illustrious successors.

Since today is not yesterday, since change is the law of life, I trust likewise that the education which our institutions of learning give to our youth is adapted to the reality and realism of the changing times. In today’s specific circumstances in our country, for instance, I should expect—that all our schools, through their curricular offerings or through their programs of action, will help the Administration advance the purpose of its integrated socio-economic development program. For it is a program that has been conceived to provide for the enjoyment by the masses of our people of the basic requisites for a decent honorable living and of the adequate opportunities for their attainment of material prosperity as well as spiritual fulfillment. Only thus as I said on more than one occasion before, will the Filipino people be able to stand in dignity and freedom, not alone in their beloved native land, but, equally important, in the stern community of nations.

Indeed, the private school system in this country is contributing enormously to the well-being and happiness of our people. It is helping the Government raise the social, economic, cultural and moral standards of the community with almost no cost to the State. Congress provides only one peso for every student enrolled in private schools. The magnitude of the contribution of private schools to the building of this nation can best be appreciated if we consider that they have invested approximately 1% billion pesos in site, plant facilities and equipment, earn an income of P80,000,000 a year, employ around 35 000 teachers and during the last ten years produced 1,300,000 graduates; 630,000 high school, 310,000 special vocational and 370,000 college which would have cost the Government P4,000,000,000.

The contribution of private education to the economic well-being of the nation is a matter of common knowledge. Statistics show that almost all special vocational students are enrolled in private schools offering hundreds of vocational courses ranging from beauty culture and hair science to flying and aircraft maintenance, in which more than 40,000 were enrolled in these courses in 1962, 41,926 or 15% in the different branches of engineering and technology, 3,000 in agriculture, 82,000 or 30% in commerce and business administration.

Private schools play a vital role in the moral regeneration program of my administration. There are three categories of private schools in our country today: the Catholic schools, the Protestant schools and the secular schools. In the first two, religious subjects are included in their curricula, church attendance and religious exercises and other obligations are required. The inclusion of religion in the curricula of religious schools has been prompted by the belief that moral formation or character building is not possible without religion.

Secular schools are likewise contributing to the moral regeneration program. In many of these schools religious organizations, fraternities and religious instruction are given support and encouragement by the administration. In others, nationalism and civic-mindedness have been the integrating principle in their curriculum. In schools that are purely secular, the students have also influenced the community for good.

The participation of the private schools sector of our country in the socio-economic program can be made more effective if the quality of education and training given in private schools is high. This demands adequate facilities and equipment, more highly qualified, contented and competent teachers, better teaching methods and techniques and higher selective admission standards in collegiate courses. Schools that depend solely on tuition fees for support may find it extremely difficult to meet these requirements. This situation is made more complicated if the school corporation operates as a business establishment with a view to making profits for distribution to its stockholders and if the school is compelled to operate small classes for lack of enrollment. Under the latter predicament it would be advisable in fairness to the students to voluntarily close the school or enter into a merger with other schools in the locality to enable the school to give a higher quality of educational service to its clientele. While schools of this type have my sympathy my administration cannot tolerate our youth to pay for substandard education and I cannot allow their exploitation by enterprising but unscrupulous school operators.

There is a feeling here and abroad that quality instruction and stock corporations are a contradiction in terms. Stock corporations by the very nature of their organization, objectives and purposes are operated for profit and consequently quality instruction is of secondary importance. Some schools are charging all kinds of fees, without returning all the collection to students in the form of services. A big university in Manila contested the right of the Department of Education representatives to inspect the books of the corporation on the ground that the same is auditing per se and hence the regulation to this effect is of doubtful legality.

A searching study of the Corporation Law reveals that schools should be incorporated as non-stock corporation. The law provides in section 165 thereof the basic organizational pattern of the corporation and this pattern is unmistakably non-stock. The Department of Public Instruction more than thirty years ago was, I think, in error allowing schools to be incorporated as stock. It is to be hoped that stockholders will realize that to improve private education, schools should be operated as educational institutions and not as business enterprises. The University of Southern Philippines in Cebu City three years ago converted the institution into a foundation; I congratulate this University for this step. The Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities through voluntary agreement have pledged to limit their profits to 12%; I commend them for this step.

I trust that I have contributed to the picture that private schools occupy in the context of the Administration’s ambition to build a progressive and better country. In order, however, to improve the efficiency of private education I have approved the policy of the Bureau of Private Schools of assisting private schools in their programs of upgrading instruction to meet existing needs of the community. I have approved the increase of the personnel of the Bureau in the proposed budget for the fiscal year 1964 in order that my administration will be able to assist private education in meeting its expanded tasks. In the conviction that our private schools are invaluable to the success of our national effort, I wish you every success in your convention and pledge to do my part to strengthen our private schools so that they may become a great and unbreakable pillar of our Republic for all time to come.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.