Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the GSIS Anniversary Celebration

[Delivered on May 31, 1962]

FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR THE ECONOMIC PROGRAM

LET ME GIVE YOU a glimpse of the five-year socio-economic program of the Administration. The socio-economic program aims at immediately alleviating the plight of the common man which is the second major goal under the program. There is urgency and impelling importance in this objective because living standards in the Philippines today are far from adequate. Per capita consumption of superior foods is well below healthy nutritional requirements. The distribution of welfare is far from satisfactory. There is grinding and miserable poverty in the midst of luxurious plenty. Very few regions and communities enjoy affluence compared to the existence of widespread, if not extreme want, in many areas.

Our responsibility in this regard is a clear and demanding one. Our task is to institute improvements in the over-all level of economic welfare and its distribution. It is the primordial duty of the Government to provide the wherewithals of a better life for the common man. Economic growth in our country, to have any meaning at all, must be reflected in terms of actual and perceived improvement in the lives of our people. Failure to recognize this fact will be a potential source of dissatisfaction and discontent.

We can accomplish this objective if we can keep production apace, if not ahead, of population growth; if we can successfully extend special assistance to unprogressive regions in the country that have lagged behind in development to enable them to participate and share more fully in the fruits of national progress; and if we can provide adequate and growing sources of livehood for our people. It is in the pursuit of this objective that I took occasion to stress in my inaugural address the need of creating “conditions that will provide more income for those whose earnings are inadequate for their elemental needs.”

We are fortunate that our country is blessed with bountiful natural resources—resources, if properly harnessed, utilized and exploited, will not only make it possible for us to sustain our fast-growing population but also provide our people with decent means of livelihood. But these natural resources would be of no avail unless properly developed and economically and intelligently exploited and unless we guard against the possibility that the results we desire to attain do not get lost over the vast desert of need that now exists. The importance of formulating a plan of action defining how these objectives are to be achieved is at once apparent.

It is for this very reason that the Administration’s five-year integrated socio-economic program was prepared and adopted. I consider this program to be the answer to the challenge of the times. It outlines the targets and the means for a total national effort to improve the economic welfare of the Nation, distribute the burden and benefits of economic development equitably and lay the solid foundations of an economy that would provide economic growth and stability consistent with the needs and requirements of our fast-growing population. This objective finds its ready counterpart in the growth in recent years of international consciousness to fight the twin scourges of poverty and want in the world at large. There is the growing realization that the world owes to its citizens freedom from want, that prosperity like peace is indivisible, and that only by deliberate cooperation and assistance of the richer nations can other less fortunate ones succeed in guaranteeing to their citizens a decent level of living.

The over-all program I have just mentioned is designed to achieve the following goals:

1. A six per cent average annual rate of increase in the gross domestic product of the Philippines, through the expansion of the agricultural and industrial sectors.

2. To create job opportunities for a Philippine labor force growing at the rate of about 300,000 annually. Our goal is 11.6 million jobs by 1967.

3. To accelerate development of economically-depressed regions within the Philippines, in order to equitably distribute income on a regional basis.

These goals are feasible on the basis that:

1. An amount equal to about 16 per cent of the annual Philippines’ gross domestic product is channeled into gross domestic investments during the next five years.

2. Gross domestic savings in the Philippines reach 13 per cent of gross domestic product by next year and 16 per cent by the fifth year. Now, domestic savings are about 12 per cent of gross domestic product.

3. Since domestic savings will not be adequate for all our needs, although capital accumulation will depend mostly on the domestic effort, the Philippines needs an inflow of new foreign capital of about $175 million average yearly over the next five years.

In order to mobilize these resources and facilities to meet the requirements of the program, our monetary and financial institutions must undergo some reforms in policy and structure to suit the task. These reorganization will involve three principal objectives, namely:

1. To prevent bottlenecks from developing in production and capital formation which may arise particularly from an inadequacy of financial resources of from the inaccessibility of these resources to worthy economic projects.

2. To develop new institutions, instruments and procedures to provide inducements for increased savings out of current income and for the channeling of these savings to economic projects of this priority.

3. To provide channels to facilitate the entry of foreign capital under conditions which will give adequate security of principal and attractive incomes to such capital.

Over the five years from fiscal years 1963 to 1967, a total of P11,500 million must be mobilized in the form of domestic savings out of total gross national income of P78,200 million. The principal intermediaries for the mobilization of such savings will be:

1. Investment banks and other institutions involved in channeling personal savings into equity investments.

2. Insurance companies that channel premium collections into corporate stock purchases and long-term loans for plant building and home construction.

3. Savings banks and other mortgage loan institutions.

4. The Government Service Insurance System, the Social Security System and the Development Bank of the Philippines.

5. Commercial banks, rural banks, and other short-term loan institutions that finance inventory.

The priorities of the financial program with respect to these institutions will be:

1. To provide reasonable government assistance to these institutions in their efforts to introduce plans which encourage systematic savings from the public in general out of current incomes.

2. To enlist the full support of these institutions for the purpose of achieving common priorities in Loan and Investment Programs and to provide assistance and inducements in order to facilitate the channeling of investible funds into projects considered most important to this integrated Economic Development program.

3. All the powers at present available to induce savings out of current income shall be put to effective use under this program. The Central Bank of the Philippines will review the feasibility of raising the interest rates paid by commercial and savings banks on savings and time deposits, push with greater vigor the establishment of local community rural banks, cooperative banks and savings and loan associations and encourage these institutions to offer more attractive inducements for systematic savings plans.

Among the objectives of the program are the expansion of the facilities and resources of existing financial intermediaries, and to establish new ones designed to induce habits of thrift in and mobilize the savings of the rural communities.

The consolidated net additional resources of the major financial intermediaries are expected to grow annually during the five-year period so that these institutions will be in a position to mobilize a total of P3,667 million in domestic savings during the period, or an average of P733 million per year.

Running parallel to the campaign for increasing the current rate of domestic savings is the reorganization of financial organizations in order to insure the optimum use of savings for productive investments. In line with this plan, we have initiated the move to budget more rigorously the investible funds placed in the control of government financial institutions. To this end, two steps are now in process; included among these step is to coordinate the lending functions of the Social Security System and GSIS with the Development Bank of the Philippines.

I appreciate your cooperation with the Administration in channeling 50% of the investible funds of the GSIS to the Development Bank of the Philippines as a concrete example of the kind of positive action necessary to carry out our socio-economic program. This turnover of funds will be of benefit to all, not excluding members of the GSIS. Although for the moment it would mean less profit to the System because of a smaller rate of interest on these channeled funds, this sacrifice on your part will in the forseeable future be offset by the good that it will bring to our people.

I expect much from the GSIS and from other government corporations during my Administration. I expect a corporation like the GSIS to flourish in the ideal climate for economic growth which we seek to foster. I expect it to find new ways of expanding the economy by stimulating the development of private business and industry. I expect it to be a strong, positive force, dynamic, vital, responsive to the challenge of commerce and competition, and at the same time sympathetic to the needs of our country and people. Most of all, I expect it to serve as a model of business organization, dedicated to public service, motivated by patriotism, managed with integrity, ability and industry.

I trust that your corporation shall help to bring to fruition the aims and aspirations of the New Era for a better life for all our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.