Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the inauguration of the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS) Building

[Delivered in Dagupan City, October 18, 1962]

THE ROLE OF THE GSIS

I AM happy to participate at this inauguration of the new Northern Luzon Regional Office Building of the Government Service Insurance System. This is a significant event in the development of the capital market in this country. It provides new and improved facilities to enable the people of this area to have easy access to the services of this vital institution. This building will further facilitate the mobilization of the savings of Government employees and their addition to the total capital funds available to the country for the pursuit of its economic growth.

It is fitting to look upon this occasion in terms of its symbolic significance to the 5-Year Socio-Economic Program which this administration is now in the process of implementing. The GSIS, along with other government financial insitutions, provides the indispensable service of mobilizing the savings of the people and channeling them into the hands of productive investors.

I am happy to announce that the savings entrusted by the citizens of our country to the financial institutions of the government, including the Government Service Insurance System, are being utilized in the most efficient manner and in a pattern that will best promote the rate of increase of the output, income and employment of this country.

We are departing substantially from the inefficient habits inherited from the past. We are discarding the established practice of letting each government financial institution, or for that matter, each government executive department and corporation, pursue their own programs and push their own projects independently of one another.

We shall insist upon the integration of the projects of the various government agencies into meaningful and technically consistent packages. Our program is premised on the principle that the Philippines will grow and flourish mainly through the efforts of private enterprise. We shall seek to influence the investment activities of the private sector through the exercise of judicious monetary, fiscal and commercial policies. While it used to be that each government institution programmed its loans to the private sector with little reference to the policies of others or to the overall requirements of whatever national program was then in existence, we are now establishing a common set of criteria and a common set of procedures for all these government financial institutions together. To this end, we have established a Loans and Investment Council composed of representatives from these institutions and from the Program Implementation Agency to draw up a procedure for coordinating their activities. This promises to be an effective instrument for insuring that a substantial part of the efforts of the private sector will fulfill the role envisioned for them by the Five-Year Program.

One of the institutions represented in this Council is the Government Service Insurance System. I bring this up to assure all government employees that their savings in the GSIS will be used to promote the economic growth of this country and to achieve the common national goals that we all aspire for. I wish to assure them that through their savings they will have a direct hand in the task of building for ourselves a vigorous nation. And I wish to emphasize that this expansion of the facilities of the GSIS is part of a wide-ranging effort to translate the funds saved by the community into the solid, real capital structures necessary to realize the long-run targets of the Five-Year Program.

Indeed, I consider the Government Service Insurance System as one of the leading financing institutions which will spearhead a concerted effort to translate into action the socio-economic development program which I have enunciated for our country during the next five years.

I am happy to know that the GSIS today is playing a vital role in the implementation of the economic program of the government because I consider the GSIS an indispensable cog in the machinery of the government.

I recognize the GSIS as a vital agency of our government that can surely help this administration in the fulfillment of the spirit and purpose of our five-year socio-economic development program.

I recognize the GSIS as one national institution that has always done its best to help the government in its multifarious duties of providing for the social improvement and economic security and stability of our country.

I recognize the GSIS as a governmental office that will always continue to cooperate with us and foster this administration’s plan of assuring the happiness and contentment of the lowly government employees.

I am happy to note that the GSIS, judging from the latest progress report submitted to me, has attained considerable progress, especially in alleviating the economic status of its members. While before the poor government employee earning P100.00 a month could hardly raise money to meet his obligations and sometimes was forced to borrow from loan sharks at exorbitant rates of interest, the GSIS has come to his rescue with service loans like salary and policy loans.

Where before the poor government supervisor earning P200.00 or more a month could hardly provide a decent home for his family unless he had to sell properties here and there or inherit tremendous sums from his parents, now the GSIS has strengthened his economic security by providing him the credit facilities with which to construct a house which he can call his own after a ten-year amortization. Whereas before the poor government employee had to wait from, say, 6 months to 6 years before he could collect his retirement pay and enjoy the fruits of his toil and labor at the brink of death, now, thanks to the GSIS, he can enjoy these benefits extended to him with the maximum of speed and efficiency and the minimum of red tape.

On this inauguration of the Dagupan branch of the GSIS, I wish to congratulate the management and the board for the steady but enviable expansion as well as the thousands of government employees including soldiers, teachers and clerks in all government offices in Northern Luzon because without their support in the form of premium contributions and amortization payment the establishment of this branch of the GSIS in Dagupan City would not have been a reality.

There is one vital fact concerning our socio-economic program which must be emphasized. It is the fact that its success is in the hands of the people themselves. This is because the program is based on free enterprise, which means that economic activities have been removed from government control and placed in the hands of the businessmen and the people. The success of the program, therefore, does not depend on the LP administration or the NP opposition. It now depends on you the people.

In accordance with our pledge during the campaign, we have discarded controls because it was the main cause of the complaint of officials and because we believe in the freedom of the people to work for their own prosperity and welfare. Under controls, you could not put up a business without the government’s permit and you could not even travel abroad without the government’s consent. Now you are free to put up any business you want and it is none of the business of the government to stop you. On the contrary, the government will help you in your problems, give you statistics and guidance about your proposed venture, build the roads and other public works needed and help you obtain credit and capital either through a loan from a government credit institution or a government guarantee in a private bank.

In brief, the administration has restored your freedom of business pursuit in order that the growth of the country and the pursuit of your personal prosperity shall lie in your own hands. We have done this not only because we believe in freedom but because we have faith in the Filipino—we have faith in the capacity of our people for hard work to attain a better livelihood if given a chance under conditions of fair and equal opportunity for all. These conditions we have created and will continue to preserve, so it is now up to our people to invest, to work hard and to bear with fortitude the trials of honest toil so that together we shall quickly turn our rich natural resources into a rich life for the great mass of our countrymen.

I extend my heartfelt and sincere congratulations to all the officials and employees of the GSIS on this inauguration of their new building. I call once more on all the officials and employees in the GSIS to meet the challenge and expectations of my Administration and of our country and people to pledge anew all your efforts and resources to make our common dream in promoting the general prosperity and happiness of all our people a reality.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.