Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the ninth National Congress of the Philippine Sugar Industry

[Released on February 13, 1962]

PROBLEMS OF THE SUGAR INDUSTRY

I AM GLAD to be with you today. I have more than an average interest in the welfare of the sugar industry. Speaking candidly because there is no reason why we should not be candid to one another, many of the leaders of the sugar industry during the election did not believe my special interest in the industry altho they knew that I come from the second-largest sugar producing province in the country, Pampanga. But that is history. The important thing now is that although many leaders of the sugar industry worked hard against my candidacy during the elections, now that I have won, I cannot alter the fact that I come from the second largest sugar province in the country, that I have more than an average interest in the well-being of the industry, and that, therefore, as President of the country, you can count on me to help in seeking the salvation and in promoting the growth and advancement of the sugar industry.

I am not only interested in the well-being of the sugar industry; I believe that the Government has the duty of helping the industry. This is because sugar has long been a pillar of the Philippine economy with a great history. The industry exerted tremendous efforts and extended great assistance in our country’s efforts for the establishment of the Commonwealth Government and for the final acquisition of independence from the United States. Confronted with the choice between the independence of the country coupled with the loss of the American sugar market on the one hand, and continued political subjection coupled with the enjoyment of the privileges of the American sugar market on the other, the sugar industry stood with the late President Manuel L. Quezon in 1934 in his demand for immediate, complete and absolute independence for our country.

During the last world war, the sugar industry refused to cooperate with the enemy and even went to the extent of completely abandoning operations and purposely sabotaging its production facilities to prevent the enemy from deriving use and sustenance from them. Likewise, when the country’s economic welfare demanded that the undesirable features of the Bell Trade Act be changed, the sugar industry did not hesitate to authorize the Laurel Economic Mission, publicly and in writing, to disregard the welfare and existence of the entire industry and to take into account only the paramount welfare of the country as a whole.

I also believe that while the Government itself should not engage in business, it is the business of the Government to help and to lead in the rapid and sound economic development of the country. It was for this reason that since I assumed office, I have made it a matter of policy to undertake continuous consultations with the leaders of all sectors of the economy so that the Administration will be kept fully informed not only of their laudable and invaluable contributions to national progress but also of the problems that beset each segment so that the proper steps and remedies may be taken for their effective solution. It was for this same reason that I have acted to provide economic leadership in the country by moving swiftly to restore free enterprise in order to enable all sectors of the economy, including sugar, to have a breathing spell in their operations and realize better returns from the fruits of their endeavors.

This action consists of the decontrol program which I promised during my campaign to implement and which actually took effect on January 22 this year. I am confident that the program will benefit, as it has perhaps already benefited, the sugar industry in the same manner that it has been and shall be a great stimulant to the economic development of the whole country.

I believe that the sugar industry has at least two important problems. The first is the expiration of the Laurel-Langley Agreement eliminating our special trade relations with the United States twelve short years from now or at midnight of July 3, 1974. From then on, whether or not we like it or unless other arrangements are agreed upon between the United States and our Government, our country will have to pay full tariffs on all its exports, including sugar, to the American continent. If steps are not now taken to prepare yourselves for its inception, the problem that this will cause will be graver than that poised by any other problem, past or present.

In this regard, efforts could be exerted by the industry to shift its emphasis from purely agricultural to integration and diversification especially in the utilization and industrialization of its by-produtcs. I need not tell you that sugar has its one thousand and one myriad uses which if properly exploited could contribute greatly to the economic development of our country.

Your second and immediate problem is the threat of the institution of a global sugar quota system * by the United States Government in her imports of the commodity. If adopted, this will bring about the abandonment of premium prices paid for our country’s U.S. sugar exports and the substantial reduction of our foreign exchange earnings from this source by nearly two-third or between $70 and $80 million yearly.

The adverse effects of the implementation of this system will tell greatly on the social and economic structure not only of the three million dependents of the sugar industry but also on the entire Filipino Nation.

There is reason to fear that the materialization of the threat may cause the final extinction of one of the country’s strongest pillars, if nothing effective is done about it. I recognize also that under the circumstances you have found it extremely difficult and perhaps even impossible to consider the continued expansion of your production efforts.

If you were to continue increasing production and the threat materializes, the result will be tragic. It will be more so to the small sugarcane farmers owning not more than five hectares of land each and who compose 95 per cent of the country’s sugarcane planters. Most if not all of them will become heavily indebted and most perhaps will have to abandon their operations.

On the other hand, if you were to cut down production and the threat does not materialize, we will find ourselves facing disastrous consequences. Sugar production will be short. We might not even be able to fill our basic quotas—400,000 short tons for domestic consumption, 980,000 short tons for our basic quota in the United States market, and 49,000 short tons in the world market. Much less will we be able to fill whatever additional sugar quotas might be granted our country by the United States Government.

This, indeed, is a dilemma which you face. On the part of the Administration, I give assurance that this Administration will do everything to oppose and prevent the implementation of this system for the protection and well-being of the Philippine sugar industry.

Already, proper representations have been made with the United States Government so that the American Congress and the American people as a whole will consider the disastrous consequence that this proposal will cause on their closest ally in this part of the world. Continuous efforts will be exerted to present the just position of the Philippines on this question.

With this and our faith in the sense of justice of the American people and Government, I advise you very strongly to continue with your increased production efforts. This is the less risky of the two alternatives facing the sugar industry. Basically, it is better to have an oversupply than an undersupply of the commodity.

If in the past you were able to rise up to the challenge and proved your capacity, I am confident that you can just as well if not better rise up to this new challenge of the global sugar quota system. Surely, you will have the courage and the fortitude to face this new problem squarely and frontally. Your Government, and this Administration in particular, will not abandon you. This I can guarantee and this you can all be sure of—we will be by your side.

There is one aspect of the sugar problem which a sense of realism will not allow us to ignore. It is the correlation that is being given by certain quarters between the Philippine sugar and tobacco industries. It has been reported that certain tobacco interests have threatened to fight Philippine sugar if imported Virginia leaf tobacco is not admitted into the Philippines. In this connection, I would like you and our people to know that as far as the present Administration is concerned, we shall not be a party to any arrangement that will sacrifice one industry for another but rather we will approach the problems of the sugar, tobacco and other industries as the interest of each industry and the sound development of the national economy require on the basis of fairness, justice, reason, and the people’s welfare.

I have said that the Government has a duty to the sugar industry. Reciprocally, the sugar industry has a duty to the Government and to the people.

The first of this duty is to your laborers. With the commencement of decontrol last month, a profit windfall has accrued to the industry. With full decontrol effected under the new Administration, this profit windfall has increased. I trust that you will share this windfall in adequate measure with your workers who not only constitute one of the indispensable factors of production but who have as all other human beings a just aspiration and right to better life.

I am conscious of the efforts being currently made by all of you to improve the working conditions of your laborers and to further grant them higher returns for their endeavors through fair and equitable adjustments in their present wage levels. However, the problems confronting the industry should not in any manner deter your undertaking these adjustments even in advance, subject to further revisions. The laborers occupy a higher plane in the production process; they have to eat and live in the meantime that your problems await solution.

I am glad to note that many among you have already made such adjustments while studies and recommendations are being formulated on proper wage levels in your farms. To all sugarcane planters who have done this already go my highest appreciation and commendation. For those who have not yet done so, I must point out the urgent need to do so because these adjustments have long been overdue. The sugar industry as the most enlightened and as the leader of the agricultural sector of the economy should set the pattern and be the model for all other agricultural industries to follow. Conscious as you have always been that an enlightened labor group should never be taken for granted, I know you will not be found wanting in this regard. I am sure your usual efficiency and your strong sense of moral and bounden duty will not further delay the implementation of the adjustment process.

Another duty of the industry at the present time is to keep the price of domestic sugar to our consumers at a reasonable level. Towards this end, there is need for more efforts to guarantee steady and adequate supply of the commodity at reasonable and fair prices both to the country’s consumers and the producers.

I am glad to note that the industry has successfully enabled the Government to increase the supply of the commodity from 200,000 tons about a year or two ago to 400,000 tons this year. What remains to be done in this regard, therefore, is to peg the price of the commodity according to the ability of the consumers to pay for it at the same time that the producers are enabled to realize just and fair returns from their endeavors. Success in this direction will mean greater consumption and increased demand for sugar to further benefit the industry’s three million dependents in terms of increased employment, more income and higher standards of living.

Hand in hand with attempt to assure adequate supply and stable prices for sugar, efforts must also be exerted to expand the domestic market by educating more of our countrymen to increase their consumption of the commodity.

It is paradoxical that while the Philippines stands as fifth to the largest sugar producing country in the world, that is Cuba, it is second to the last in per capita consumption of the commodity. Health authorities have established that an individual should consume 16.97 kilos of sugar annually. The average per capita consumption in our country is only 10.12 kilos yearly or 6.85 kilos less. Consider this in the face of the fact that the national population has increased to 27.5 million according to the latest census undertaken.

This aspect of the sugar industry’s problems should command greater attention not only to maintain the price of domestic sugar to consumers at a reasonable level but also to assist the industry in preparing for the termination of preferential trade with the American market in 1974.

Lastly, and speaking with the candor that the President of the Republic owes to the people for the national welfare, it is your duty to the country to refrain from engaging in organized power politics as a means of promoting the welfare of the sugar industry. You may take sides in politics as individuals but I believe that it is neither in the national interest nor in your own to engage in partisan politics as an organization. The promotion of the sugar industry, or any industry for that matter, ought not to be sought through the attainment of political power so that such power may be wielded to seek a privileged position for the industry concerned but should be sought through a demonstration of the merits, value and just claims of the industry in the over-all economy. To seek the well-being of an industry through control of political power, through control of vital agencies of public authority and control of high officials, not only places those engaged in the industry in an unwarranted risk but jeopardizes the health of our free political system which must at all times operate not as the captive implement for the benefit of one sector but for the general welfare of all the people.

I have spoken to you with this candor not for my benefit but for your benefit and for the good of the country. I am so convinced that it is not conducive to the public good as well as to your good for any industry to engage in an organized way in partisan politics that if I were to run again for public office and you offered me, as an organization, your political and material support for my candidacy, I will thank you as a matter of courtesy but I will prefer that you did not give such organized support to me or to any other politician because the industry should not be the concern of, and should not be concerned only with, one politician or one political party but should be the nonpartisan concern of the entire Government and Nation.

My friends, I have presented what I feel are your most important problems and what I think should be your paramount objectives in your efforts to contribute the best you can for the promotion and advancement of our country’s welfare. Besides all these, allow me to make one parting request.

Give my Administration an opportunity to cooperate with you and to help you. In your efforts, make me privy to your plans; consider my Administration an interested partner in the solution of your problems. My greatest concern as it is yours is the welfare of our beloved country. Therefore, let the well-being of all our people be our paramount and mutual objective.

* This threat materialized when the U.S. Congress instituted the global sugar quota system on July 13, through what is now known as the “Sugar Act Amendments of 1962”.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.