Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the Dedication Ceremony of the International Rice Research Institute

[Delivered in Los Baños, Laguna, February 7, 1962]

THE PHILIPPINE RICE PROBLEM

I FEEL HONORED for this opportunity to participate in the dedication ceremony of the International Rice Research Institute. The Philippines is fortunate in having been chosen as the permanent site of the Institute for with the strong support behind it, the amplitude and splendidness of its buildings and premises, and above all, the employment of world-known rice scientists and researchers, this Institute stands among the best scientific institutions on rice all over the world. We appreciate the good fortune in the selection of the Philippines as its site and the Philippine government is ready, willing and, I think, able to give full support and cooperation to the Institute in the attainment of its goals and objectives.

Our country faces today many complex problems of awesome dimensions. In the period of over a month, our Administration has pursued a crusade for moral regeneration. We have effected a shift from a controlled economy, which had been in vogue for over a decade, into a market economy. We have launched an integrated five-year socio-economic program as a take-off from a traditional type of economy.

In the midst of these endeavors of enormous magnitudes, I say that our most vital problem is rice. It appears ironical that while technological practices in the growing of palay is all ready practiced here and our soil and climate are suitable to the production of rice, our national average production still remains at 27.47 cavans per hectare. The Philippines occupies the lowest position among the 23 rice-producing countries of the world as shown in the following table:

PALAY: Yield Per Hectare in Specified Countries, 1956-1957

Hunger and malnutrition constitute one of the principal problems of every country in Southeast Asia and the Far East. Production of food has never outdistanced population growth in this part of the world. Freedom from hunger is the aspiration and goal of every Asian nation.

The explosion population of the Philippines is estimated to continue at the annual rate of 3.2 per cent. This means that our population which was 27,455,799 as of February 15, 1960, as officially announced on November 26, 1960 by the Bureau of the Census and Statistics, Sp. Bul. No. 1, will be 34,060,000 by January 1, 1967. Our rice eating population is 76.5 per cent and the annual per capita consumption, based on a weighted average estimate, is 1.847 cavans.* The estimated total human consumption by 1967 will be 48,313,973 sacks of 56 kilos of clean rice as against the 1963 estimated production of 45,622,600 sacks or 96,627,946 needed cavans of 44 kilos palay for 1967 as against the 1963 estimated production of 89,456,000 cavans.

There are three integrated solutions to the rice problems of the Philippines which constitute the Administration’s rice program. The first is the short-range measure of preventing a rise in the retail price of the cereal. To bring this about, one of my first acts was to create a Presidential Rice and Corn Committee with the function of insuring a year-round supply and distribution by buying and stockpiling the cereal which will be released and sold during the non-harvest period at prices within the reach of the common people and, if necessary, even at a loss to the Government. In fulfillment of this program, the Rice and Corn Committee through the NARIC and ACCFA started on January 29, 1962 to buy palay, ordinario , from farmers and their cooperatives, not from middlemen, at P12.00 per sack of 44 kilos, dry, at major centers of consumption in an effort to accumulate a buffer stock of palay and rice to be released at times and places of scarcity and at a price within the reach of our masses.

This short-range measure is based on the truism that our food production will not serve its intended utility to our people if the man in the street, if the common worker on the farm or in the factory, cannot afford to buy it with his modest earnings. It is the common people who need the most help of our Government in order to improve their working conditions, increase their per capita income, and elevate their standard of living. The high price for essential commodities, especially rice and other staples, whether in times of calamity or not, is one of the most potent reasons for inflicting misery on the majority of our countrymen, and when prices increase to an extreme level, this can drive them to desperation. I pledge to our people that I will do everything that can be done to insure that this injury to their welfare will not happen under my Administration.

To insure reasonable price levels of rice and other goods to the consumers requires the cooperation of those engaged in distribution and marketing. I would like to make a statement addressed to traders, irrespective of their nationality, who would unduly enrich themselves at the expense of the people through hoarding and profiteering of rice and other prime commodities: No privileges shall be granted by this Government to any merchant who will not honor the laws of the land or who v/ill commit acts, which, even if not illegal, are immoral or prejudicial to public interest. I will not hesitate to take the necessary measures to stop hoarding, blackmarketing, and price manipulations and prosecute those who will resort to the same because in a democracy the welfare of the individual and of the people is the highest law and that law must be upheld without fear or favor.

The long-range solution to the rice problem consists of “a program for increased production” which shall be aimed at adequate supply to meet the demands of our fast-growing population, and, later, enable exportation of the cereal abroad. The buying activities of the Presidential Rice and Corn Committee, which offers an attractive price to rice growers, will increase their productivity and production. The attainment of sufficient productivity in excess of the demand and at a diminishing cost of production will lower the consumers’ price at levels within their ability to pay and, furthermore, provide a reasonable margin of profit for the efficient rice grower, thereby making government price support in due time no longer necessary. Every possible assistance will be provided rice growers to increase their productivity, including adequate credit facilities, irrigation, fertilizers and the other aids to scientific agriculture. We will arouse a national effort for a successful long-range rice program for which purpose, we will enlist the support of Congress, all public agencies dealing with rice, farmers, merchants and the consuming public towards the realization of adequate rice production, distribution and stabilization, in order that the Government will be able to fulfill its first duty to the citizens, which is to insure provisions for the food of our people.

The third measure in our program is the use of research which will make full and comprehensive the solution of our rice problem. It is for this reason that our Government and people are gratified by the establishment of the International Rice Research Institute in our land. This is the reason why on behalf of our people, I have come here to participate in these ceremonies.

This phase of our program is aimed at developing high-yielding and disease-resisting rice varieties, and in addition, at developing varieties with greater resistance to blast and varieties with improved cooking and eating qualities. The studies on the utilization and effectiveness of the use of chemical and organic fertilizers and green manure crops, as well as on the contributory effect of the cultural practices like weed control, use of seed board varieties, pest and disease control, plant spacing, direct seeding versus transplanting, and the use of various cropping systems will be included in the activities of the program. There is every reason to expect that in undertaking these and other studies, the International Rice Research Institute will be a reservoir of scientific knowledge and information about the different phases of rice production. This Institute will save the different rice-producing countries including the Philippines, the time, expense and efforts in finding out for themselves the solutions to technical problems involved in rice production. We have the same objectives, the same zeal to make the Philippines self-sufficient in agricultural crops, principally rice. The Institute, therefore, will contribute immeasurably to the success of the rice and corn program of the Administration.

This Institute provides also a significant opportunity for the nations of Asia to engage in a cooperative effort to meet common problems like food, poverty, ignorance and disease. From this standpoint, I welcome the representatives and scientists of other countries who have come to participate in the activities of the Institute. The Philippines is ready to play its role in forging, among the nations of Asia, a bond for more cooperation and brotherhood in order that together we can contribute to the peace, freedom and well-being of mankind.

For all these, I convey to the Rockefeller Foundation through its chairman, Mr. John D. Rockefeller III, and its President, Dr. J. George Harrar; the Ford Foundation through its Vice-President, Dr. Fornest Hill; and to the International Society of Scientists the gratitude of the Filipino people for their humanitarian and scientific gift to the Philippines and to humanity—the International Rice Research Institute.

* Report to the NEC by the Interagency Committee on Rice and Corn Production and Consumption dated January 11, 1962.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.