Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the U.S. Memorial Day ceremonies

Firmness for Freedom

ON THIS DAY of remembrance, it is but fitting that as we survey the row upon row of white crosses lined neatly before us, we contemplate their meaning and think of the men whose bodies are beneath them and whose lives and deaths have enriched our soil and our lives.

Words cannot convey what is in our hearts for these brave men. But we can comfort them and pay tribute to their memory far more eloquently than mortal speech by assuring that the liberties for which they sacrificed the hopes and aspirations, the bright dreams and the unfulfilled future of their youth, shall forever endure. We can make sure that the alliance of free men remains united and unimpaired in the face of a common foe.

These crosses are the stark and glorious reminders of the blood of Filipinos and Americans shed and commingled in our soil, the ultimate symbol of friendship and unity.

These crosses are the symbol and proof and the result of the historic and unique relationship between the Philippines and the United States.

This relationship had the most inauspicious of beginnings. It began with war—a war in which we were allies against the common enemy of European colonialism, but which developed into a war in which we became enemies, when Filipinos and Americans struck and killed each other in fierce combat.

But when American rule was established in these islands, peace began to reign. Unlike the experience of other colonized Asian countries, there were no bloody revolts or violent demonstrations against the United States. Agitation for independence was done in the dignified and peaceful confines of the Philippine and American legislatures.

When the Japanese invaded these islands, the Filipinos fought with all their strength side by side with the Americans. The proof of their common sacrifice we see before us today.

No other Asian country has fought so bitterly against a foreign invader even while still the colony of another country. Even when the Americans abandoned the fight in this country, the Filipinos carried on the fight in the hills and in the towns and in the barrios, hunted in the jungles, tortured in the dungeons, our homes burned, our villages pillaged, our towns plundered, our women taken—all as a result of loyalty to a country that was still a part of the United States.

When the forces of the United States returned to the Philippines, we welcomed them with open hearts and open homes. Again, no other Asian country has welcomed the forces of its colonizers with the same enthusiasm with which the Filipinos hailed the return of MacArthur and the American G.I.

When after liberation, the American flag was finally lowered, and the Philippine flag was raised in sovereign solitude, it was an occasion for joy. It had not been preceded, as in other former colonies, by violence or rancor or bitterness.

Even when the United States had relinquished its sovereignty over this country and the Philippines had taken its place among the independent nations of the earth, Filipinos continued to extend a welcome hand to the Americans.

Numerous American bases on Philippine soil have continued to tie the Philippines to the American security system in the Pacific. In the economic field, the Bell Trade Act of 1946 continued to tie the Philippine economy to that of the United States. Moreover, the Filipino people approved a “parity” amendment to the Philippine Constitution which gave Americans the same rights as Filipinos in the development of our natural resources and public utilities. This is more than any other sovereign Nation has ever conceded to another.

Although there were many among our countrymen who regarded these concessions as a diminution of Philippine sovereignty, the Filipino people acceded to them as a sign of a special regard for America and of trust in the American people.

This special regard was earned by the good will and the generosity of the American people. But it is also a sign of the Philippines’ enduring friendship for America, and —more—it is an expression of the Philippines’ loyalty not so much to America as a nation, as to the cause of freedom for which the United States specially stands.

Our friendship with America as the recognized leader of the Free World is based on our love for freedom itself, and should serve as a reminder that the Philippines, because of its long heritage of freedom, is a veritable pillar of strength for freedom and democracy in this area.

This country never had to import the love of freedom from any other country.

Long before the Spaniards came, our forefathers lived in small independent settlements called barangays , free from foreign domination, trading freely with other countries, paying tribute to no one, making their own decisions. When the Spaniards came, they met with fierce resistance from men like Lapu Lapu and Soliman, who loved freedom with the ferocity with which they fought for it.

This tradition of freedom was carried on in sporadic rebellions against Spain, which culminated in the Propaganda Movement and the Philippine Revolution of 1896. Rizal and Lopez Jaena, Bonifacio and Mabini, the Del Pilars and the Lunas were inspired not only by the French and the American revolutions and by the ideas of the Liberals of Europe, but even more by the sense of freedom that formed part of their native heritage.

The Malolos Constitution, which was the fruit of the declaration of independence of June 12, 1898, proves that the Filipinos were even then by no means strangers to the workings of constitutional democracy. I dare say that the statesmen who gathered in convention in the church of Barasoain were able to capture the spirit of freedom in their Constitution as fully as the framers of the 1934 Constitution.

But if our love of freedom is native born, it was America, during her occupation, that gave it the constitutional substance that it enjoys today.

This is the substance of freedom which does not permit us today to be ever uncommitted, to be equivocal or to sit on the fence of neutralism.

If any Nation has consistently refused to flirt with neutralism, or has resisted the economic and political blandishments of the Red camp, or has always stood squarely and unequivocally on the side of the Free World, that Nation is the Republic of the Philippines. We have voiced our abhorrence of communism as an imperialist menace, a voracious ideology and a totalitarian way of life on every forum of the world. We have demonstrated time and again our confidence in our Free World partnerships and in our staunchest ally, the United States. Looking right into the cannon’s mouth, with the monstrous might of Communist China only a short stretch of water away, we have stood uncompromising guard over the boundaries of freedom, committed our soldiers to battle, sent our sons and daughters to labor and give succor in the hinterlands of Laos and South Vietnam now seriously threatened by communist advance.

This is not a people who will ask for doles. This is a Nation that will deal with another only in honor, that will gratefully acknowledge assistance extended in respect out of common effort for a noble cause but will disdain handouts.

Past events have demonstrated the unalterable fact that Filipino-American friendship is forged by bonds of sentiment and mutual affection which irresponsible talks will not destroy. Consecrated by a common shedding of blood on countless battlefields, this alliance of two peoples should not and cannot be destroyed even by indifference and disdain by some of their officials for the feelings of tested friends.

This constitutional substance of freedom which is a legacy from America tells us that the answer to atheistic expansion is firmness, determination, support to those who are committed to freedom—more of these, and less of dependence on the word of those who by their actions have so often discredited their word, and less of political experiment at the sacrifice of friends.

This is our position before America and the world. This is the least we can say if we are to do justice to the sacrifice of those who by their action have so often discredited their Filipino comrades-in-arms, because they and their nations refuse to be uncommitted in the fight for honor, for peace, and for the dignity of man.

May I end with a prayer before these hallowed tombs that, as they did in the past, Filipinos and Americans will walk shoulder to shoulder towards the fulfillment of their national destinies.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library