Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the Annual Communication of the Most Worshipful Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons of the Philippines

[Delivered at the Plaridel Temple, Manila, April 23, 1963]

Building a Nation upon Sound Foundations

ACCEPT my greetings, cordial and sincere, on the occasion of your Annual Communication. I am immensely pleased to see here so many representatives and delegates not only from the Philippines proper but also from Guam, Okinawa, Japan, and other jurisdictions.

I take this occasion to express my regret on my inability to attend in person the ceremonies of the Golden Jubilee of the Grand Lodge of the Philippines. Secretary Mariño appeared for me and delivered my message because illness and my doctor compelled me to cancel all my engagements that day. Because of my sincere desire to meet with you, I distinctly recall that on the New Year Reception at Malacañang, I told Senator Osias that I wanted another chance to be with you, and I am glad that I now have the chance to be privileged to be in your company in this your Annual Communication.

I accepted the invitation of your Most Grand Master readily nay, anxiously, because this affords me an opportunity to be with men interested in economic problems and in things moral and spiritual. You and I cherish ideas, ideals, and principles that are similar and we are laboring for causes and objectives that are identical. Thus I address you on a subject near and dear to all of us—”Building a Nation Upon Sound Foundations.”

The sovereign will of the people elevated me to the Chief Magistracy of this Nation. Being a free and progressive nation it must be a nation continually in the making. Upon my inauguration as President of the Republic I said: “Nation-building is an exacting and endless endeavor. No President can build the whole edifice of a nation, all that he is called upon to do is to add a fine stone to that edifice so that those who shall come after him may add other fine stones that will go for a strong and enduring structure.”

Those sentiments were made articulate on a solemn and historic day December 30, 1961, the date made meaningful and memorable by the supreme sacrifice of our national hero, Jose Rizal, in Bagumbayan Field. It is to the credit and honor of the framers of our Constitution that they fixed the thirtieth day of December as the beginning of the terms of office of the President and Vice President and other nationally elected officials of the government. This is eminently fitting for Rizal was the Filipino pioneer in nation-building and it was he also who hurled the ever timely challenge saying, “Do you not know that that is a useless life which is not consecrated to a great idea? It is like a stone wasted on the wayside without forming a part of any edifice.”

The honored members of this universal fraternity are builders par excellence. You are builders of bodies, of minds, of spirits. You are builders of local communities, of nations, yes, of a better humanity. We are allies in the building of this nation upon sound and enduring foundations.

From the beginning of my Administration I have addressed myself in all earnestness to the two-fold mission of solving the immediate problems of the present and of building materially and spiritually for the future.

The life of an individual has a material and a spiritual basis. The life of the nation has an economic basis and a spiritual basis. We must build all life—individual, national, and international—upon sound economic and spiritual foundations. To this end I have presented to the honorable members of the Congress an integrated socio-economic development program and a program of moral regeneration. But my appeal for cooperation along these lines is not only directed to those in the government. It is directed to such men as you, to all citizens and other residents in the Philippines. Nation-building, let me say for emphasis, is a difficult and complex task necessitating full and complete cooperation. It demands hard work and much sacrifice and for the common good I am unceasingly seeking to enlist the interest, the attention, and the collaboration of all elements of our cosmopolitan population not as President of one party but as President of the entire nation.

There are many among you who are actively engaged in business. Many, if not all, are concerned with economic enterprises. You are aware of the common problems of labor and capital. I ask you to get behind the integrated socio-economic development program of the Administration. In so doing, you will be contributing toward attaining common prosperity and toward strengthening the economic foundation of the Nation.

For the achievement of the objectives of the socio-economic program and its effective implementation, there is absolute need of real and smooth executive-legislative collaboration. In the beginning we were hampered by the lack of a working majority in the two houses of Congress. While I must recognize the spirit of cooperation and unpartisanship among senators and representatives, for which we must be grateful, the difficulties are readily apparent in the face of the patent fact that while we of the Liberal Party captured Malacañang, our highest goal in the last election, the Nacionalistas had control of both the Senate and the House of Representatives. In the House there were seventy-four Nacionalistas and thirty Liberals. On March 9, 1962, however, the Liberal Party wrested the speakership by the election of Representative Cornelio Villareal as Speaker. In the Senate there were eleven Liberals, twelve Nacionalistas, and one Nationalist-Citizen. When Senator Balao joined the Liberal Party, a deadlock for the Senate Presidency ensued. As early as January 28, 1962, I stated: “I am confident that Senator Marcos will, in a short time, bring new laurels to our party and become the President of the Senate.” This did not eventuate “in a short time” but on April 5, 1963, the Senate elected Senator Ferdinand Marcos its President. This is a great step but it should be known that the Liberal Party does not yet have a controlling majority in the Senate. I mention these facts not to bring politics to this non-political group but simply to clarify a situation in a democracy which often presents formidable obstacles that do not preclude obstructionism.

From the beginning I busied myself with the alleviation of the plight of the common man. It was thought that the government should set in motion a comprehensive program on rice and corn which shall achieve self-sufficiency in these cereals at prices within the reach of the masses. Thanks to the cooperation of the Congress a law was passed for the establishment and financing of a Rice and Corn Administration to implement the program.

We readily realized the ills that stem from unemployment and underemployment. Recommendations were presented to Congress to support employment projects that not only create jobs but will also increase production and productivity. Executive and legislative cooperation resulted in the creation of the Emergency Employment Administration. We shall push forward with a view to assisting private enterprise in creating job opportunities. Realizing that it is not only the insufficiency of job opportunities that causes unemployment but the inadequacy of the preparation and training of our youth I presented the problem of unemployment to the Division Superintendents of Schools in convention assembled to enlist the assistance of educators and educational institutions in the solution of this basic socio-economic problem which is aggravated by the population explosion. The over-all program envisages raising the living standards of the people and this includes improvement in clothing and shelter, expansion of public services such as public health and education, intensification of public works that promote production, like irrigation, flood control and roads connecting agricultural areas to market centers, and increasing the income of wage earners, of families, and of the nation as a whole.

I shall not dwell on the various economic, banking and financial measures that were presented in my first and second state-of-the-nation addresses and other messages. They are numerous and comprehensive, calculated to solidify the economic foundation of the nation. Not unmindful of the need of protecting the preferential rights of Filipinos in certain economic fields, this Administration is definitely committed to attracting foreign investments.

This Administration wishes to assure just and fair treatment to foreign capital especially with respect to the repatriation of capital and remittances of profit. Needless to say, this massive socio-economic program calls for adequate financing from governmental and private sectors. To this end and for this purpose I have submitted proposals to re-examine and revise the tax structure to ascertain the impact of the tax rates on investment activities, and living costs. To advance industrialization and to foster progress and to achieve prosperity, specific measures have been presented to amend banking laws, to improve financial institutions, and to increase the capitalization of the Development Bank of the Philippines for lending purposes and for expanding its authority to grant long term industrial and investment loans for productive enterprises.

Let me now devote the balance of my address to the other important, if indeed not more important, foundation of a stable and progressive nation, the spiritual. In my inaugural address of December 30, 1961, I said: “It is not our only task to solve the immediate problems of the present and build materially for the future. The structure of this Republic must be built not only upon material but more so upon spiritual foundations.”

You who are here gathered for your Annual Communication and the hosts of other Masons who pilot lives by the principles of liberty, equality, and fraternity; men of your Venerable Order who are firm and steadfast in laboring to anchor all life in virtue and morality cannot but share in the common task of building this nation upon the sound foundation of spirituality.

The spirituality of the Filipino people is enshrined in two Constitutions, that of Malolos and the one under which the Republic now operates. In the Malolos Constitution the framers were unequivocal in seeing to it that the people rely on the Supreme Legislator of the Universe. In the present Constitution we see the preamble beginning with these awe-inspiring words: “The Filipino people imploring the aid of Divine Providence.” We who believe in one God must make it our supreme business together to build this nation upon sound and lasting foundations.

I have made it my first mission to tackle the problem of graft and corruption. The people elevated me to the presidency when our Nation was in the throes of unprecedented moral degeneration, when graft permeated every level of government. This Administration made the solution of the problem of corruption its immediate and primordial concern, I believe you are aware that by precept and by example I have taken and am taking definite steps to institute moral reform.

The relentless drive against graft and corruption has been both positive and negative. As I reported to the recent Convention of the Liberal Party the positive measures constituted, among other things, such steps as the presidential family and key officials setting the right example, considering integrity and honesty as the prime qualifications for sensitive positions, banning presidential relatives and others from influence peddling and prescribing procedures that would prevent occasions for corruption. The negative drive constituted in the prosecution of wrongdoers as a deterrent to the recurrence of wrongs. To avoid nation-wide tension that might fatally jeopardize our economic and social program and in the people’s interest we sought the purpose of deterrence by limiting prosecutions so far to significant and exemplary cases. There is one feature of our limited punitive actions to which your attention is invited. It is the fact that this Administration has departed from the old way of treating the “big fishes” differently from the “small fry.” Now there are no more “big fishes” and “small fry” in the eyes of the law and in dispensing justice. Under a sound government no man is above the law and under my oath I am pledged to execute the laws and do justice to every man.

On my twenty-first day of office I took a bold step to implement decontrol. This was done not only as an economic measure but as a part of our avowed policy of moral regeneration. It was designed not only to unshackle the economy so that through its innate vigor it may propel its expansion in free enterprise but—and this I stress—to remove an important and tempting source of graft and corruption. Our decontrol program has merited financial support from external sources. With full cooperation it will pave the way for a strong economy and prosperity in freedom for our people. Economics and morals are interdependent and interbound. This suggests a deep significance of our act of removing controls. Exchange control meant tremendous economic power and political power in our hands as president but knowing that controls had not only exhausted their economic utility but may be the main source of graft and corruption, we voluntarily gave up this tremendous economic and political power in our hands because it was demanded by the well-being of the Nation.

Indeed, we have to strengthen the moral fiber of the Nation. This may be achieved in part through formal modes of reform, through enforcement of statutes, through character education in the home, in the school, in the church, in the government, and in civic and fraternal organizations such as yours. We can not overemphasize the role of moral leaders and the power of example. We deplore the seemingly increasing cases of juvenile delinquency. We, of course, believe in raising the young in virtues and morality. But our efforts are often negated when the young notice that some of the elders and leaders are neither virtuous nor moral. We must therefore see to it that the practices allowed by law in government and business in the professions and labor unions, in field and factory, yes in all areas of national endeavor conform as much as possible not only with what is legal but what is moral as well.

One specific recommendation made for moral renaissance is the establishment and financing of a Moral Commission composed of outstanding and upright leaders in government, religion, education, and the professions. This Commission shall study and recommend ways and means by which all elements and institutions of the country may be mobilized towards the goal of national moral regeneration.

In making appointments to sensitive and responsible posts in the government my guiding criteria have invariably been integrity, competence, and dedication. Such cannot but be pleasing to you because you as votaries of Freemasonry are given definite moral charges thus: “. . . practice the domestic and public virtues. Let temperance chasten, fortitude support and prudence direct you, and let justice be the guide of all your actions.” As President I am sworn to “do justice to every man.” Likewise, together with other government officials, I am in duty bound “to preserve and defend the Constitution.”

The Constitution, in its letter, spirit, and philosophy is not only a legal document. It is an instrument for the moral order in its highest and best sense. The framers of the Constitution were statesmanlike in prescribing the fundamental objectives of all schools giving primacy to moral character. (Article XIV, Section 5.) They were dictated by a high moral code when they include the prohibition of any Senator or Member of the House of Representatives directly or indirectly to be financially interested in any contract with the Government or any subdivision or instrumentality thereof, or in any franchise or special privilege granted by the Congress during his term of office. . . .” (Article VI, Section 17.) Consideration of good morals is behind the provision that “the heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus, or offices and their assistants shall not, during their continuance in office, engage in the practice of any profession, or intervene, directly or indirectly, in the management or control of any private enterprise which in any way may be affected by the functions of their office.” [Article VIII, Sec. 11, (2).] The principle of morality applied to national and international life is at the root of the declarations on “the promotion of social justice to insure the well-being and economic security of all the people” and on the renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy and adoption of the generally accepted principles of international law as part of the law of the Nation. (Art. II, Sections 5 and 3.)

With a body of thinking and reasonable men like those before me it is so easy and tempting to go on and I am loathe to close but close I must. In concluding I wish to thank the high dignitaries, officers, and delegates for honoring me as your guest on this Annual Communication and I now bid you not adieu but au revoir confident in the belief that the objectives indicated and the thoughts here presented found cordial receptivity for, if I mistake not, they fully conform to the noble ideals and lofty principles which you and the Venerable Fraternity hold dear and sacrosanct.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.