Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the Anti-Communist Youth Rally

CHALLENGE TO YOUTH

IT IS INSPIRING to face the youth of the land gathered in this vast assembly which is dedicated to the crusade against communism and tyranny and to the preservation of freedom for all men of all nations throughout the face of the earth.

Your assembly brings back to memory the youth of 1896 like Rizal, Bonifacio and Aguinaldo who liberated our country from Spanish bondage; the youth of 1902, Osmeña, Quezon and Roxas who liberated our land from American tutelage; the youth of 1942 in Bataan and Corregidor who sowed the seeds of liberation from the Japanese occupation. I like to think and I so pray that now you shall be the youth of today who shall sow the seeds of safety and liberation from the menace of communism which is the worst tyranny that ever threatened the liberty and well-being of our Nation.

I know that the Filipino people share with me the feeling of gratitude for the help and support extended by the Philippine Anti-Communist Movement and the Filipino-Chinese Anti-Communist League to the Government in its difficult task of warding off the Red threat from and within our shores. With their continued support and cooperation, I am confident that we will succeed in the fight against Communism, thereby proving to the countries of Asia and to the rest of the world that a people, armed only with the spirit of patriotism and with faith in the democratic way of life, can conquer the forces of evil. It is imperative that we succeed, because the attainment of a better life for our people will depend on the elimination of obstacles placed along the path of progress.

To solve the problem of communism, we must go into the root of the problem. We must dissect it in such a way that every move, every idea, and every theory of the communists will come into focus. Furthermore, we must discover through a careful analysis, the reason for that move, that idea, and that theory. Then and only then can we have the best answer to the problem of communism.

Analysts abroad have come up with the fallacious theory that communism cannot triumph in a predominantly Catholic country. This argument is heard even in the Philippines; its exponents continue to expound on it even after the Huks came close to taking over the country. What is surprising is the fact that it continues to gain adherents despite the historical examples of Catholic Poland and, most recently and notably, Catholic Cuba. It is a fact that Poland and Cuba, before they were smothered by the Red Hand, were predominantly Catholic. Yet they succumbed to the communist onslaught. I believe that the Government and the people must work hand in hand with Catholicism and other defenders of freedom if the country expects to defeat the forces of communism.

Another fallacy abroad is that poverty and unemployment alone cause communism, and that when conditions of extreme poverty appear, particularly in farming areas, communism, by a process of spontaneous generation, will come into existence. This argument is not meritorious. An examination of historical examples will show that this is not the case. I admit that it is easier for communists to work in such a climate; but I deny that such a climate is the key to communist success.

What then is the key to communist success? I ask you to dig into the root of the problem, and you will come to the correct conclusion that the key to communist success is leadership and organization . The communist is trained and disciplined; he is a member of an international conspiracy aimed at complete world domination. The individual communist is simply an extension of the will of Moscow or Peking. He does not think; he does not reason. He simply believes, he takes orders. Wherever communism has been successful, it has been through the efforts of a small group of people who have worked their will, through leadership and organization, on the minds of the great mass of people.

This then is our problem: How shall we counteract the Red Threat, and how shall we unshackle the millions of minds from the bonds tied around them by a small force of disciplined and organized individuals? I invite all of you to join me in dissecting the problem.

It has been an established fact that every communist party, including the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP), has a special interest in youth. Documents in the hands of our intelligence authorities reveal that the Communist Party of the Philippines hopes to recruit talented young men and women, train them, and thus maintain the continuity and expansion of communism. The next question that comes to our mind is: Why the youth? There are four factors why the communists are particularly interested in captivating the minds of our young citizens.

First, idealism . The communists know that the youth are usually emotional and impressionable. The Reds paint before the youth a glowing picture of prosperity in Russia and other communist states. In almost convincing tones, they tell of an earthly heaven behind the iron and bamboo curtains. When they speak of underdeveloped nations, they try to convince the youth that only communism has the answer to those nations’ problems. A hurried peek through the cracks in the bamboo and iron curtains, however, will show the horrors being perpetrated by the Red regime and the miserable life being led by the people.

Second, frustration . The communists are aware of the fact that youth are more readily frustrated by a nation’s failures. Frustration is a feeling to which a young man or a young woman is easily susceptible. I believe that most of you have many times been frustrated by many things. It is this natural tendency in youth that communists make use of. To the frustrated, the communists say, “Only we can solve your problems.”

Third, extreme solutions . Youth’s idealism and frustration make their minds more attracted to extreme solutions. Frustrated by their nation’s failures and eager to correct such failures, the youth are willing to go to the extreme without carefully weighing the consequences of their acts. They are not to be censured for acting rashly; this is understandable since they are easily carried away by their emotions. I must warn you of the danger that such rash actions create, especially since the communists are extra-active in pouncing upon youth’s weaknesses. In their frustration, the young are willing to adopt extreme solutions. This is where the communists come in. They advance the communist ideology as the only solution which can be adopted, hiding the fact that communism is the extremity of remedial measures.

Fourth, naïvete . Youth are often naïve, and thus, not having experienced the harsh realities of life, more susceptible to communist arguments.

These, are the main reasons why the communists are interested in ensnaring the minds of the youth. The Reds think that they can easily deceive the young into believing what is not true. I challenge you to disprove them. I challenge you to prove that the much-vaunted courage of the Filipino youth is not yet gone.

Following the almost total defeat of the Huks, the Communist Party of the Philippines has shifted its methods of subversion from the military to the so-called legal and parliamentary struggle. The Communist Party has attempted to take over key positions through society, but particularly in national and local governments, labor, mass media and education. They have tried to infiltrate our schools and colleges, and communist educators have been attempting to destroy their students’ beliefs in religion and democracy, fill them with hate against the established order, and support the communist line.

Just what is the communist line in the Philippines? At present, the communists are supporting an extreme brand of pseudo-nationalism. They feign to glorify this or that national hero and later use him as an instrument for advancing their evil ends. They try to engender, and sometimes succeed in engendering, such a frenzied approval of the activities of a hero, which were peculiarly applicable to his own times, that hate for other peoples results. They hope to arouse an extreme revolution which would expel all foreigners from the Philippines, adopt a policy of neutralism, and destroy the Philippines’ alliance with the free world. They hope that, after this pseudo-nationalistic revolution is accomplished, they will be able to bind the Philippines closely to the communist bloc by economic and military alliances. When this is accomplished, the Philippines would become another satellite of Moscow or Peking.

This, in brief, is the problem. We must now present a solution. It is my Administration’s belief that two things can be done in this fight against communism: Knowledge of the communist threat and the strengthening of our free, democratic society. To fight the enemy, we must know the enemy. We must know how it deploys its forces, where it intends to attack, and other matters relative to our defense. Likewise, we must take steps to solidify the foundations of our democratic society and to strengthen the moral fiber of our people.

However, the most pressing problem of our democratic government is an economic one, and my Administration has already moved to take the first step in solving the problem. Twenty days after I stepped into the Presidency, I launched the decontrol program by giving up the executive power over foreign exchange and by instituting safeguards such as revising the tariff duties on imported goods. I took this bold step, knowing that decontrols were a hindrance to the growth of our economy and were a source of graft.

I submitted an integrated five-year socio-economic development program to Congress which is designed to bring prosperity to all and a better life for the common man.

I also prepared for congressional approval a five-year public works development program which includes specific plans on irrigation, feeder roads, river control, schoolhouse construction, and other public works projects, eliminating the pork barrel which, in the past, was often used for political purposes.

I formulated and I have started the implementation of a rice and corn program which will solve the perennial crisis in these two essential cereals.

I proposed to the Congress a P30-million employment program based on simultaneously job-creating and production-boosting projects in order to provide employment to our unemployed youth and manpower.

I have sought from the law-making body a P10-million housing program, which includes the construction of multi-storey apartment houses for the poor and homeless.

I formulated a program to assist our people stricken by calamities through a P20-million calamity fund for first aid and relief and a P30-million fund for public works rehabilitation from ravage of disasters.

I have proposed to Congress other measures which together form an integrated solution to our varied and complex economic problems which have long been neglected.

All these measures are intended to bring about a better life for our people, which will strengthen our country and insure its safety against communism.

My hope is that the youth of the country will work with the Government to help establish a new spirit of public service, that it will work constructively for the fulfillment of the objectives of the National Youth Corps, and, in so doing, help build the country and, at the same time, defeat the forces of communism.

The National Youth Corps will be the first vehicle for youth of an increased participation in the growth and strengthening of our society. The second element is knowledge. I hope to establish a Freedom House which will be the center for the study of communist techniques and the means of combating communism.

My dear countrymen, here are means with which we can overthrow the forces of evil. Here are weapons with which we can break the Hammer and Sickle. Come and take your place among our forces and, shoulder to shoulder, we shall march onward to victory for freedom and democracy.

Let is not be said that we were afraid to accept the challenge. Let not the coming generations say the patriotism, courage and perseverance of the Filipino youth died with our soldiers in Bataan and Corregidor.

Will you accept the challenge? This, you must answer. For the destiny of our Nation and the survival of our people are at stake.

I shall watch for your response.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.