Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Convention of Judges

[Delivered on January 7, 1962]

TOWARDS A REGIME OF JUSTICE

I FEEL HONORED and happy to be with you on this occasion. I must confess, however, that when I was invited to come, I at first wondered whether I should accept the invitation. I recall how before the war President Quezon’s posing for a photograph with justices of the Supreme Court was branded by some critics as meddling with the judiciary, and I feared that my coming here now would be used by the enemies of the people as basis for accusing me of dictating to our courts.

But after considering the matter, I realized that it is my duty, which I have no right to evade, to appear before you and appeal to your sense of patriotism to help make our democracy a going concern, discharge your tasks with greater dedication and vigor, and do your share in placing the structure of our Republic upon firm foundations of public faith.

The prime effort of the Administration, as you may now have noted, is concentration on solving the economic problems of the country. To this effort, I shall bring to bear my background as a student of economic science, having earned in my studies the degree of doctor of philosophy in economics. But for all my incursions in various fields such as economics, foreign affairs and other specializations, I am at core a lawyer with, therefore, a profound interest in the administration of justice. Hence, under our Administration, it is to be expected that we shall pay the utmost attention to the improved efficiency of the machinery of justice, the strengthening of our courts, the careful selection of judicial officers, and the defense of the courts against political assaults, to the end that after my term of office, I shall lay down the burden of public cares gratified as a lawyer who has a passion for law and justice that our judiciary has enhanced its independence, integrity and efficiency in playing its role in our democracy as a dispenser of true and equal justice to our people.

You will note that in its preamble, our Constitution promises to our people for the enjoyment of the blessings of independence “a regime of justice, liberty and democracy.” The first pledge of the Constitution, therefore, to our people, and posterity is justice. The first thing that the government is duty bound to give to the people is justice. Realizing the potency that the powers of the office bear in its relation to the lives of the people, the Constitution also emphasized the primacy of justice in our society when it added a phrase in the oath of office of President which is not contained in the oath of other officials, requiring the President to pledge that he shall “do justice to every man.” Realizing the letter, spirit, and mandate of the Constitution, I say for our Administration that we will seek to strengthen the administration of justice and I say on my part that in obedience to the fundamental law of the land, I assure all that if I did nothing else I am resolved that I will do justice to all our people, to every citizen, no matter how rich or poor, no matter how exalted or humble, no matter how high or low.

When our people were faced with the task of forging a constitution of our Republic, in their wisdom, they divided the powers of government into three: you represent one of these three powers; and I another. While these powers are independent of each other, they are also interdependent—for the judiciary cannot exercise its functions effectively without the cooperation of the Executive any more than the Executive can exercise his powers effectively without the cooperation of the judiciary. It is for this reason that I welcome the opportunity to be with you for it gives me the opportunity to reiterate and reaffirm the pledge that this Administration will exert every possible effort not only to assert and maintain the independence of our judiciary but for that purpose to assist you who compose our judiciary in every possible way to perform your functions effectively.

From you, in return, the Administration asks only this: that by your conduct, by your impartiality, by your moral strength, you continuously uphold the independence and integrity of the judiciary and its imperviousness to political and other pressures.

When I was studying law, I came across an incident in the life of Sir Edward Coke, Chief Justice of England. There arose a case involving the right of the king to appoint a clergyman to what was called a “benefice in commendam” that is, with the right to have its duties performed by deputy. Fearing that such a prerogative of appointment might be denied or brought into question, King James instructed his attorney-general, Lord Bacon, to write to the judges to command them not to proceed further until they have consulted with him. Upon the instigation of Sir Edward Coke, however, the judges wrote to His Majesty to tell him that by their oaths they were bound to disregard a private letter from the king in any suit between party and party. The king was furious and summoned the judges before the council where all but one of them fell upon their knees, and, acknowledging their error, begged the king’s forgiveness. The obstinate one, of course, was Chief Justice Coke, and his obstinacy was strengthened by the fact that Lord Bacon supported the King in the course of the argument. The King now put this question to the judges: “In a case where the King believes his prerogative or interest concerned, and requires the judges to attend him for their advice, ought they not to stay proceedings till His Majesty has consulted them?” All the judges except Sir Edward Coke cried: “Yes, Yes, Yes!” But Chief Justice Coke said firmly: “When the case happens, I shall do that which shall be fit for a judge to do.”

That was a judge; that is what the people demand and expect of judges. I hope that, like Chief Justice Coke, you, our judges, will never bow before the majesty of politics or money or influence. It takes courage, character, and conviction to uphold the supremacy of the law, but I know that you have that innate quality to have that courage, that character, that strength of conviction.

Our courts have been established not only to administer justice in the solitary realm of the judiciary detached from the other spheres of government and society. They constitute an implement of the Republic charged with the mission of placing within the reach of our people one of the three great fundamental ideals of justice, liberty and democracy which together foster the general welfare of the people. Although independent, the judiciary is not therefore detached from the stresses that move the Nation as it seeks the general welfare and must play a proper part in the husbanding and control of the current national forces in order to divert them to the attainment of the national good.

One of such national forces which the judiciary cannot ignore is the drive against corruption which has become the unmistakable mandate of the sovereign people in the last election. This Administration is accordingly pledged to stamp out graft, venalities and organized crime. Without breach of the fundamental independence of the judiciary, you can take part in a proper manner in this national crusade. You can render proper and valuable assistance by expediting the disposal of anti-graft cases. Any government official, who has unlawfully enriched himself in office or perpetrated any violation of law, must not stay in public office a minute longer. Any person who has committed a crime against society must be punished with the least possible delay. Likewise, anyone who is innocent must be vindicated so that the stain on his name may be removed immediately. To see a person accused of a crime out on bail for an unwarranted length of time is to foment apathy and cynicism among our citizenry in the administration of justice. To allow the innocent to suffer the tortures of unjust accusation is to commit injustice. The duty is clear—these anti-graft cases must be expedited, thereby enabling the judicial officers not only to dispense true justice but also enabling the judiciary to discharge its integrated role towards the constitutional goal of a regime of justice, liberty and democracy.

The gravest problem of our day is, of course, economic development—how to raise the standards of living of our less fortunate people, how to foster prosperity for all. To achieve this task, it will be necessary that our people—all our people, the rich and the poor, the high and the low, the strong and the weak—bend every effort in a gigantic and joint endeavor. But we cannot ask our people to work with us and we cannot expect our people to respond to our programs unless they are convinced that, in our hands, justice is done to every man, without regard to his politics, his influence, or his means. That is our common role, to do justice to every man. That is your role; to maintain our people’s faith in the process of law for without that, we cannot have a democratic and free economic growth and development.

It is for this reason that at a proper time during our Administration, we shall institute judicial reforms. These reforms shall embrace every level of the judicial system below the Supreme Court, but on my part, I shall be particularly anxious about reform in the lowest level of the judicial strata. Since the vast majority of our people live in the barrios, simple in their ways, their contact with our courts begin and often end with our justices of the peace. From the standpoint of rank, the justice of peace may be the lowest in the judiciary; from the standpoint of maintaining the people’s faith in the administration of justice, his is the hardest and most important job. It is to them that our people look for redress. With wise decisions, they bring the concept of good government closer to the understanding of the masses. With unfair decisions, they destroy the faith in government and democracy. While concerned with all our courts in general, my Administration pledges itself particularly to improve the administration of justice at the Justice of the Peace level in order that justice shall not be available only to the few but justice shall be within the grasp and reach of all our people.

Apolinario Mabini said that the judiciary is the conscience of the government. At all times and in all places, let us, you and I, keep that conscience alive, vibrant and clean.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.