Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the United Philippine Coconut Association

[Delivered on March 30, 1963]

PROBLEMS OF THE COCONUT INDUSTRY

WE ARE GLAD to be with you in this convention. It is time that more serious attention be given to the coconut industry. Coconut is one of our greatest industries, the largest producer of foreign exchange and apparently the largest employer of labor. Yet despite this peerless importance of the industry, it has paradoxically not been given the attention that it deserves. In the system of free and private enterprise that we have evolved, the development of the industry is mainly in your hands. Because I believe that the industry has been neglected, I pledge the full support of my Administration to the needs and problems of the coconut industry.

In our conferences with business leaders and in our talks with our countrymen living in the coconut regions, we are gratified to be told that our decontrol program has already benefited those who are engaged in the coconut industry by considerably increasing their income for they now receive the real value of their produce. While this is to us a source of satisfaction because of our conviction on the value of the coconut industry to our people, we are not yet satisfied and we are ready to do more to assist the industry in increasing the profits of those engaged therein and in spreading its boon to the rest of our countrymen.

We are convinced that no socio-economic development program for the whole country would be complete or successful unless the development of the coconut industry is integrated with the primary objectives of that program. Realizing this, we have included as one of the chief objectives of our socio-economic development program the development and modernization of the coconut industry. We have accordingly given the highest priority to the coconut industry in the blueprinting and implementation of our five-year socio-economic development program.

We are therefore happy to congratulate the newly inducted officers of the United Philippine Coconut Association. You will recall that when you called on us at Malacañang after the decision to organize the UPCA was reached at your convention last year, we expressed gratification over your plan to organize the planters, oil millers, copra exporters, the by-products entrepreneurs, the desiccators and the PHILCOA. Your organization should insure that the various sectors of the coconut industry will look after not only their own sector’s interests but also those of the entire industry. We commend the spirit of unity which now binds the officers and members of the National Federation of Coconut Planters, the Philippine Oil Millers Association, the Philippine Copra Exporters Association, the PHILCOA and others who have the welfare of the industry at heart.

With the united purpose which has been achieved through formal organization of the UPCA, a new stage has been set from which fresh approaches to the solution of the problems in the coconut industry could be made. Whatever has been done in the past, there is still much more to be accomplished in the future. There is a vast amount of unfinished work of improvement to be done. Expressed in the most simple terms, we say that the unfinished business of this industry involves three main tasks:

1. To increase the amount of available raw material, the crop of coconuts, either through an increased acreage by new plantings, or, an increase in the productivity of the existing coconut palms through fertilization and other modern farming methods;

2. To squeeze the last ounce of value out of our raw material through a most efficient processing and marketing and through the utilization of the by-products; and

3. To set up permanent and continuing research facilities both to improve the present methods and to meet the threat poised to the existence of the industry by coconut pests and diseases, particularly the as yet unidentified malady known as Kadang-Kadang .

On the first problem, in order to attain an integrated goal, there is need for each sector—planters, oil millers, desiccated coconut producers, copra marketers and by-products plants—to improve their present practices and to coordinate with each other so as to attain a higher degree of efficiency for the whole industry.

Let us take the case of the planters. The favorable Philippine climate induces farmers to continue producing even with mediocre or slipshod practices. A farmer owning a coconut grove can afford to be lazy and still live. It is well-known that fertilizing, cultivating, better cleaning and weeding greatly improve production, but since the trees do not die nor production completely stop without fertilizers, the result is a lackadaisical attitude among coconut farmers. It is time that the planters must conquer the present endemic mediocrity and lethargy in their efforts.

The government will do its share to assist the planters to improve their productivity but the work of improvement must be done by the farmers themselves. Government agencies are carrying out intensive research into ways and means of raising the productivity of our coconut palms but production will not increase if the farmers themselves do not apply the methods recommended by scientific research.

We, therefore, urge the planters here assembled to accept the task of improving the production of everyone’s coconut plantation, not only the large plantation, but also the smallest coconut grove. Fertilizing can raise productivity by 50 per cent or even 100 per cent. On a conservative estimate of raising our production of coconut by an average of 15 per cent, in two years this will mean an equivalent of about 200,000 tons of copra every year which at the present price would amount to P100 million.

Regarding the marketers or exporters, we encounter here a problem that is as old as the industry itself. It is known that the marketers do not pass on to the planters the fair price in accordance with the ruling market conditions. The price of copra in the Philippines fluctuates with the world price which fluctuates with the general market trend for fats and oils.

This is a large market consisting of many potentially substitutable products such as whale oil, cotton seed oil soy bean oil, palm kernel oil, sesame oil and many other vegetable products. On the demand side the market is subject to fluctuations on the prices of hogs and butter. The important point to remember is that since the market price of copra must suffer relatively high fluctuations, it is the function of marketers to forecast these changing trends and, to the extent that they are able to do so, to cushion the rapid gyration of the market so as to protect the planters. This should be their contribution to the industry.

What is regrettable is that some marketers are tempted to hog the market to the detriment of the producer. Copra exporters engage in a fair amount of speculation—speculation on the upside and also speculation on the downside—but when this speculation is exaggerated and is consistently at the expense of the planters, the exporters become untrue to their function and betray the interests of the industry. Our marketers should be farsighted enough to look not only to their own interests but also to those of the planters.

Another important function of the marketers is to open up new markets for Philippine coconut products in competition with other suppliers of fats and oils. A great deal of opposition and tariff impediments will have to be overcome to sustain and increase in our exports to America and Europe, but with the basic advantage which Philippine soil and climate give, we should be able to meet competition and sustain our share of the market.

On their part, the task of processors—these include the oil millers, manufacturers of soap, lard and other coconut products, and desiccators—is to improve their efficiency both in the processing and marketing of their products. They should introduce innovations and not retard the growth of the industry by sticking to the use of old and less efficient machinery and equipment. It is essential that they modernize their plant facilities and their marketing methods in order to achieve a position of superior competitiveness in the world market.

The oil millers, for instance, must at all times be able to compete with processors of other countries using copra imported either from the Philippines or from other sources as their raw material. It is desirable that this competitive position should be maintained on their own hook and through their own efficiency, and not at the expense of the coconut planters who provide the raw material. They would be taking undue advantage of the raw material producers if they were to achieve competitiveness only at the sacrifice of the planters.

On this score, we are happy to note that since the Administration’s decontrol on foreign exchange on January 21, 1962, oil millers have generally been able to compete more actively in the purchase of copra, and that this active competition among the different users of copra is helping in the establishment of their market prices for the producers.

It is gratifying that of their own free choice, the oil millers have indicated their desire to the PHILCOA to do away with the practice of allocating quotas among oil exporters even in the face of diminishing quantities of tariff-free quotas in the United States under the Laurel-Langley Agreement. This attitude blends perfectly with the Administration’s over-all policy of promoting free enterprise. A healthy competition among the oil exporters should stimulate plant modernization as well as improvement in efficiency in processing and marketing.

The continued expansion in coconut oil production and exportation resulting from foreign exchange decontrol is one of the most outstanding features of the Philippine economy today. Oil imports increased by 105 per cent during 1962 over those of 1961. The upward trend is continuing through 1963. In January, 1963 our coconut oil exports exceeded by 227 per cent exports in January of 1962, while February shipments were 44 per cent more than those in February of last year. For these accomplishments, the oil millers sector merits our congratulations.

On the second problem, may we say this enterprising and pioneering people who are engaged in the commercial utilization of coconut by-products: To the extent that you add value to the by-products now going to waste on our farms, to that extent will you be able to strengthen the competitive position of the Philippine coconut industry here and abroad.

Let us consider the husk. Today, owing to its very limited use, the coconut husk has practically no value at all to the planter. The small quantities that are gathered from the plantations and brought to processing plants have value only to the laborers who gather and transport them to the decorticating plants. However, prospects for larger utilization of the coconut husks have improved both in the local and in the foreign markets.

A trial shipment of coir twines to Italy is being prepared by PHILCOA. Inquiries for coconut coir, either in the form of curled fiber or straight fiber, are piling up from Japan and European countries. New uses for coconut shell are being developed in research laboratories and in private factories.

Our Administration is prepared to lend financial assistance for the development of a coconut by-product industry. This by-product industry would not only provide additional income for the planters, but also increase the total value of the coconut industry. Such added value would lower our cost of production and thereby enhance further the competitive position of all our coconut products and by-products abroad.

On the third problem some ten million coconut trees have already been lost to Kadang-Kadang . The affliction is spreading at the rate of approximately 7 kilometers a year and has spread as far north as Infanta, Quezon. In the Bicol region, Kadang-Kadang has brought about tremendous economic losses.

It is deplorable that while the scourge of this disease has long been recognized, the will and the effort to eradicate or minimize it has been almost nil.

The Philippine Coconut Administration, which Congress established in 1954 to promote the coconut industry, at the beginning made some effort to carry out its research objectives but later, particularly under the past administration, bogged down under the pressure of political dictation and domination. Chairman Abadilla took over the management of the PHILCOA under this great handicap—and it is to his credit that, in spite of it, he has made and is making some progress in putting the PHILCOA on a sound basis. Other government agencies have been equally ineffective, either because of inadequate financial support or lack of competent personnel, or both.

We are encouraged that some headway has been made in Kadang-Kadang research by the group of professors at the U.P. College of Agriculture at Los Baños who are undertaking their work with the support of a yearly grant of P90,000.00 from the Kadang-Kadang Research Foundation. While this group of researchers has not yet come up with definite answers to the many complexities of the Kadang-Kadang problems, they have been able to devise a method to determine whether or not a coconut tree is afflicted with Kadang-Kadang. The Foundation itself, which is a joint undertaking between government and private enterprise, has done creditable work not only in supporting the valuable research work in Los Baños but in arousing interest among leaders and interested parties in the need of greater research efforts in the coconut industry.

In this connection, we must make use not only of our own experience but also of our friends abroad who are more advanced than we are in the industry. To this end, we have entered into negotiations with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) so that we may utilize the technical aid of the United Nations agency in undertaking a thorough survey of the coconut industry and in the establishment of a Coconut Research Center which will be devoted purely to research and extension work on coconut. The UN representation in Manila has given firm assurances that the UN, through the FAO and the UN Special Fund, will give the fullest support to a Coconut Research Center in the Philippines. As a first step, we have contracted the services of a FAO expert in the PIA—Dr. Menon, who is reputed to be one of the leading scientists on coconut and who is very highly recommended by FAO officials.

We shall express one more thought to end our remarks. The high prices for copra resulting from our decontrol on foreign exchange last year present unique opportunities for improvement. Decontrol is benefiting the planters who now get a higher price than they did when overvaluation and undervaluation which dominated trading practices before decontrol enriched only the traders. We should not dissipate these windfalls in conspicuous consumption but should plow them back to our coconut palms in the form of fertilizers and better farm practices.

The time to prepare for the rainy day when prices might tumble down again is now when bigger incomes permit massive investments on tried and tested tools for increased productivity. The prices of coconut products being dependent on factors beyond our country, we must at all times be prepared by doing our best during moments of good fortune such as we are enjoying today.

The foregoing are the different facts of the unfinished business in the coconut industry. The completion of this unfinished business is the greatest challenge that you, the leaders of the different sectors united in UPCA, who are gathered in this convention, are facing today. There is no magic formula for any industry. But if we work together, if each sector were to apply itself with steadfast dedication to its own task, and with the government doing its part, then shall we attain a position of superior competitiveness for our premier export industry and prevail in a world seething with harsh economic realities for the welfare not only of those who are engaged in the industry but of all our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.