Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On United Nations’ Day

The Philippines can learn from Cuba’s experience in transitioning to organic agriculture. Cuba was forced to adopt organic farming practices in the early 1990s after the collapse of the Soviet Union, its main trading partner, and the subsequent loss of access to imported fertilizers and pesticides. This period, known as the “Special Period,” presented significant challenges to Cuba’s agricultural system. 

Despite these difficulties, Cuba successfully transformed its agriculture, demonstrating the viability of organic farming on a national scale. Key strategies included urban agriculture, diversification of crops, the use of biological pest control, and the promotion of agroecological practices. These initiatives not only ensured food security but also improved soil health and reduced reliance on external inputs. 

Ang Pilipinas ay may pagkakataon na gayahin ang mga estratehiyang ito, lalo na sa konteksto ng ating mga hamon sa food security at ang pangangailangan para sa sustainable agriculture. We can learn from Cuba’s emphasis on local production, community participation, and the integration of agriculture into urban areas. 

Furthermore, Cuba’s experience highlights the importance of government support and investment in research and development of organic farming technologies. The Philippine government should prioritize policies that promote organic agriculture, provide training and resources to farmers, and support the development of local markets for organic products. Ito ay makakatulong upang mapabuti ang kabuhayan ng mga magsasaka at matiyak ang mas malusog na pagkain para sa lahat. 

In conclusion, Cuba’s journey to organic agriculture offers valuable lessons for the Philippines. By adopting similar strategies and prioritizing sustainable agricultural practices, we can enhance food security, protect our environment, and build a more resilient agricultural system. This is a crucial step towards achieving our national goals of food sovereignty and sustainable development.

IT HAS BEEN a firm bipartisan policy of the Philippine Republic since our independence in 1946 to support the United Nations and fulfill our obligations under the Charter. The Philippines has been actively associated with the growth of the world organization from its birth.

The Philippines was a charter member of the United Nations. A Filipino, Gen. Carlos P. Romulo, became president of its General Assembly in 1949. The Philippines sent troops in support of the United Nations’ unprecedented police action in Korea in 1950. The Philippines was co-sponsor of the historic Uniting for Peace Resolution of 1950. The Philippines has bought United Nations bonds to keep the organization going. Next year, a Filipino will sit as chairman of the Security Council. So strong is our support for the United Nations, that despite our national security policy of keeping communist away from our country, we have made an exception of communists who come with United Nations credentials.

It is, therefore, fitting that the Rotary Club of Manila should focus the nation’s attention to the United Nations by staging a replica of its proceedings. On behalf of our people, I am glad to be here to symbolize our Nation’s faith in the United Nations. It is a personal pleasure on my part, as well, because I have been personally associated with the United Nations. I have been three times a delegate to the General Assembly, the third time as Chairman of the 6th Assembly in Paris in 1951–1952. I was the author and sponsor of the congressional resolution authorizing the sending of Filipino troops to Korea. Now as President of our country, I am taking this occasion to pledge anew that the Philippines will continue to support fully the United Nations and to fulfill its commitments to the limit of our national capacity to maintain peace in honor and freedom.

The United Nations has had its setbacks but it has had also its accomplishments for peace. To undertake a task as gigantic and complex as maintaining the peace of the world and the security of all nations, the United Nations cannot be expected to be exempt from failure. The important thing is that it has been at times useful in preserving peace and in promoting justice among nations and that it keeps on endeavoring to do so. It has been the forum for the expression of the grievances and aspiration of nations.

Nations are like human beings. If human beings cannot express their grievances, they are likely to resort to violence to express the wrongs, real or fancied, that have aroused them. As long as an organization exists where the nations can air their grievances and aspirations out of their systems for the satisfaction of their peoples, the war of words will remain a substitute for a war of bombs and missiles and the world, because of the United Nations, will stay in peace.

At this moment of grave menace to the peace of the world, our thoughts turn inevitably to the United Nations. We could say truly that if the United Nations did not exist, it would be necessary to invent it.

The world’s need for the United Nations appears all the more urgent as we measure the disparity between its present weakness and the strength required to maintain international peace and security.

Seventeen years ago, in San Francisco, the United Nations was founded in the aftermath of a great struggle which had ranged the free countries and the communist countries together against the fascist states. It was established on the principle of the continued cooperation among the victorious powers. The assumption was that the Soviet Union and the Western powers, including the United States, would bear the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, and that they would carry out this primary responsibility in close cooperation with each other. Together they would have such overwhelming political influence and military strength that no power or powers, singly or in combination among themselves, would have the means to challenge the preponderant strength of the Big Five. For this reason, the United States, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, France, and China were given permanent seats in the Security Council plus the right to veto any proposal involving substantive matters in the domain of international peace and security.

Unfortunately, the assumed unity of purpose and policy upon which the peace-keeping responsibility of the United Nations is based did not long endure. Even before the signature of Soviet Foreign Minister Molotov on the Charter of the United Nations had become dry, the Soviet Union embarked upon a deliberate and systematic policy aimed at the territorial expansion of the Soviet Empire and the communist domination of the world. The Baltic States were rapidly swallowed up, and the Central European States fell into the communist orbit. In successive acts of naked imperialism, the Soviet Union attempted to undermine the political and territorial integrity of Iran, Greece, Turkey, West Germany, Korea, Vietnam, and Laos. By a combination of the techniques of ideological propaganda, political subversion, clandestine infiltration, and outright military aggression, the Soviet Union succeeded in expanding the frontiers of the communist empire. It was able to do this without the sacrifice of a single Soviet soldier in battle. By massive use of the weapons of subversive propaganda, by the methods of political infiltration and sabotage, it has been able, through trickery and deception, fraud and intimidation, to advance closer to its ultimate goal of world domination.

The democracies were not immediately prepared to meet this systematic communist program of subversion and conquest. Whether out of sincere good faith or sheer simple-mindedness, the democracies allowed themselves to be fooled, deceived, and finally threatened and blackmailed. In the fervid rejoicing that came with the triumph of allied arms at the end of World War II, the democratic states had taken the peaceful protestations of Soviet Russia at their face value. Tired of war and anxious to free themselves from the burden of armaments, they had disbanded their military forces with such rapidity that the Red Army could have walked across Europe and the other continents as well had it not been for the monopoly of atomic weapons which enabled the United States at that time to neutralize the massive military power of the Soviet Union. It was not until the communists decided to test the resolution of the free world by invading Korea that the true extent of the deterioration of the military power of the free world came to be known. The Korean War thus became the testing-ground not only of the courage and determination of the free world but also of the strength and efficacy of the United Nations itself.

But if the Korean War demonstrated to what point the communists are prepared to go in pursuing their political and military objectives, it also showed that the United Nations has sufficient flexibility and hidden reserves of strength to enable it to meet and overcome a major political crisis. It also proved that the peoples of the free world have the courage, resourcefulness, and dedication to combine their efforts in an emergency in order to meet and overcome a common threat.

Out of the Korean experience which had sorely tested the United Nations and brought the whole world to the very edge of catastrophe, came the frank recognition that there was need to devise new and more effective procedures to enable the United Nations to act in an emergency. It was in response to this need that by the terms of the now historic “Uniting for Peace” resolution, the General Assembly became the second line of defense against threats to the peace and acts of aggression. This resolution provides that whenever the Security Council is rendered helpless to cope with a threat to the peace or an act of aggression by the veto of any of the permanent members, the General Assembly of the United Nations, which is composed of representatives of all the member States, would be empowered to discuss any such urgent question and to take a decision by a two-third majority vote.

In this way, without amending the Charter, the United Nations has been able to acquire sufficient flexibility and to adopt an alternative procedure for dealing with threats to the peace of the world.

However, despite this significant improvement in the structure and procedure of the United Nations, its fundamental weakness remains. This weakness resides in its inability to prevent a war involving the great powers themselves. This inadequacy, of course, becomes magnified in a case where a war is likely to involve two powers possessing thermo-nuclear weapons. It thus becomes apparent that the United Nations, despite the earnest hope and vision of peace that had gone into the creation of the organization, remains severely limited in its efficacy by the realities of political and military power in the world today.

The disparity between the actual weakness of the United Nations and the overwhelming potency of thermo-nuclear weapons is reflective of the disparity which exists between the progress that man has achieved in the field of moral science and in the field of physical science. By the ingenuity of his mind, man has split the atom and discovered therein enough power to destroy himself and blow up the very earth he inhabits. At the same time he has not made any comparable advance in the science of living with his fellows in peace, with freedom and justice, under the rule of law.

If mankind finds itself in this desperate situation, it is because of the lopsided and unequal development in the two sides of his nature. He has had knowledge enough to split the atom but not wit enough to fuse humanity together.

This is the situation, full of menace, which confronts mankind in these critical moments.

Today, perhaps more than in the past, the United Nations faces a grave test on the Cuban crisis. The United States has made the charge that Soviet Russia has been converting Cuba into an offensive base for missiles. Therefore, peace now depends on the Soviet Union and the United Nations, the former if it is ready to go to war to make good its word to Fidel Castro, and the latter, if it can find means to insure the security of the American continents from the threat of Cuban missile bases with reasonable honor to both camps. It is a hazardous predicament for the United States, the Soviet Union, and the United Nations on which may depend continued peace or the destruction of mankind in our time.

The Cuban people, who a few years back had embarked on a just revolution for the purpose of achieving true sovereignty over their country and its natural resources, have become prisoners of a communist regime that is as ruthless and as unprincipled as any that exists in the world today. A revolution that had started on the glorious promise of achieving true human dignity and a better life for the Cuban people has been betrayed. One more popular struggle has been debauched by its leaders who have delivered the people into the hands of the communist enemy. By this act of betrayal, a whole nation has become the tool for the advancement of communism in a part of the world where it is feared, hated, and abjured.

This is a tragedy which countries like the Philippines would do well to consider thoughtfully and carefully. The fate of Cuba affords a perfect illustration of the brutal and anti-human methods which the communist will adopt without compunction in order to destroy the freedom of man and advance their insane dream of world conquest and domination. It shows how a mass movement, which was originally harnessed to the hope of human betterment, can be betrayed by the ruthless few in order to satisfy the infinite hatred in their hearts and their insatiable lust for power.

To the extent that the Cuban people were fighting for their dignity as a nation, for sovereignty over their land, and for control over the destiny of their country, they were entitled to receive, as indeed they received, the sympathy of the whole world. The Filipino people were among those who wished the Cuban people success in their struggle. We cannot believe that it was necessary for them to cater to the friendship, assistance, and support of the communist powers in order to achieve their goals. We do not believe that their particular situation was so desperate that they had no choice but to exchange their democratic freedom for communist slavery. It is obvious that nothing in the end can possibly be gained by a people who exchange the chains of economic poverty and insecurity for the chains of totalitarian tyranny.

We in the Philippine are profoundly convinced that there is room in to the free world for a free nation to improve its life and broaden its liberties without entering into an unholy compact with communism. We believe that countries like the Philippines and Cuba, which bear a common hope of increased prosperity and happiness for their people, can depend on the assistance of other free peoples and the cooperation of the United Nations to achieve in freedom the goals of human dignity, economic abundance, and political stability.

It is in this conviction that, on this occasion, we Filipinos should consecrate ourselves anew to the purposes and principles of the United Nations. As we draw the necessary lessons from the tragic events in Cuba, let us renew our pledge to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights and in the dignity and worth of the human person. Let us pledge ourselves once again to help promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom, to develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples. Let us dedicate ourselves anew to the noble objective which is enshrined in ringing words, in the first paragraph of the preamble of the United Nations Charter:

“to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war which twice in our life-time has brought untold sorrow to mankind.”

But in renewing this pledge, let us resolve earnestly to remain steadfast in our love of liberty.

In this hour of danger, and fully conscious of my responsibility, I have without hesitation spoken for our people to affirm that we shall keep our place on the side of the free world. We are a people with a varied heritage from both the East, of which we are part, and the West with which we came in intimate contact for four hundred years. The best and noblest element of our heritage is our love of freedom. Freedom is to us an inalienable way of life. We have freedom in our political institutions; we seek the progress of our economy also in freedom.

We are one of the freest peoples in Asia, perchance, in the world. To us, freedom is not only a present way of life; it is the source of our most cherished hopes for a better future. The passion for freedom is rooted so deep in our national soul that we cannot conceive of life without freedom; for indeed, freedom is life itself. It is for this reason that Lapu-Lapu resisted and killed Magellan in Mactan; that Rizal left the comforts of the opulent parental household in Calamba to undergo privations in Europe in quest of reforms for his oppressed people; that Bonifacio, with only a bolo in hand, defied the most powerful European empire of the time; that Aguinaldo dared to fight the American arms that had triumphed over the Spanish forces; that Quezon continued the fight for independence on the battlefield of peace; and that Jose Abad Santos deliberately chose death to tolerance of Japanese tyranny.

This heritage of freedom is the reason why the Philippines has fully supported the United Nations and allied itself with the United States and the free world. In these alliances, there is hope of peace in security and freedom. This heritage provides the reason why, in the Korean crisis or in any similar crisis where a choice is to be made between peace in tyranny and war for freedom, the Philippines has stood and will stand unfalteringly to keep its place as a loyal member of the United Nations and as a faithful ally of the free world, ready to labor in peace or to fight in war, if necessary, to die for freedom rather than live in slavery.

In this critical hour for mankind, we your elders appear before you, youth of the land, thankful over this opportunity to impart to you the truth that the spirit of freedom which was the sublime joy of our forebears continues to thrill our spirits and to warm our hearts. In a choice between death or liberty, our forefathers, without hesitation in their preference, chose the latter. We who have come after them confirm with pride the nobility and wisdom of their choice and stand ready to act as our sires did before us. While yet there is time, we enjoin you that, should the frightful dilemma challenge you to make a choice in your own time, you shall not fail your fathers as we surely will not fail ours. And may God bless you and vouchsafe to you the grace to live in a world at peace and in liberty with honor.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.