Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Tenth National Congress of the Sugar Industry

The sugar industry is a vital component of the Philippine economy, providing livelihoods for hundreds of thousands of farmers and workers. However, the industry faces numerous challenges, including declining productivity, increasing production costs, and the threat of imported sugar. This document outlines a comprehensive plan to ensure the sustainability and competitiveness of the Philippine sugar industry in the years to come. 

One of the key priorities is to increase the productivity of sugarcane farms. This will be achieved through the adoption of modern farming techniques, the provision of high-yielding sugarcane varieties, and the improvement of irrigation facilities. We will also invest in research and development to develop sugarcane varieties that are resistant to pests and diseases, and that are adapted to the changing climate. Kailangan nating tiyakin na ang mga magsasaka ay may access sa mga kinakailangang teknolohiya at kaalaman para mapabuti ang kanilang ani. (We need to ensure that farmers have access to the necessary technologies and knowledge to improve their yields.)

Another important aspect of the plan is to reduce the cost of sugar production. This will involve streamlining the operations of sugar mills, improving the efficiency of transportation and logistics, and reducing the cost of inputs such as fertilizers and pesticides. We will also explore opportunities to promote the use of renewable energy sources in sugar mills. Dapat nating suportahan ang mga lokal na negosyo na nagbibigay ng mga serbisyo sa mga magsasaka. (We must support local businesses that provide services to farmers.)

To protect the local sugar industry from the threat of imported sugar, we will strengthen the implementation of sugar import regulations. We will also work with other government agencies to ensure that imported sugar is properly labeled and that it meets all necessary quality standards. We will also explore opportunities to promote the consumption of locally produced sugar. Ang ating layunin ay protektahan ang kabuhayan ng ating mga magsasaka. (Our goal is to protect the livelihood of our farmers.)

Finally, we will invest in the development of value-added products from sugarcane. This will include the production of ethanol, molasses, and other by-products. This will not only increase the income of sugarcane farmers but also create new employment opportunities. We are confident that with a concerted effort, we can ensure a bright future for the Philippine sugar industry. This plan represents a commitment to our farmers, our workers, and the future of our nation.

A YEAR AGO, we addressed you on the occasion of the Ninth National Congress of the Philippine Sugar Industry. On that occasion, we assured you of our interest in the welfare of your industry. We stated, as firmly as we could, that as President we could not but show sympathy, helpfulness and understanding towards the sugar industry whose welfare, growth and development were so inextricably bound to the welfare, growth and development of the nation itself.

During the past first year of our Administration, we endeavored to show you with deeds the sincerity of our words. We made representations with the American Government which successfully surmounted the serious threat posed by the proposed institution of the global quota system for sugar imports into the United States. These efforts, together with yours, resulted in the maintenance of preferred prices for Philippine sugar imports into the United States and won additional non-quota allocations.

We likewise directed the departments of government concerned with your industry to give you all encouragement and assistance in your projects and programs. In the fiscal policies and programs of our Administration, we considered your best interests and those of other export industries. We gave you full support for your plans for integration and expansion and, although these plans are still to bear their fruits, we have every hope that these shall be forthcoming soon.

We are gratified that you have welcomed the efforts of our Administration with your own cooperation. Except for a few who persist in perpetuating the out-moded division of interests which has been in the past so destructive to the progress of our nation, the large majority of the members of the sugar industry have shown genuine understanding of our efforts. As we stand here before you today, we feel encouraged by the conviction that there is among you a proper understanding of our motives, our ideals and our objectives. We feel that we are dealing with you not just as the President of the Philippines but as your partner in the efforts to meet your hopes and your fears, as a collaborator in your programs, as a participant in your future, and above all, as your friend in your problems, aspirations and welfare.

As a friend, let me speak to you briefly now on a matter which we know is in your minds: the future of the sugar industry.

Last year, we made the suggestion that you should consider immediate diversification of the sugar industry and the industrialization of your by-products as a means to further stabilize the sugar industry. Many of you have made plans to do so. What is needed now is to take immediate steps to implement those plans.

Even at this early date we should be considering alternate proposals which can be presented to the United States Congress to replace the Laurel-Langley Agreement when it expires in July, 1974. In making these plans, we should consider the projected increases in consumption demands of our own people which by that time are calculated to be close to the present total production. If the Philippine sugar industry is to be placed in a position to supply our own projected demands and at the same time take advantage of the United States and world markets, there is need to accelerate your efforts to expand production.

For this purpose, it would be of value to make maximum use of the technical knowledge now available here and abroad and of the additional finances that favorable sugar prices have made available to us. There should be more emphasis on intensive rather than extensive farming by increasing your yield per hectare before considering opening new hectarage to sugar. Those mills that have already started to take measures to increase their efficiency are moving in the right direction. There should be greater efforts towards this end. It is our sincere belief that your expenditures in modernizing your farming practices and mill facilities will bring you rich rewards. If these improvements are made now, there is still sufficient time to amortize the new expenditures during the life of the Laurel-Langley Agreement.

The Philippine Sugar Industry is a rich and strong industry with resources and capacities which have not yet been fully tapped. What this industry can do when it bends its will and its back to it is clearly shown in the history of this industry in the years immediately after World War II. From practically complete and total ruin in 1945, it lifted itself up inch by painful inch until in 1958, with less mills and less acreage than it had had before the war, it surpassed all previous production records and took its place as the number one foreign exchange earner of our country. This performance alone shows that the potential of this industry is tremendous.

It is our duty to find the reason why this potential is not exploited to the fullest, why specifically, with a ready and eager market in the United States which is hungry for your products, you have not been able to fill the additional non-quota allocations to which we were entitled. During the last two years, the Philippines failed to fill a large portion of its US sugar non-quota commitments, with a consequent loss of more than $50 million in foreign exchange revenues. This year we stand to lose another $30 million. Even under normal conditions, it would only be sound business sense to discover the reason behind these losses. Faced with the inevitability of 1974, it is not only sound business logic but an imperative necessity.

We enjoin you to address yourselves to this problem with your characteristic vigor and determination. We are aware of the rivalries that exist between and among you. We know of the difficulties engendered by normal business competition. But there is more at stake here than pride and individual welfare and the well-being of any particular firm and business. The welfare and the future of the entire sugar industry, indeed the welfare and the future of the entire nation and of generations of Filipinos yet to come, are also at stake.

We venture the suggestion that you forget whatever rivalries may exist among you, to forget bickerings and family quarrels, and instead to sit down together and plan your program to meet the inevitable that will soon be upon us.

The most important elements in the work that has to be done are still the planters, the millers and laborers. The success or failure of any plan to develop and improve the industry will depend upon the cooperation, cohesiveness and unity of these three elements.

We wish to lay special emphasis on the fact that the third element—labor—is as important in this undertaking as the planters and the millers. No business venture can hope to succeed without the proper understanding and compensation of efficient labor. It is with gratification that we have noted the beginnings of efforts in the right direction in your dealings with labor. We urge you earnestly to accelerate this effort to reach the proper levels of compensation at the earliest possible time in order to achieve the proper atmosphere for the attainment of our objectives.

We cite with appreciation the fact that the laborers who depend on your industry for their livelihood have shared in your good fortune which resulted from the increased earnings from decontrol and from the protection of your quota position in the United States. You should widen your benevolent efforts in this direction. While benefiting more from the exportation of your product, it would be commendable as indicative of concern for the public welfare in general and for the plight of the small man in particular for you to insure, on a preferential basis, an adequate supply for domestic consumption in order to keep the price of sugar to our people well within the reach of the masses. The cooperation that you have extended on this score has been noted with satisfaction by the Administration and the continuance of such understanding and cooperation will surely bring in fruits of good will from our people and reciprocal assistance on the part of an appreciative Administration.

It is by now no secret to you that the Administration, while handling with comprehension and justice, all the problems of the Nation, has sought to lay emphasis on giving the laborer and the common man new and effective opportunities for the enjoyment of a better life. This is by no means aimed at depriving the well-to-do what is their due but of sharing, through the ways of justice and magnanimity which are qualities of a democracy, the bounty of the land with the less fortunate of our countrymen. We seek to benefit the common man not by pulling down the rich to his level but by pulling up the worker towards a more abundant life which it is within the efficacy of a democracy to give.

We deny, therefore, the political smear that the Administration’s ways are against the well-to-do. This is belied by the fact that countless wealthy citizens and enterprises have rallied to the efforts of the Administration and are being given wider opportunities for productive activities beneficent not only to themselves but to the country at large. Nor is there basis for the partisan calumny that the Administration is undertaking punitive action against those businessmen who were on the opposite political side. To cite only one instance, the Jacinto family which promoted under past administration the P250 million enterprise for the establishment of an integrated steel plant and is known to have supported the opposite political group in the last polls not only has not been in the slightest inconvenienced by the Administration but, on the contrary, forgetting politics and remembering only that this enterprise is good for the economy, the Administration gave assistance to the Jacinto project in the form of terms and credits in millions which it could not obtain even from the past administration because this Administration is for helping businessmen and entrepreneurs, irrespective of political considerations, who can contribute to the harnessing of the vast productive potentials of the country to spread prosperity to all the inhabitants of our country.

We are only against one group—the politicians who, occupying elective office, use their public trust and political power to advance their business interests. We are for helping all other businessmen, whatever their politics may be. If you are a businessman who is not holding elective public office, you can feel absolutely at ease in going about your legitimate business without being subjected to any inconvenience and the Administration will even help you with what it can in your problems and needs, irrespective of your politics, past, present or future.

A proper understanding of this true attitude of the Administration towards legitimate businessmen in general and in particular towards politicians who unduly compete in elective public office with bona fide businessmen should likewise lead to a better understanding of the Administration’s attitude towards the giving of more effective opportunities to the common people for the enjoyment of a better life. A number of measures showing the particular concern of the Administration for the plight of the common man have already been taken. We have urged you to help the laborers in your industry. We have assured the common tao of his rice through the RCA; reasonable prices for prime commodities through the NAMARCO; employment through the EEA; housing through the multi-storey tenement projects; clothing through the “PAGASA” textile, insight into the responsibilities of proprietorship through the sale to him of the NDC textile factory; specialized opportunity for higher education through the project for a Labor University; and a new dignity and incentive for more productive effort through the project to abolish tenancy.

Why have we undertaken these and more for the common man? It is not just that he is by natural right entitled to a decent living; it is not just that true democracy, and indeed, the constitution itself, requires not only the enjoyment of political rights and liberties but also “the well-being and economic security of the people.” The alleviation of the plight of the common man has been included as one of the three major goals of our five-year integrated socio-economic development program not without a high economic purpose. Fundamentally, we are profoundly concerned with the welfare of the common people because of our conviction that this country can become a prosperous and strong nation only if and when all the people, including the now impoverished and apathetic masses, can be aroused to take active part in husbanding our vast resources and in building with hard work and enthusiasm the prosperity and strength of our Nation.

We have indicated to you what you should do to face the future of the sugar industry. On its part, your Government as your friend has not been idle in relation to your problems. The Department of Commerce and Industry has been working closely with you in studying the problems involved and working out their solutions. We are working constantly to increase the efficiency of the Sugar Quota Administration so that it could serve you and your industry better. We have explored the possibilities of availing of the German Government’s desire to help work out the technical problems of the industrialization of your by-products. A German Government scientific mission may be arranged to help you in this direction.

The Philippine National Bank is now giving increased financing to the sugar industry. The Administration is cooperating wholeheartedly in the establishment of the Private Development Corporation of the Philippines which can be another source of investment equity for your expansion and industrialization. Through the Department of Commerce and Industry, we have made representations with foreign credit institutions to make available financing for the expansion of the sugar industry. As your realistic needs indicate in the process of your efforts at more efficiency and expansion, the Administration is prepared to expand its facilities and efforts to the utmost to make available to you the financing and credit aids that you need.

We assure you that you shall have all the assistance and support that the Government and our Administration are within our power to give. We are fully confident that together we shall be able to meet successfully the challenge to the future of the sugar industry.

A year ago, when we appeared before you, we stated that the sugar industry as an entity or group should not engage in partisan politics as it did in the previous presidential election. In candor, we say that our constructive and friendly admonition does not seem to have been heeded. The figures who led the industry into partisan politics are still engaged in obstructing the Administration in bringing about official national solidarity through which to accelerate economic and social reform and progress. The organizational heads of the industry at the time it engaged in partisan politics have continued at their posts. In this connection, we emphasize that in our contentious actions, we are only against a handful political group who have pretended to control the sugar industry and not against the sugar industry itself and that as far as the industry itself is concerned, we are strongly for the sugar industry and for helping the industry in its expansion and other problems.

Beyond pointing out these facts, we only state now at the beginning of another election year that if only the industry will heed our friendly and constructive suggestion in reality and not in words, considering our own interest and faith in the industry because it is a great enterprise and because it is the means of livelihood in our own province, the sugar industry will be the favorite industry under the present Administration which is ready to exhaust all efforts and assistance, under conditions of mutual faith and good will, both to meet the threats to the future of the industry and to enhance it not only as the great industry of the past and the present but also as the greatest Filipino industry of the future.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.