Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the Loyalty Day celebration of the College of Agriculture

Loyalty to the Common Man

LOYALTY DAY in Los Baños is one of the most significant celebrations of the year. I have watched with interest the growth of this College, from a typical and much-needed school for farmers and farming techniques to an institution of world renown, unique not only in its place in our system of higher education but also in its role in the agricultural economy of Southeast Asia. To see this institution grow has naturally become a source of pride to all of you here, but I believe you cannot match the satisfaction that I feel over your progress.

I say this in all sincerity and conviction—sincerity, because you are concerned here with the same interests that have inspired my life; and conviction, because you are well on your way to proving, if you have not proved it already, that working in behalf of the common man is gratifying and soul-filling and has its own intrinsic rewards.

Your Colleges of Agriculture and Forestry here in Los Baños are part of the University of the Philippines, a growing University, composed of 35 degree-granting units, an institution that is now steadily forging ahead, and whose interests are close to my heart. This I have demonstrated by recommending an initial substantial increase in its appropriations, the first time in its history. I am, I must humbly say, a staunch believer in your University of which I am honored to be an alumnus. I see in its efforts, particularly in its development program, the delineation of a policy that will mean the achievement of excellence, and I have committed myself to its support. We cannot ask for less, and I consider it my duty to our people to stimulate every effort in that noble direction.

The University of the Philippines today is led by General Carlos P. Romulo, who at one time was the President of the General Assembly of the United Nations. After one year and a half since the Board of Regents elected General Romulo as the President of the University of the Philippines, it is apparent that his performance has been excellent. He has raised the prestige of the University and has more than justified my expectations when I lent my support to his election as President of the University.

A few weeks ago, the sensational allegations prompted by the political atmosphere which has been engendered by the current elections purported to associate General Romulo with an affair involving ethics in government which had attracted wide attention. I have personally looked into this matter. After doing so, I am in a position to state that the mention of the Romulo name in the aforesaid affair was absolutely not aimed at marring his unquestionable integrity, because that would have been an untenable task, and that the integrity and honesty of General Romulo which has been consolidated by his lifetime of devotion to his country and to high principles has not in anyway been put to question, much less impaired, by the mention of his name. Being at least as well informed as any other on the aforesaid affair, I speak with authority in stating that General Romulo has absolutely not acted in any manner as to put his lifelong adherence to high principle to an iota of ambiguity. Out of fidelity to the facts and to the truth, I say that General Romulo remains today, and I believe for the rest of his life, to be a great Filipino whose integrity and honesty, not to mention his eminent services to our country, is not only unquestioned but unquestionable.

As to your celebration of Loyalty Day, allow me to share with you my thoughts on it. This celebration, to my mind, is loyalty to the common man. The history of this celebration here at Los Baños is proof of this. Forty-five years ago, the faculty and students of this college rallied to a call to duty—to President Quezon’s appeal, in particular, for enlistment in the Philippine National Guard as the Filipino contribution to the First World War. We are all familiar with the ideology which won that war and which inspired everyone with a sense of new-found freedom. This ideology guaranteed that the common man will be heard, that it is he who will determine who will run his affairs for him, and that it is he who has the immediate lien on the fruits of his labors.

We have since learned to live that ideology—to establish in our social institutions the proofs of its validity and strength; and we are committed as a people to safeguard it from subversion and even from the slightest signs of decay.

It is in this light that Los Baños is important in our political life. This campus exhibits a devotion to the Common man today, just as it did eloquently forty-five years ago. This is a dedication which has given me inspiration in my own administration as your President and, perhaps, today is as good a time as any to describe to you some of the ways in which I have tried to express that loyalty.

It is very easy for the leader of the country to express loyalty to an idea but at the same time encourage, if not indeed support, or initiate actions contrary to that spirit. This is the temptation of leadership. But drawing from our experience as a nation and impelled by a love for progress, my administration has endeavored to step clear of the reach of such a temptation. To achieve this, my administration, at its earliest stages, launched the moral regeneration campaign, which, as you all know, is changing the ethical landscape of this country. Like any other country we have our share of the poor and the rich, of the weak and the powerful, and, as you have observed, we have not hesitated to confront the powerful and the rich wherever such issues as public morality, graft, corruption, and other venalities have been involved. In my own view, manifest expressions for the welfare of the common man would be utterly empty should my administration condescend to accommodate the evils exemplified in the public behavior of some of the rich in this country who also happen to be some of the most powerful. In my view, loyalty to the common man can be expressed by protecting him from the evil represented by the few in our society who wallow in a morass of degradation disguised as wealth and power which, for all we know, became theirs through the labors of the many, the sweat of the poor, and the tears of the hungry.

But let me not be misunderstood. It is not true that I am trying to divide our people between the rich and the poor. It is not true that I am pitting the underprivileged, which form the greater part of our population, with the favored few. Such insinuations as these can come only from irresponsible criticism, a criticism that does not take into account and which does not honor the solemnity of the oath of office which a public official takes when he joins the government service.

Especially in the case of the President of the Philippines, that oath of office is a mandate and a responsibility which cannot be taken lightly. It is in this light that criticism of the President must be read, and in this connection such critics has believe that your President is dividing the people into this or that class and matching one against the other—such critics, I say, take the President’s oath of office, I repeat, lightly indeed. For that oath of office compels your President to protect and defend all our people, regardless of class, regardless of social standing, or position, and privilege of any category.

That is your President’s commitment, and his actions must be judged in that respect before they may be given any other construction such as would suit the interests of his detractors. What criticism often forgets is that the common man has long been expecting his due, and it is in the interest of the privileged, in the interest of the favored and entrenched in their comforts and wealth, in the interest of the entire nation that all of us personally had better consider it our duty to see to it that the common man is looked after, that his rights are protected, that his opportunities are expanded and safeguarded, and that his future in security and plenty is within his reach and not a mere illusion that is promised him year in and year out by those who seek his support only to jeopardize eventually his worth and frustrate his hopes.

And why did my administration launch a socio-economic program? Why are we now tapping not only the brawn of our working class but the brains of the intelligentsia as well in the concerted effort to improve our living conditions, to double the per capita income, to provide self-sufficiency in as many consumers’ items as we can manage to manufacture? The beneficiary of this mammoth effort is none other than the common man. This is the second expression of loyalty that my administration manifests to the common man.

I have come from their midst, and if circumstances of leadership which came no less from the people and by their popular mandate, have now placed me in a position to administer their affairs and safeguard their welfare, it is they, the common people, who have truly and unequivocally made this possible. You will therefore see that my concern is natural and that, personally, I cannot indeed do otherwise. Underprivileged as all my forebears have been, I nevertheless cannot claim that I, on every occasion, know our people’s problems, that I can divine their needs and, of my own accord, find solutions for them. Such, if possible, would be a superhuman task and, therefore, my administration on no occasion can pretend to say that it knows at every turn what our people want. But I felt it my duty to try personally to feel the pulse of the nation, not indirectly but directly, not through figures and reports but by personal contact. And this is the reason why we have initiated the Common Man’s Day at Malacañang.

Even then I knew that this was not enough. That to feel really the pulse of the people meant seeking them out in their homes and in their farms, in their various places of work and recreation. I knew that the President would be guilty of his own kind of regionalism were he to remain in Malacañang and wait there for the people to see him, to talk to him, to tell him about their problems, their needs, their immediate aspirations, and their long-range plans. It is for this reason that I have taken the time to visit the provinces whenever possible, for it is in the provinces where the greater part of our life as Filipinos is lived in utter simplicity and honesty which has been traditional with our people. It has been strenuous, it has required patience and forbearance, it has called for numerous sacrifices; but I find comfort in the thought that I will be rewarded with the vast knowledge of how this nation lives, a knowledge which no man sitting in comfort in an air-conditioned room can possibly attain, and by a conviction that one who is truly loyal to our people must be ready to offer any sacrifice, even life itself, if necessary, for the well-being and happiness of the people.

The land reform program is, as you can very well see in this context, a further expression of that loyalty. Much has been said about this subject, and I will not burden you with the details of the implementation of this revolutionary program. Your involvement in it, however, especially as engineers of our agricultural economy, is patent and undeniable. But this much must be said: that the land reform program constitutes a challenge to your knowledge and skill, to your generosity and to your foresight. The underlying principle, which is to harness our land resources to the fullest, is indeed an opportunity for sharing your skills with the land and with the people. The revolutionary concept to which the land reform program has been geared, which is the abolition of tenancy, is in effect a dynamo of infinite power and of unlimited resources. It means a people liberated at last from a bondage which they and their forebears have had to suffer. To free the common man from his chains—this is the most dramatic expression of loyalty to him that we can express. To give him the opportunity to own his land, to till it and enjoy its fruits to the fullest, by this we make practical the abstraction called love for the common people.

You, on this campus, are in a very vital way involved with the common man. The professors here have long ago chosen their field of study, which is agricultural technology, and that choice was one which did not overlook, I am sure, the common man. Let no one say that they and their students here are without loyalty to the cause I have just described. You are doing your share as much as everybody else, if not more.

And yet, even now, I must say in all frankness that this firm loyalty we share to the man behind the plow, or to the woman sitting all day long behind the counter of her small sari-sari store, or at her loom, or tending her chickens or swine in her backyard—let it not be said that we are doing enough for them. Especially from this College, much is expected for the reason that much has already been done here. Your laboratories have not been idle, your class rooms have not remained silent but have become the setting of a continuous dialogue between two generations, a dialogue that has to do with how best to attain wealth and plenty from the soil, a dialogue which has to do with banishing poverty and want and frustration.

Yet it is a paradox that while not only in our country but abroad, your College is regarded as the repository of the best agricultural-technology, your know-how has failed to be accepted by our farmers so as to influence their endeavors into more abundance and prosperity for our people. While other countries have so benefited from the rice technology of your College as to help make them rice exporting countries, your technology has failed to raise the rice productivity of our farmers. This is one of the perplexing problems of our time. We must attend to this problem if we are to justify the continued support of the government and of the people to the maintenance and growth of your College.

I would think that over and beyond the means now at your disposal, and I am aware of your efforts towards disseminating to our people the technical knowledge that you have acquired, there are any number of activities and schemes to further the influence you can exert to foster the ideal of prosperity and security to which your individual careers in this College have been dedicated. Your research will be meaningless unless translated for easy and practical adoption by our people; and the expense incurred in such research will amount to sheer waste if you cannot transform our people’s lives in keeping with the needs and demands of our time.

You have learned to utilize the printed word and the radio as media for spreading that knowledge; soon you will be thinking of using television and the cinema. These are tools which are handy enough, but I also know that you do not frown on personally demonstrating your knowledge to the lowly and unlettered who might need it. This is your way of expressing your loyalty to the common man. But this I must repeat: there are possibly other ways, methods, and schemes that will challenge your imagination and that will widen the reach of your influence and deepen the intensity of your desire to work not for yourselves alone but for others. And reach our people in every way, I repeat. Make your science work for them, perhaps without their knowing it.

The country looks in your direction for precisely this kind of attention that you can give to the common people. Buckle down to the task; let no obstacles come your way; go forth and spread this knowledge that you have; share it generously and extensively, so that it will go into our folkways, it will become flesh and bone in our tradition—it will be our way of life. Science is nothing if it does not benefit the common man. And the scientist is essentially he who can transform reality out of a sense of love for his people.

A greater love for his people a man even in public office cannot profess. We live in perilous times in which ideological weapons have come into play. Our commitment to democracy and the democratic way of life so dramatically expressed on this campus forty-five years ago has required new ways of manifestation. I have described how your President and his administration have chosen to commit himself and his government on the side of that way of life. This has been a decision born not out of fear of the stark and forbidding realities of Communism but out of love for our people. For fear is an unstable foundation for action; it is love that builds for solidity and permanence.

If, however, we live in perilous times, an opportunity for security and abundance now awaits us through completing the unfinished revolution which our forebears have started. History has perhaps deprived us of seeing this revolution in its true perspective, but no one can belie the fact that it was not fought in vain. Its issues, even now transformed by time and national exigencies, have changed. By the same token, our means of pursuing this struggle must change to bring it to a triumphant conclusion. To make that victory possible and real, my administration has decided to harness all our resources towards creating that better society which our forebears have dreamed about. Thus, our concern for the common man, our moral regeneration campaign, the socio-economic program which my administration has launched, the land reform program for all these are as nothing, if they are not indeed the very weapons now at our disposal for consummating that age-old struggle. They are the weapons that fit our time, and they are as blades of steel which our forebears brandished in the air as they cried “Freedom!” That spirit is not dead, and it inspires us today.

Lincoln said of democracy that it is a government of the people, by the people, and for the people. We all know how right that definition is. Indeed, what is a democratic government if it is not the handiwork of its citizenry, if it did not work toward the best interests of its citizenry, and if it did not include all of the citizenry? But in our day, this concept needs a new reading. Democracy is not a static concept; it is as dynamic, as organic as any living thing, and it is for this reason that we say that democracy is alive or that it is dead—alive when its dynamism is patent, when its breath is warm, and when its touch is comforting; and dead, when its hand falls inert on our people’s shoulders, when its breath is fouled by some form of decay, or when its energies have been drained completely.

I am a great believer in the undying life of democracy, and I say that its dynamic quality emanates from its leadership as manifested by the people’s choice. This is why Lincoln’s definition must be updated; in my view, democracy is not only a government of the people, by the people, and for the people is based on mutuality of interests between the government with the people—because a government with the people is based on mutuality of interests between the governor and the governed, a government in which if possible no gap exists between public officials and the citizenry, and a government with a leadership that is motivated by understanding. It is a government in which access to its highest councils is available to all, where bridges of accord between the governor and the governed remain open at all times. These I call a government with the people and a truly genuine democracy which draws its strength only from the people.

We are gathered today in celebration and in joyful appreciation of the blessings of our land and of our people, firm in our faith in that democracy whose strength and whose future rest with all of us.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.