Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the Signing of the Agricultural Land Reform Code

[Delivered on August 8, 1963]

AN ACT OF EMANCIPATION

WE ARE GATHERED here to witness a very simple act. The act itself will take no more than a few seconds, no more than a brief moment to affix a simple signature on the last page of a printed document. It will take no more than a few quick strokes of the hand. Yet in this brief moment are packed many centuries. This unspectacular act of signing a piece of paper will bring to an end a long and at times bitter past of economic and human slavery which we now make bold to abolish, and it will launch a new and better future for those languishing in poverty from this bondage which we now make bold to build.

There have been times in human history when a short signature by a mortal hand could build or demolish empires, or send nations at war with one another. Today, a signature by a humble hand obedient to a million silent aspirations will give the toiling Filipino farmer his liberation from poverty and social degradation. Thus, we are gathered here not merely to observe a transitory ceremony; we are engaged in the formidable act of re-making history. We are presiding over the dismantlement of an institution that has plagued our land for longer than four and a half centuries. We are celebrating the initial step that will burst us under the forces and the institutions that have kept our tenants in silent bondage over a period of time that extends to long before the Spaniards came to our shores. We are returning to our toiling farmer the freedom that is his by God’s grace, the dignity and security that come with the possession of his own land, and the natural right to enjoy the rewards of his own labors. We are launching the boldest program of land reform ever attempted in our country which shall bring redemption to the economic slaves tilling our farms.

In a few minutes, we shall sign an enactment of Congress proposed by us into law. But we are signing more than an ordinary code. We are signing a veritable proclamation of independence, a declaration of faith, a declaration of determination. By this we proclaim the independence of the shackled Filipino farmer, declare our faith in his ability to fulfill the responsibility that comes with his newlywon freedom, and declare our determination to assist him effectively in rising to the proud status of an owner of his land and the equal in human dignity of any other citizen of the land.

This occasion is the culmination of more than four hundred and fifty years of history of tenancy in the Philippines. It was mostly a melancholy history; at times, it was a turbulent history. It was a continuous history of share-cropping and debt-peonage that bore down on the shoulders of the tenant, whether it be the mamamahay of pre-Hispanic times or the kasamahan farmer who emerged in the eighteenth century or the share tenant of the twentieth century. Some of the old Spanish governors-general tried to alleviate the plight of the mamamahay , but their attempts took the form of laws that were not honored in practice. In the eighteenth century Jose Basco y Vargas made another attempt at liberating the tenant from his servitude by prohibiting practice of kasamahan , except in the case of landlords who had some legitimate reasons for absenteeism; such as, sickness or old age.

All through the American occupation of the Philippines and all through the Commonwealth period the problem of the tenant was a profound concern. Some advocates of reform sought the way of violent uprisings, strikes, or similar massive actions by tenants against landlords: Benigno Ramos led his Sakdals, and Pedro Abad Santos, his Socialists. Others, resorting to the methods of law, pushed the passage of measures to improve the lot of the tenants by increasing his share of the crop or by giving him tenure or by resettling him on friar or public lands. President Manuel Quezon announced and tried to pursue a program of social justice in an effort to pioneer in land reform.

In 1946, after the war and after the transfer of political sovereignty back to the Philippines, another tenancy law, Republic Act 34, was passed. Again it regulated sharing arrangements, protected the tenant from undue eviction, and defined the rights and obligations of tenants and land­lords within a system of share-tenancy.

Still another attempt at land reform, and the boldest one before this new law, was taken by President Ramon Magsaysay. Under his administration Congress passed Republic Act 1400 in 1955. It was salutary in its intentions, but—in spite of its ambition—it suffered from the weaknesses of its predecessors: it attacked the tenancy system on the surface, not at the roots. The evidence of the failure of past intentions are all around us. Today we have more share-tenants than ever before. The trend is firmly established and shows no signs of levelling off, unless fundamental measures are implemented. Even in resettlement projects which have for their entire objective the establishment of farmer-operators tilling their own farms, the corrosive forces of share-tenancy have penetrated and are spreading rapidly.

This trend cannot be stopped except by bold and forthright action. We cannot cure a grave disease by simple palliatives. We cannot remove a growing social tumor by treating its surface. We can remove it only by a quick surgery. The failure of past attempts at land reform was always a failure of determination: they tried to alleviate the pains, the evils, the injustices of the share-tenancy system, rather than resolutely attacking the system itself. The result is that while some of the edges of the problem have been treated with some success, the disease remains as formidable and as threatening as ever.

It is thus not enough to deal with the bits and pieces of the problem. It is not sufficient simply to enlarge the tenant’s share of the crop, or to give him stability of tenure, or to outlaw usury, or to provide alternative sources of credit, for the basic disorder remains. All the problems that plague the share-tenant—the death of his initiative, his vulnerability to usury, his weak bargaining position before the landlord and trader, his poverty—all these have one root cause, namely, the very institution of share of share-tenancy itself. This is the very disease that must be removed, decisively and with determination.

Today, with a few strokes of the pen, we shall perform the initial step in this surgery. This document before us, a bill which in a few minutes will become a statute to be known as the Agricultural Land Reform Code, will provide us with the legal powers to remove once and for all the system of share-tenancy that has plagued our agricultural countryside. In one statement it declares share tenancy as violative of the law of the land, a system which will be abolished and will no longer be tolerated by law. But the Code does not only provide us with the powers to remove an organic disease from our agricultural society; it also provides the means of injecting new health, new vigor, new muscles, and new strength into the new social order that will arise. Its first and immediate step is to destroy an oppressive and intolerable system; its ensuing objectives—which will constitute the sinews of land reform—is to nurse our agricultural economy into a state of healthy productivity. It not only aims to turn the Filipino tenant into a free man; it aims, most of all, to turn him into a more productive farmer.

Thus, after centuries of silent struggle and angry protests, the Filipino tenant finds in this movement his victory, finds in this pen a powerful scythe with which to harvest the fruits of a proud and productive future, finds in this gathering the jubilant witnesses of his triumph, finds on this stage a rampart from which to view the wide and spacious fields in the country which shall be his to till, to work, to cultivate, and to love as his own. This moment is only an initial triumph in that the law has torn down his prison. His task from hereon is to build: to build his own technical capabilities, to cultivate his farm efficiently and scientifically; his abilities to finance his operations in. an orderly manner, his ability to market his produce effectively, and to invest the savings out of his increased incomes in the further improvement of his own farm. Most of all, his task is to change himself, his outlook, his spirit, his attitude towards work. Under the law he will cease to be a tenant; during a transitional period he will function as a leaseholder; and after a few years he will be a landowner. We call upon him to abandon his outlook as a tenant, and take on the vision of a new landowner.

In this transition the Filipino farmer will need help. As a transitional leaseholder and as an eventual landowner he will need manifold assistance, including technical, marketing, financial, and legal. The Land Reform Code provides the government with the resources and the machinery with which to give him all the help and support he needs. Among these are the Agricultural Productivity Commission which will extend to him technical assistance, the Agricultural Credit Administration which will give him operational financing and marketing assistance, the office of Agrarian Counsel which will provide him legal assistance, the Land Authority which will assist him to become the owner of the land he tills, and the Land Bank which will assist him to pay for the land that has become his own.

Under the Land Reform Program, the farmer will therefore have behind him a formidable battery of government agencies to insure that his transformation from a tenant into a lessee and eventually into a landowner will result in increased production from our farms, in increased incomes for our farmers, in better management of the farmer’s financial affairs, and—most of all—in the enhancement of the dignity and the social position of those who now live under the burden of tenancy. Realizing that the implementation of the program is the crux to the realization of its noble objectives, we pledge all our power, all our fervor, and all our faculties to warrant the efficient operation of all these agencies in order to insure the rise of the poverty-enslaved tenant into a free and prosperous farmer.

The machinery for carrying out the Land Reform Program will soon be in full operation. We shall see that the implementation of the program thereby will not be haphazard but systematic; will not be hasty but orderly; will not be reckless but resolute. It will be pursued in manageable stages, rather than as a breathless and one-shot effort that will sweep the nation overnight. It will be managed prudently and well, with all due respect to the rights of all parties concerned.

In abolishing tenancy and launching a decisive and bold land reform program, we confront a huge and monumental task. We dare say that it matches the historic proportions of no other achievement of our nation in the past, save the Philippine Revolution that began in 1896. Indeed, the Land Reform Program is a revolution in itself, part of the peaceful, ambitious, unfinished revolution which we are now waging to win for our people an adequate measure of prosperity and well-being. Land reform is not a separate and isolated program; it is a component, and a very crucial component, of our wide-ranging and integrated program to promote the rapid and sound social and economic development of our country. Land Reform will release the hitherto suppressed productive energies of our farmers, and will thus increase the capacity of our agricultural sector to provide our people with food and our industries with raw materials. Land reform will increase the incomes of our agricultural society, and will thus convert it into a large market for the produce of our industries. Land reform is not solely a program to help tenants; it is a program to uplift the whole nation, socially and economically. It is ultimately a proof and demonstration of the respect which our nation holds for the dignity and the rights which are attached inseparably to the human person.

It is meet to recall at this point that the Filipino has been associated with apathy and resistance to progress. Our national hero, Dr. Jose Rizal, has referred to this seeing trait as the indolence of the Filipino which must be overcome. For centuries, the Filipino tilling our farms seemed indolent because his creative and constructive qualities were overpowered and stifled by a sense of hopelessness as he languished in the dark prison of his unending poverty and misery. Since life was to him hopeless for advancement, his supreme ambition and recourse for human joy was to spend the occasional windfalls from his lengthening debt in order to drown his sorrows in tuba and basi or in a bet at a cockfight. This sense of hopelessness was a drug that kept him indolent and lukewarm to the charms of progress. Through this land reform program, which releases the tenants from endless darkness to the sunshine of new hopes, we can look forward to the day when the so-called indolent Filipino, after centuries, shall be no more, and in his place will arise a Filipino who shall work hard because he has a better life to work and hope for, who shall actively take part in community work that builds the nation because he has the dignity that makes him the equal of all his countrymen, who shall fight for his rights and do his duties because he has effective freedom for the discharge of this responsibility, and who, in the hour of necessity, will be happy to give even his life for his country because in his country he has land to call his own.

The Filipino farmer has waited century after century for this very moment and this very occasion. In a moment, as the elected President of this Republic, I shall sign the Agricultural Land Reform Code into a law of the land. By this act the nation shall put its indelible seal on this proclamation of the toiling farmer’s liberation and his victory.

So let this signing be recorded in our annals as an Act of Emancipation of the toiling farmer from his slavery to debt, poverty, and misery and of his dignification as a human being and as a citizen. By this act of emancipation, a new revolution is on.

In fulfillment of the dream of centuries and in answer to the cry for liberation of the slaved Filipino tenant in our farms from his chains of want and misery, it is now my cherished privilege and infinite honor to sign the Agricultural Land Reform Code into law as Republic Act No. 3844 on this memorable day of the Common Man.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.