Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Manila Rotary Club

[Released on January 3, 1963]

On the Threshold to Progress

WE HAVE reached the end of the first year of our Administration. This occasion is an auspicious time for looking back and looking forward: for reviewing the substantial achievements made by our country during the past year, and for previewing the goals and the tasks we have set for ourselves during the years to come.

We cannot help but look back with a feeling of pleasant pride and satisfaction over the accomplishments which our people have made in the past year, and we can happily say that our Administration has faithfully played its part in attaining those achievements. To our people go our thanks for their magnificent cooperation and display of discipline during a time when our country went through a trying period of political and economic transition. Our Administration, for its part, has been true to the pledges it made to the country when we assumed the noble mandate which the electorate placed on our shoulders at the beginning of the year. We faced considerable difficulties at the start, but we can now say that as a country, we have performed beyond expectations.

Following a time-hallowed tradition of counting our blessings at the start of the new year, I would like to review with you the benefits which the past year has brought us, and how your government has fared in carrying out the mission which it set out to accomplish. On this occasion, I hereby submit to our people the main accomplishments of our Administration summarized in four categories, as follows:

First , we gave the government back its self-respect;

Second , we gave the businessman back his freedom;

Third , we gave the common man the substantial beginnings of a better life; and

Fourth , we gave the country a stable base and a solid framework for its future growth.

Let me deal briefly with each of these.

At the start of our tenure of office, we gave the people a firm and solemn pledge to retrieve their government from the morass of graft and corruption into which it had desperately sunk in the past. We brooked no delay and spared no effort in pursuing a vigorous and tireless campaign for moral regeneration. This took the form of a drive against corruption in the public service and a campaign to bring before the bar of justice those who unduly used their positions and their power to build up ill-gotten fortunes, and who thereby infested the public service and, indeed, our whole society, with the virus of corruption. We began our term of office on the premise that our country could earnestly and effectively pursue a program of economic growth only after it had established the necessary moral climate for such a program. This is why we have insisted, and will continue to insist, on nothing but the highest standards of integrity and efficiency for public officials in order to make the government not a vast instrument for the corrupt and the powerful, but a true and faithful servant of the people.

I trust that our campaign for moral regeneration has made its message heard. We went through considerable pains and stresses to underscore our determination to demonstrate that dishonesty, however widespread and acceptable it was in the past, can no longer be a way of life. As a result, the government now stands in the eyes of the people as their sincere and earnest partner in which they can repose their full confidence.

We realized from the beginning that the problem of graft and corruption was not an isolated problem, but was tied up with the unwholesome climate of controls.

We also realized that the system of controls was effectively distorting the pattern of investments in the country and stood as a barrier to the implementation of a rational and systematic program of economic growth. Hence, we lost no time in dismantling exchange controls and allowing the rates to be determined by the forces of the free market. With one fundamental stroke, we established one of the prime conditions for using the resources of the country for the greatest good of the people rather than for ventures made artificially profitable by the prevailing system. By that very stroke, we also gave the businessman back his freedom.

This is our answer to those who would superficially and unjustly impute to us dictatorial tendencies. If we had these tendencies, we would not have done away with controls. Exchange control was a source of vast economic power for the President, which also meant tremendous political power.

But because we knew that it was a source of uncontrollable corruption and that it was impeding the progress of the country, we voluntarily let go this tremendous power out of our hands because we are for more freedom and not for dictatorship and in our loyalty to the people, we will do what in conscience we believe to be good for the people even if it is not personally good for oneself.

Indeed, by the elimination of controls, we have restored and upheld the freedom which is cherished by our people. Already enjoying political rights and liberties as extensive as in any free nation in the world, the Filipino has reacquired his economic rights and liberties which were withheld from him when the control of foreign exchange and ancillary restrictions were instituted. Now the Filipino citizen is so free that under the protection of the laws for the general welfare and for general enjoyment as a right, he can shape his future on his own genius and effort, if need be, without seeking any favor from the government or from any politician and official in the government. A Filipino possessed of merit may now pursue the livelihood of his choice and happiness, if he chooses, without the help of the government and invoking only his rights as a citizen. We have, therefore, upheld a system of freedom which enables the citizen, if he is in that mood, to tell the government or any official to “go and jump into the Pasig River.” I submit that when a citizen lives under conditions where he can tell his government to “go and jump into the Pasig River,” that citizen is in the best sense free and he has reason to exult over his freedom and to recognize the good will of those who have thus restored to him his boon of freedom.

We can think of this freedom as it concerns the businessman in two senses. The first is freedom from controls, and the second is freedom from instability. Both are necessary for the progress of private business.

The first freedom released the businessman from the heavy burden of having to negotiate with the government for dollar licenses, and removes from the government the corrupting power of rationing foreign exchange to various applicants. Our businessmen now bid for and offer their dollars in a virtually free market, and the forces of competition have been returned to an area where its absence has caused considerable distortions and graft.

While in the past the businessman could obtain his foreign exchange only if he was shrewd enough to obtain a license, he can now purchase his foreign exchange if he is willing to pay the market price. While the dollar-earner in the past had to surrender his foreign exchange to the government at a price lower than the market would have paid him, he is now virtually free to receive for his dollars as much as the market is willing to pay him. The days of choking controls and anomalous licensing are past; the forces of a free exchange market have returned. I submit that this is one of the greatest blessings which the past year has brought our people.

The second freedom—the freedom from instability—allows the businessman to draw up long-range investment plans under conditions which are both stable and reflective of true, rather than artificially induced, market conditions. The last months of control had been marked by a highly speculative atmosphere which was hostile to the formulation of long-range plans on the part of private enterprise. The businessman thought it more advisable to build up stocks of goods or of dollars, to postpone his plans, and to wait and see, rather than to expand his ventures or to go into new ones. The causes of all this speculation in the past were many and varied, but one of the most important was the businessman’s uncertainty with regard to the exchange rates and the foreign exchange policies of the government. Our program of decontrol, as complemented by appropriate monetary and fiscal measures, has served in great measure to reduce past instability and to give the businessman a new confidence in his future prospects.

Our stabilization program has also made the country a more attractive place than ever for foreign investments. All this confidence has been generated both by the courageous dismantlement of controls and the formulation of a long-term program for our economic and social development.

Our third major achievement during the past year was to give the common man the substantial beginnings towards a better life. Our Administration has made it a matter of grave importance to keep itself ever sensitive to the needs and the problems of the common man, and to provide for him the assistance he needs towards providing himself with the prime necessities of daily life. Our rice and corn program has insured for him a sufficient supply of his daily cereals, the prices of which have been stabilized at levels within his reach. Our NAMARCO policies have also assured the continued availability of foodstuffs and other essential commodities without prejudicing local manufacturers. We have embarked on a low-cost housing program for the people, as well as on a scheme to provide low-cost PAG-ASA clothing for the masses. We have provided jobs to the jobless through the Emergency Employment Administration, and thereby given some of our unemployed workers not only a source of income but also a chance to participate in the building of our nation’s capital. We have added more pesos in the purses of the government workers in the total sum of P93 million. We have laid the groundwork towards the establishment of the Labor University to provide the benefits of a higher education to those who aspire for it but who erstwhile have not been able to afford it.

These are some of the most significant services which our Administration has done for the common man during the past year. These are only the beginnings. For the most important task that our Administration has set out to accomplish is to implement a Five-Year Integrated Socio-Economic Program, which would provide for the country the crucial impetus for the steady and sustained growth of our production, our incomes, and our levels of employment. In the final analysis, the greatest service that the government can do for our people is to devote itself without reserve to the task of assisting them in building for themselves a country capable of producing and importing those goods and services which make for a happy, healthy, and wholesome life. In short, we aspire for a stable but reasonably rapid rate of economic development.

This, indeed, is the ultimate aim of the Five-Year Socio-Economic Program which we have started to implement. In essence, the Program seeks to marshal all the resources of the government in the most efficient manner to build and to generate the conditions that would encourage the vigorous growth of our national productivity through the efforts of free enterprise. It outlines the investment requirements for attaining its objectives, and it lays down the means for generating sufficient domestic savings and foreign capital to finance the Program.

I shall not repeat here the contents of the Five-Year Program, which has now been widely publicized. In the last analysis, its mission is simple: namely, to accomplish whatever conditions are necessary to assure that the average Filipino will have enough food on his table, clean and potable water from his taps, ample clothing on his back, adequate room and shelter for himself and his family, sufficient life-saving drugs and health facilities for his needs, good roads to travel on, adequate means of communication, adequate schools to send his children to, sufficient facilities for generating electricity and for irrigating our fields, and, in general, enough farms and enough factories to make available to the Filipino household a reasonable income every year and a sufficient supply of those goods and services on which the household chooses to spend its income. In aspiring for these goals, the Five-Year Program does not seek to work miracles; it simply seeks to have the resources of the country utilized in the most efficient manner in order to achieve the maximum which it is within our means to attain.

The first-year phase of the Program has been concerned with stabilization, with readjustments, with the establishment of the machinery to implement the Program in the concrete, and with the start of the actual implementation of the Program. The restoration of economic stability was brought about by decontrol accompanied by monetary and fiscal discipline. The freeing of our foreign exchange market has resulted in an increase in our international reserves from $103 million at the beginning of the year to the order of $145 million this year-end, while the rise in prices in the wake of decontrol has been reasonably moderate. The tax collection machinery of the government has been improved, resulting in increased revenues. The sincerity of the Administration in pursuing its policies has increased the willingness of foreign investors to bring their capital into the Philippines to assist in our developmental efforts, and has also enhanced considerably the credit-worthiness of the Philippines to foreign lenders, especially lenders of long-term capital.

In other words, during the past year, we have increased the sources from which we can tap the capital we need for the pursuit of our Five-Year Program. In the meantime, we have provided for the technical staff of experts to translate the over-all Program into specific projects and day-to-day policies and activities.

The failure of the economic measures of the past was the simple fact that they never got implemented. The mechanics of implementing our Five-Year Program, in contrast, are now in full operation, particularly in the matter of programming the direct capital expenditures of the government and the lending of government funds with a view to obtaining the maximum social benefits for every public peso spent or transferred. The process of implementing the Program is largely a matter of managing the capital program of the government in the most efficient manner, together with the execution of a consistent set of policies to encourage private enterprise in increasing its own investments in the most productive and most desirable fields.

Since the growth of private enterprise cannot proceed with vigor unless the government does its part in providing such basic and necessary services as public works, power, transport facilities, and the like, the success of the Five-Year Program will considerably depend on whether the government succeeds in managing its own resources. To insure that it does, we have adopted a new procedure for budgeting the capital funds of the government, in order to direct the limited funds at its disposal towards the most strategic and most important projects. In fact, we are at the moment operating under a quarterly master budget which allocates our present expenditures in what we judge to be the most efficient manner. The budget is the most crucial instrument of implementing a Program, whether it be for the government or for a business enterprise, and we are now using it to build for our country the necessary highways, telecommunication and transportation facilities, power-generating capacity, educational and health services, and the other essential factors for serving industry and agriculture and for facilitating their expansion. We have also established a Loans and Investment Council to coordinate the programming of the capital funds which the financial institutions of the government lend to the private sector for its projects. In addition, we have established a Cabinet Committee on Foreign Economic Policy to insure the wise management of the resources which foreign investors and lenders are making available to us.

The policies we have adopted in the past year have been designed to encourage an increase in private investments and protect existing industries from foreign competition as they rationalize their operations to adjust to the new conditions brought about by decontrol. To cite just one or two example: We have revised our tariff schedules in order to shield our textile industries. We have also reduced the importation by NAMARCO of commodities which are being produced by local industries. Through the Department of Commerce and Industry, your government has been engaged in the active promotion of private investments and in the provision of assistance to businessmen. We are now in the process of formulating a comprehensive and consistent set of legislative proposals for submission to the next session of Congress to meet the policy requirements of the Five-Year Socio-Economic Program.

In synthesis, we have reached a significant threshold. We have gone far in our campaign for moral regeneration. We have given the businessman back his freedom. We have alleviated to some substantial measure the plight of the common man. We have laid the groundwork for the vigorous growth of our economy through the faithful implementation of our Five-Year Socio-Economic Program. For its part, the private sector during the past year has increased its agricultural, industrial, and mining output, and has adjusted itself to the new requirements of a free economy.

The future will be a period of challenges. The government intends to intensify its own capital programs for meeting the most urgent requirements of the economy in the field of infrastructure and developmental services. It also aims to assist private enterprise in the area of project development and promotions as well as in financing. In this connection, I have created a 3-man Cabinet Committee on Investment Promotion to attend to this endeavor headed by the Secretary of Commerce and Industry. The Private Development Corporation of the Philippines, which was envisioned by the Five-Year Program and for which the World Bank has approved a $15 million loan, will soon be in operation to provide long-term capital for business ventures.

Private enterprise will also face a future in which investment requirements for new industries will be large. On our businessmen will fall the task of putting up industries for producing intermediate products as well as basic materials to feed our growing industrial structure. Their efforts will demand more capital and greater efficiency than could be tolerated in the past. But they will have the government’s full support in the way of technical and administrative services, tax, tariff, and other incentive policies, and financing facilities.

As our people have cooperated with us in the past year, we now ask their continued support of our Program during the years ahead. We likewise ask your support because you are leaders of the people.

Our program for rapid economic and social progress is ambitious. But our people deserve no less. They have long been in bondage to poverty; they must now be freed from their chains. The endeavor, with its complexity and the obstacles, requires formidable effort. Whatever the undertaking calls for, with faith from the people and support from leaders of the community like you and with God’s grace, we in the Administration are grimly resolved not only to give out the best in us but, if necessary, to give all of ourselves in order that our people might enjoy the good life that is the rightful heritage of all mankind.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.