Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On the 66th Anniversary of the Philippine Army

THE PHILIPPINE ARMY

I CONGRATULATE you once again as you mark another important milestone in the history of your organization. It always gives me extreme pleasure to attend the affairs of our armed forces. Indeed, I have been accused by our superficial critics of being overly solicitous of our armed forces. To these critics I say that we cannot be overly solicitous of our armed forces because while these critics serve their country only with words our soldiers serve their country with their lives, their sacrifice and their blood, and therefore to give attention to the armed forces is only to pay due homage to those who truly serve and build our country.

When I addressed you on this same spot last year—only a few days after assuming office as your Commander-in-Chief—you were then celebrating the 26th Anniversary of the Philippine Army. Today, you have reckoned your celebration as the 66th Organization Day of the Philippine Army. The change in the date of Army Day is realistic and appropriate. For this, you deserve the congratulations of our people and the esteem of your counterparts throughout the world. In effecting this significant change, you have deservedly and properly recognized and established your link with the military organization of the First Philippine Republic. You have justifiably traced your organization to the first nationally organized army during the revolution against a world colonial power in which was born the glorious tradition of the Philippine Army that in the defense of country, what is important is not the superiority of arms but the superiority of the fighting spirit which prefers to fight and if necessary die for liberty rather than live in slavery.

The change in the celebration of the foundation day of our Army from January 11 to March 22 gives due recognition to the heroic exploits of the Philippine Army under the over-all command of a military leader whose courage, fortitude, statesmanship and endurance have provided a glorious legacy and great inspiration to the Filipino soldier and have earned for him a place of heroism in our history next only to Dr. Jose Rizal and General Emilio Aguinaldo. The change is a fitting tribute by a grateful people to the father of the Republic of the Philippines, President Aguinaldo, who today in humility and sickness observes his ninety-fourth birthday anniversary in the Veterans Memorial Hospital, still firm and determined to live and witness our people enjoy the blessings of democracy in the atmosphere of plenty and prosperity to which the major efforts of our Administration are directed.

We wish to recall on this occasion that as soon as we assumed the challenging and exalted position of President, we intimated to our close associates that we desired to correct certain inaccuracies in our historical attitude. The fact that we used to honor General Aguinaldo as the president of the First Philippine Republic was not consistent with the celebration of our Independence on July 4. To correct this historical inconsistency, we signed Proclamation No. 28 providing for the commemoration of our Independence Day on June 12 in recognition of the fact that the day of our independence was not when another country chose to recognize our emancipation but the day when our people themselves chose to proclaim before the world in words written in tears and blood that we were one nation entitled to the natural right to liberty and independence.

We are gratified that the Philippine Army authorities have acted in consonance with our view by moving the commemoration of Army Day from January 11 to March 22. The proclamation of Independence Day on June 12, 1898, which marked our people’s declaration and exercise of the right to self-determination and independence, was the fruit of the heroism of the triumphant Filipino Army which was conceived and organized pursuant to the Tejeros Convention on March 22, 1897 under the command of General Artemio Ricarte who became the Captain General or Chief of Staff of the Filipino Army.

It is fitting and realistic that we trace our independence and the establishment of our army during the revolution against Spain. It is a truth that invests our history as a nation with luster and glory that we were born to independent statehood in the throes of war and blood. We proclaimed our right to liberty amidst the drums of a libertarian war. The Filipino flag was pieced into a shape of beauty by patriotic Filipino women who joined their husbands and sons in meeting the dangers of military strife. The Philippine National Anthem was composed amidst the din and sound of rifle and cannon fire. It was in this setting of heroic conflict that the Philippine Army saw its birth as the liberator of our people from bondage. Our freedom and independence as a Nation were, therefore, not a gift from another country, no matter how benevolent, but it was a gift from the heroism of our soldiers and patriots and because our liberty was won with the blood of our soldiers and heroes, our soldiers, youth and all of our people shall be ready at all times to shed their last drop of blood to keep our precious boon of liberty.

Because of the valor and patriotism of your forebears, we have received the legacy of a great country which is rich in natural resources and richer in its heritage of heroism and ideals of freedom and justice. Our Republic is now achieving its respected personality among nations, expanding its role in international affairs and moving to its rightful destiny. In consonance with this growing responsibility, the Philippine Army must not only maintain its traditional efficiency but its capabilities. I renew my appeal to the Congress which is in current session to support the needs of the Philippine Army because by providing adequately for the needs and requirements of our army, we not only do honor to the glorious record carved by the Filipino army in the past in helping to give birth to our nation but we do our duty to insure the attainment of the glorious destiny which our nation faces in the years to come.

On this happy occasion, we are thrilled to reminisce over the glorious military tradition that is yours to uphold from our early history when Lapu-Lapu and his men fought to repel the invader. The quality of Filipino soldiery achieved international renown in the Second World War when, shoulder to shoulder with American servicemen, our soldiers withstood the onslaughts of an enemy superior not only in number but also in material support. You who fought in Bataan and Corregidor know poignantly the kind of combat that took place in those hallowed fields of battle. It was there where the Filipino soldier again proved his worth with service above and beyond the call of duty. His gallant stand in Bataan and Corregidor elicited a glowing tribute from no less than Sir Winston Churchill who declared in fitting homage that the Filipino soldier has no equal on the face of the earth.

We have noted with a sense of pride that your bravery and heroism have abided beyond the Second World War. The Battalion Combat Teams that fought as part of the United Nations Forces in Korea during the early fifties acquitted themselves creditably, thereby adding more glory to our military history. Their records are replete with awe-inspiring accounts of courage and gallantry in action on the part of many of our soldiers. Some of our BCTs which fought in Korea came home with flying colors. Some of them were recipients of the coveted presidential unit citations.

Let us also mention the exemplary devotion to duty and patriotism that you demonstrated recently within our own shores. If the Communist rebels are on the run today, it is mainly because you dealt them a smashing blow in the jungles of Sierra Madre, in the swamps of Candaba, in the foothills of Mount Arayat and in many other dissident strongholds. Banditry and other forms of dissidence in Mindanao and Sulu are negligible as a result of your intensive campaigns there not long ago. You have responded admirably whenever and wherever the free way of life has been threatened. Even in these times of peace our Army has been actively preparing for the fulfillment of its share of our military commitments to the United Nations, to the South-East Asia Treaty Organization, and to our friends and allies. You have contributed unselfishly not only to the national interest but also to the cause of other freedom-loving peoples.

In Fort Magsaysay, Nueva Ecija last February 23, we made reference to the fact that the major efforts of our Administration are geared toward the improvement of the living conditions and economic well-being of the common man. In this regard, we are elated to say that the Philippine Army, as a major command of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, is doing an excellent job in supporting our five-year socio-economic program while it continues to beef up its combat readiness and capability and thereby improve our national defense posture to the limits of the relatively meager budget which our economy can now afford.

While the achievements of the Philippine Army along its civic action activities, like rural development projects, construction of pre-fabricated school houses, rural resettlement programs, food production endeavors, assistance to victims of natural calamities and the like, afford us no small degree of satisfaction, a greater portion of the work remains undone. While you streamline your units, for combat proficiency in the event of a defensive war, we ask you, officers and men, to remain ready at all times as soldiers of peace and, as such, continue to be looked up as the important cogs that you all are in the wheel that rolls incessantly for the building of a more prosperous Philippines. A more aggresive participation by Army personnel in the socio-economic program of the Administration is in itself an effective weapon against the forces of Communism.

Officers and men of the Philippine Army, your Organization Day is more than just an occasion for rejoicing or for the parade and demonstrations that we have witnessed here this afternoon. It is an occasion that should serve a more important purpose—that of focusing your attention once again not only on your sworn duty as men in uniform but also on your responsibility as citizens in a free society. The Philippine Army is known the world over as a truly fighting army. Our heroes who had carved the good name of Filipino soldiery, died with the firm belief that you, who have come after them will hold high the lofty ideals they fought for in the name of our country. This is an opportune day of the year for you to take stock of yourselves and undertake a constructive reappraisal of the manner in which you discharged your duties and responsibilities during the preceding year. Now is also the time for you to rededicate yourselves to the military service, to the service of God and country as well as to the common cause of the Free World.

As your Commander-in-Chief, I urge each and every member of the Philippine Army to face the coming year with a firm resolve to maintain at all times the lofty ideals and high standards of service that have earned for your organization a respectable position among other armies not only in Asia but also in other parts of the world. Let the people in all climes conclude that the Philippine Army is the equal in valor and quality to the best Army in the world.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.