Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Labor-Management Congress

[Delivered on May 2, 1963]

LABOR-MANAGEMENT HARMONY

I WELCOME this opportunity to address your current Congress. We meet at a propitious time. Together we can discuss the public role which my socio-economic program has assigned to the private forces which you represent.

Labor and Management constitute the manpower of an economy. In a totalitarian system, they are the mere tools of the State. But in a free society, such as ours, they are the prime movers of production, the directing and implementing forces of economic growth. The power that you represent is a private power because it remains, as it should, outside the purview of public control. Together you are engaged in the task of production, the most strategic phase of economic activity. Without your mutual cooperation, production shall be at a standstill.

But I address you today, not to remind you of your accepted private importance, but to stress upon you the magnitude of your public responsibility. This responsibility stems from one of the basic changes introduced into the Philippine economic situation by my Administration, when I instituted decontrol and returned to private enterprise, of which Labor and Management are an integral part, the initiative of industry.

You will agree with me when I say that industrial enterprises are the principal sources of production and employment. Whoever controls the industrial process controls the principal source of production and employment. During the period of controls, the industrial process was at the mercy of government. You recall as much as I do, for those days are not really too long ago, that the question of whether a new industry shall be established, or whether an already established industry shall expand or contract, was not in the power of private enterprise, of labor and management, to decide. That power was lodged in the whims and fancies, sometimes exercised with intelligence but more often than not, of a handful of men and women who were the appointed dispensers of an inherently discriminatory quota system.

You recall that during that period, no industry of significance could come to being unless blessed initially by a certificate of allocation. And I am sure you likewise recall, although some of you may choose to forget, the price in stifled conscience, in social and moral decency, and even physical dignity, that had to be paid for a license that became a marketable commodity.

During the period, influence peddling assumed the stature of a profession, and influence peddlers, strutting in new-found importance, dipped their hands into the coffers of corporate treasuries and thrusted themselves into the sanctum of management, freely and proudly. For they were also important determinants of production. What they whispered to people they knew, and to people that counted, affected the livelihood of men and women who worked the plants and factories, and shaped the destiny of our entire industrial machinery.

Labor and Management, whose normal, natural function is to produce, and who should therefore exercise primary control over the process of production, were relegated to a secondary role. It could not be otherwise when with one sweeping denial of a quota application, the public dispensers could close an existing plant or deny life to an economic enterprise.

That is why I abolished the quota system, instituted decontrol and restored the economy to free enterprise. I cleared the stultifying atmosphere that hovered in the uncleared desks and pretentious offices of the quota dispensers. Long before I assumed the Presidency I had made up my mind that the future of Philippine industrialization should not be allowed to continue resting upon such an unhealthy foundation. I had made up my mind even then that responsibility for increasing the productivity of the economy must rest primarily upon the shoulders of Labor and Management. For production is your natural function.

Those who would criticize my economic program by alleging that it is a vehicle for imposing government dominance over business would do well to remember the basic situation that existed before I assumed office. If we seek government dominance over business, we surely would not have renounced exchange control which was the source of tremendous economic and political power. By instituting decontrol, we showed that we do not seek government dominance over business, that contrary to the sophisticated calumny against us we have no dictatorial tendencies because we look at power not for its sake but in its relation to the public good, and that we were, and will always be ready to give up economic and political power that is in our hands whenever doing so is required by the welfare of the people.

Today, Labor and Management convene in a free atmosphere.

I hope, however, that you assemble here today conscious of a new dimension in your relationship. In restoring to you unconditional control over the productive capacity of the nation, my program assigned to the private forces that you represent, a public responsibility.

To increase production has become to our people a matter of national necessity. I say this in all urgency for our economic circumstance has maneuvered us into a desperate race against time. A population expanding at an explosive rate has to be fed and clothed and sheltered, furnished with the decencies of life and lifted from a poverty that degrades the body and the mind. To do this, our economy must produce more and at an increasing rate sufficient to outpace the massive march of frightening statistics.

My Administration has elected free enterprise as the mechanism with which to cut through the maze of tangled obstructions that stood in our way to increase productivity. I removed primary control over the industrial process away from the hands of bureaucrats and politicians and lodged it in your hands because I am firmly convinced that the economic progress of the nation should be the principal responsibility not of the government but of Labor and Management. The role of government in this urgent task is to assist private enterprise, not to supplant it. The role of government under my socio-economic program is to furnish private industry with the facilities which would spur them on to renewed and expanding activity. As my program states:

“The provision of growing sources of livelihood for the Filipino nation is today’s most urgent problem. To this the government’s prime efforts must be bent. The ambitions of any party or person must be submerged in a total dedication to this overriding task . The machinery of government must be transformed from one designed to ensure the continuance in power of any person or party or to serve the selfish interest of public officials into an effective machine for satisfying the nation’s aspirations for a rising standard of living.

“The task of economic development belongs principally to private enterprise and not to government. The government was not established to go into business. The government can never become a good businessman because of the interference of political factors and because those running the business have no genuine concern for the success of the venture.”

This then is the magnitude of your responsibility. Increased production, under my Administration, is a declared national objective. It is the “overriding task” to which “the ambitions of any party or person must be submerged in total dedication.”

But I charge private enterprise, of which Labor and Management are the moving spirits, with the primary responsibility of undertaking this overriding task under my Administration, for I yield to the realism of the view that “government can never become a good businessman because of the interference of political factors and because those running the business have no genuine concern for the success of the venture.”

I never fail to shudder everytime I look back to the days of my predecessors-in-administration and recall that period of our history when critical decisions affecting industry, and therefore, production and employment, were made by a privileged few who administered the quota system. Most of them would never have qualified as junior executives in a going enterprise, and yet during their heyday they decided what industry shall live, what industry shall die, and what industry shall languish between life and death. It is known that many of those fateful decisions were made over a cup of coffee which brewed the deals of the ten percenters.

Labor and Management represent the most precious capital resource of a country. Your skill, your decisions, your boldness, energy and capacity are what can truly transform the full potential of our economy into a reality of abundance.

That is why I thought it only fitting that the forces you represent should be restored to the ultimate power of decision usurped for twelve long years by the quota masters.

But the power that you now hold represents a public responsibility which you are constrained by the urgency of our times to discharge efficiently and which you can discharge efficiently only by working harmoniously. Institutions and their causes are generally controversial. Labor in itself is controversial arrayed against management. Management is in itself controversial arrayed against labor. But labor and management genuinely together present no controversy and bring forth only the harmony that is as blissful as the harmony between man and wife for the family well-being. This reason, in the faith that labor-management harmony can only bring forth our economic well-being, my Administration supports in advance of the aspirations of your Congress and will give whole-hearted assistance on the resolutions that you will agree upon in this Congress.

The institution of private enterprise shall be judged by your mutual efforts and actuations. You cannot afford to fail our people in their great expectation. If I may use a parlance of industry, you must produce results. The country cannot afford the possible consequences of your failure to meet our national objective.

Should the system that we have elected, the system of private enterprise, default in its obligations to meet the pressing economic, elemental demands of an expanding population, we face penalizing alternatives that can sweep away the foundations and structure of our society. In that structure, Labor and Management have a direct, immediate stake. For it is that structure that has given Labor its Great Charter, institutionalized the process of collective bargaining, and vested Labor with collective strength while preserving for the individual the precious right of choice to move from one employment to another. It is the structure that has given to Management all the incidents and benefit of the profit motive. It is the structure that makes possible the rise of an employee to the executive suite of his company. It is the structure that made possible the ascent of a peasant’s son from the very bottom of our society to the presidency of the land.

Fail in your undertaking, in the public responsibility with which my Administration has charged you, and you fail the system that makes men free.

It is in this light, in the light of a paramount national, compelling mission, that you must tackle in the few days ahead of you the numerous problems which this Labor-Management Congress has placed in its agenda for discussion and resolution.

More and more your respective rights to disagree with each other’s terms will have to accommodate the great urgency of the nation’s overriding economic target. Only by working together in a spirit of total dedication can you maximize the fruits of your joint exertion. It is imperative that in this Congress you arrive at effective solutions to your problems because friction between Labor and Management necessarily arrests their respective, as well as collective, efficiencies.

Hence you must not only define precisely and accurately the areas of friction, but you must devise ways and means to anticipate such friction in order to meet them with an effectiveness that is borne by foresight. You must contrive procedures designed to substantially shorten the process of arriving at common agreements, and minimize the possibilities of strikes that hamper production.

You must reexamine the character of your leadership and test the same against the criteria of social consciousness and the demands of your public responsibilities. You must learn to think beyond the traditional frame of reference that hitherto has dictated your actions in the bargaining table.

Labor and Management must learn to think greatly, for theirs is a magnificent function, a function that provides the food, the clothing, the shelter and the material decencies of an entire population. How you discharge that function will shape the answer to the crucial question of our times: whether it is poverty that will rule this land of potential abundance or whether it will be the satisfaction and contentment of a proliferated wealth.

My Administration is pledged to a program of extensive assistance to private industry. That means that Labor and Management shall be given every inducement to broaden the area of their mutual understanding. While government, under my Administration, shall leave to private business the principal task of increasing the nation’s productivity, government will do all in its power to provide the facilities that would induce private enterprise to extend the limited boundaries of our industrialization and, therefore, increase employment and production. Private enterprise cannot, by itself, undertake the construction of roads and public highways. It is the duty of the government to do so. But in the construction of these roads and highways, in the implementation of an extensive public works program, I do not refer to constructions of haphazard manner, undertaken for purely political considerations, which a past administration was habitually inclined to do as a matter of policy.

When I say that my Administration will build roads and highways, I mean roads and highways planned under a carefully thought scheme of economic priorities, designed to stimulate trade and industry, and programmed for an economic function. They shall be constructed where their economic benefits shall be most felt, and not where political expediency demands it. They shall not be constructed simply to please the ego of an aspiring politician and to raise him before the eyes of his constituents.

I cite public works as an example of the task of assistance to which my Administration is committed. For under my program what is conceived is not assistance in the sense of government intervention in business. What is conceived is assistance in the sense of removing fundamental bottlenecks which impede, discourage and render difficult the expansion of private industry. Lack of adequate roads is but one example of the numerous impediments in our economy.

Lack of skilled manpower is another fundamental obstruction to efficient and increased production. Hence, my Administration shall invest in the reform and improvement of our educational skills to meet the specialized challenge of industrialization.

The agricultural system shall be transformed to create a class of free and independent farmers, proud in their ownership of land and stimulated to increase the productivity of the same because it has come to be their own. A free and independent farmer is likely to create a more effective demand for the products of industry than one whose life is bereft of any meaning and dignity because it is chained to a poverty which he cannot possibly overcome under conditions imposed by an oppressive system of tenancy.

Tenancy must go. It has gone in nations that only recently knew despotism like Japan, Taiwan and Persia. It has no reason to be in a land like ours that prides in the worship of freedom. It chokes the breath of progress. It stultifies the productivity of the farm; it keeps capital idle in land that should go into industry; it deadens the tiller of the soil with the stupor of human degradation and hopelessness from aspiring to a more fruitful activity. I have felt the lash of this social injustice and sense of futility because I am a tenant’s son. Knowing generally the economic, social and moral evil in tenancy, I am resolved that before I step down the presidency, this evil must be destroyed so that with this new sense of freedom and dignity, the tiller of the soil shall enrich his life and enrich the life of the nation.

If my socio-economic program entails the raising of considerable revenue, this should not cause you alarm. It should rather prompt you to reexamine the program of the past and to ask yourselves where and how were previous appropriations applied as to have resulted in the massive backlog of social overheads which my Administration now has to meet.

The fact is that, in the past, public funds that should have been utilized to better the community were dissipated to support the massive graft and corruption of those who would now pose as official critics of my Administration.

The graft and corruption of the past misdirected and misallocated valuable resources that could have been applied to the very projects which I am now constrained to undertake. Had there been a semblance of intelligent and integrated planning of public works during previous administrations, you and I would be considerably relieved of the necessity, the urgent, compelling necessity, of starting, as it were, anew.

Government, just as much as business management, is a continuing affair. The corporate problems created by the inefficiencies and mismanagement of a previous board of directors will carry over and compound the problems of a new and succeeding board.

I am constrained to remind you of the past, because it is the voice of the past that is vociferous in denouncing the budget that I have presented to Congress. It is the past who, having raided the national treasury with promiscuous ruthlessness, would now hamper my Administration from properly undertaking what should have been undertaken long before I was elected to office.

There is nothing inherently wrong with public expenditure. It is only when public expenditure is misdirected to corrupt, private and uneconomic use that it becomes vicious and a public crime. But public expenditure channeled to provide the social services and basic utilities which the private community cannot afford to furnish, such as public hospitals, housing projects, ports, harbors, air terminals, roads, schoolbuildings, highways, irrigation projects and the like, constitute a public investment in the general welfare. The results of these public investments may not be as tangible as a corporate dividend or a pay envelope, but they are of immeasurable value nonetheless and provide depth to the market of private enterprise because they inject purchasing power into the general community. Just consider for a moment the implications of a sudden halt to public spending for social services and basic facilities. The result would be certain chaos where private enterprise cannot possibly thrive.

The test of a public expenditure program is not its magnitude but its application. Properly implemented, such a program, particularly in an underdeveloped economy like the Philippines, should stimulate, rather than depress, the energies of private business.

Only the short-sighted, poor in spirit, the timid, the unconstructive cynic, will deny to government the role that my Administration has assigned to it in my socio-economic program. It is the only role that I can conceive.

I close with the earnest hope that this Congress of Labor and Management, representing the creative genius and the driving force of a private enterprise economy, will instill a new dedication in the bloodstream of our industrial machinery. It is a dedication that should come with the appreciation of the public responsibility which the entire nation, under my Administration, have vested in Labor and Management. It is a responsibility worthy of your collective energies and the genius of the power you represent, the power of production.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.