Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On the Philippine Air Force Day

THE PHILIPPINE AIR FORCE

I APPEAR before you today on this the celebration of the 27th Anniversary of the Philippine Air Force, in three capacities: first, as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; second, as President of our young Republic; and third, as a fellow citizen.

I have followed with great interest the progress made by the Philippine Air Force. Our Air Force of today is a far cry from the small section of the Philippine Constabulary that it was 27 years ago. Because of the foresight, ambition, and devotion to duty of that handful of pioneers that started the Air Force in 1935, nurtured by the skills and valor of your comrades and yourselves during World War II, the Philippine Air Force has now reached the stage of rapid development in keeping pace with the accelerated progress in science and technology. I am happy to note that under the able management of its Commander and his staff, the Air Force has its modernization program well under way. It is a credit to all of you that our fighter units flying modern jet aircraft and our aircraft control and warning radar sites are now combat-ready.

Noncombat missions of the Philippine Air Force have been well accomplished. Fresh in our minds is the calamity that struck our countrymen recently in Eastern Mindanao.* I note with satisfaction the great help extended by the Air Force in the speedy distribution of medicines and relief goods. Almost daily, I know of patients being airlifted to Manila from different parts of the country.

Neither spectacular nor publicized, yet important contributions to our economic development, are the missions performed by the Air Force in coordination with other branches of the Government. The Philippine Air Force has been working with appropriate government agencies in the Photogrammetry Project, in industrial survey and planning, in irrigations, in reforestation, and in plant pest and disease control.

I am glad that your Commanding General, General Pedro Molina, has started an air education program, aimed such that the potentials of air transportation may be availed of to integrate many dispersed and remote areas into our country. I do not mind disclosing (although before I already had esteem for General Molina) that after knowing more of him my esteem has developed into admiration and a liking for him as a person and a respect for his leadership as a military officer. Because of this and because of my high assessment of the role of the Air Force in the defense and development of our country, you can be sure that although our Air Force is already a fine one, yet with me as your Commander-in-Chief, my Administration will give full support to the Philippine Air Force to become an even finer organization than ever before.

While I am interested in the Air Force as a whole, I must confess that I have special concern for the enlisted men in the Air Force. I wish to mention, therefore, that it has given me joy to be able to provide in the national budget which I have submitted to Congress an increase of pay for the enlisted men, and in addition, I and General Molina have agreed on plans to provide better housing facilities for the enlisted men and their families.

The primary mission of the Philippine Air Force is to provide air defense for our country. Under present conditions where weapons systems are either being developed or are obsolescent, it would take enormous sums of money to even approach the state of weaponry of many other countries in the world. However, this should not detract from our responsibilities to our people, to our friends, and to those that follow us. We have to maintain an efficient and respectable, although compact, Philippine Air Force, with sufficient military posture to be able, if need be, to defend our country, and also to be a capable partner to fulfill our commitments to our many allies in this part of the globe. May I assure our allies, the representatives of some of whom are present, that if and when the call of freedom is sounded, pilots of the Philippine Air Force will be in the air to fight with the nations of the free world in defense of liberty, human dignity and the free way of life that we all cherish.

At this point, I would like to extend my appreciation to the United States Government for the assistance rendered in the development of our Air Force. The present state of modernization of the Philippine Air Force would not have been achieved were it not for the $78 million worth of aircraft, electronic and other valuable equipment, supplies, and training of personnel received by it from the United States. As weapons systems become even more sophisticated and expensive, further expansion and modernization of our air arm would well depend upon additional assistance from our allies and friends.

Because active air defense is its primary role, the Philippine Air Force has to be continuously on its toes—keeping its personnel proficient and maintaining the weapons and support systems in shape. However, other commands of the Armed Forces, the civilian component of the Government, and the population as a whole, have roles to play in air defense. The Philippine Air Force can help these elements perform their passive air defense functions by actively assisting in their training, and by passing on information to our people so that all our efforts may be integrated in the event our sacred skies are transgressed.

Our country is today faced with many serious and pressing problems. Even as you of the Philippine Air Force keep yourselves in fighting trim and render the other socio-economic functions you have been performing, there are still other fields in which you could contribute towards the solution of some of our country’s problems. Since air power includes everything in aviation, the development of civil aviation in our country may parallel that of the Philippine Air Force. I feel that the Philippine Air Force as the military air arm of the country should take a more active part in the development of civil aviation. Because of the very nature of our geography, air transportation, among all modes, appears the most charged with the probability of effecting far-reaching changes in our cultural and economic life. The numerous mountain ranges and seas that separate our provinces have long posed grave problems of transportation. These same natural barriers to free movement of persons and property tend to hamper the socio-economic progress of our country. The government is embarking into an ambitious airport and airways development program, but you must realize that our coffers are not unlimited. There are other ways in which civil aviation could be promoted.

You of the Philippine Air Force have the technical skills, you are familiar with the inherent advantages of air transportation, and you travel to different parts of the country in the accomplishment of your different missions. You can assist by actively encouraging the patronage of airplanes for transportation, thereby bringing about an increased demand for air travel, thus making it attractive enough for more investors to organize airline companies, and complete the cycle by bringing down costs and therefore rates to enable the mass of our people to afford air transportation. In this manner, the contribution to the economic development of our country will be tremendous because not only will an air transport industry to be developed, but the inherent benefits of the airplane shall reach each and every part of our country and the majority of our masses could afford to travel by air for reasons of pleasures, convenience, economic advantage, or necessity.

The Philippine Air Force has made magnificent progress during the past 27 years. The future demands an even faster rate of development. You, as the first line of defense of our country, have a unique responsibility to our countrymen. I shall continue to support your efforts as I have done in the past. However, do not expect everything handed to you on a silver platter. You shall have to work even harder; in these difficult times, you shall have to do without some of the things you need. I know that you shall meet the challenges without flinching, knowing that the material rewards shall be meager. Rest assured, however, that as you accomplish your different missions, you shall have the undying gratitude of your country and your people.

Again, I salute the officers and men of the Philippine Air Force. Our Air Force has a glorious if brief record of dedication to country. The exploits of its combat airmen under appallingly adverse circumstances compare with the saga of valor displayed by air heroes in other lands. As I see our pilots in their planes rise in majesty through our skies, I thrill to the thought that you symbolize the dream of our people for a better life. In the same manner that our airmen in their missions rise higher and higher into the infinite skies, let us all at this critical time of our history labor together so that our people too shall rise higher and higher in their level of livelihood to the end that all Filipinos shall enjoy a life of abundance in dignity and freedom.

* The President was referring to the flood that wrought heavy damage to property (estimated at more than P12 million).

Source : Presidential Museum and Library