Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the Graduation Exercises of the NBI National Academy

[Delivered on April 6, 1963]

A PATTERN FOR POLICE IMPROVEMENT

AT NO OTHER time in police history has the demands of strengthening its services been so great and pressing as now and in the immediate years ahead. This Administration is dedicated to the momentous task of retrieving the country from the economic and social stagnation of the past and of giving it new goals and new directions. Greater challenges will be encountered as this country emerges with the throes that come with advancement. The economic upheaval has brought about changes in our way of life, changes that are inevitable in the wake of progress, changes for a better life which demand sacrifice from all.

It has not only the duty of law enforcement to provide the essential background of peace and tranquility in the execution of our socio-economic plans but to gear all its preventive and repressive resources to meet the challenge of those who dare to violate the laws of the land in their inability to face the changes that must come or of those who take advantage of the changes brought about.

We must realize that social changes are fast taking place—the opening of vast road networks and easier means of transportation has facilitated mass movements and migration but this, too, has enhanced the mobility of crime. As we gain momentum toward industrialization, rapid urban and suburban population changes have increased blighting slum areas and created problems of dislocation and replacement. Even new and greater job opportunities and new inventions can disrupt family ties and encourage delinquency and criminality. With these changes come a multitude of laws and ordinances regulating human conduct, presenting additional direct administrative problems to the police.

All of these require understanding, a new approach and new procedures for the effective solution of these problems. It is, therefore, imperative that the present police agencies, particularly those dealing mainly with the common mass which represent the front line defenses of our communities, must be able to comprehend the present situational trends and to cope with the mounting tasks of law enforcement.

The municipal police problems today are as old as the institution of local government with the added problems that come from the harsh realities of present-day changes as we move swiftly into the realms of industrialization and socio-economic advancement. Progress toward the solution of these problems has not taken an appreciable stride as in the fields of health, education, medicine, and the rest of the professions. The reason commonly advanced for the stalemate has been customarily placed at the door of politics which is essentially valid and would have lent itself readily to popular conviction and control were it not that most often the police have allowed themselves to be with politics. The more the police keep out and resist politics, the less politics would be in the police.

On my part, I shall be ready to extend my assistance to any member of the NBI or the police who becomes a victim of injustice or of undue pressure by any politician.

In the five-year integrated socio-economic program, the police play a vital role in the prevention of economic losses through criminal activities, and in the rapid enhancement of our social and economic growth through the maintenance of peace and order. All the economic gains of the country would come to naught if the Republic’s coffers would be drained by the high costs in the administration of criminal justice and the maintenance of sub-standard police organizations. The Administration will endeavor to raise the standards of our law enforcement agencies not only to save the country from the destructive efforts of law violators but also to retrieve these misguided elements in order to channel them into the stream of economic participation and bring about an enlightened and useful citizenry.

It is the Administration’s policy to launch and implement the police improvement program at the grass roots level which is decidedly the weakest link in the country’s socio-economic program. The strengthening of our local police forces calls for a complete overhauling of our municipal police system, to release it from the antiquated provisions not up to the exacting demands of professional growth and of the new and broad concepts of public administration. Their welfare as the guardians of the public peace and our civil liberties has long been overdue and forgotten in our popular agitation for the protection of our own rights and privileges. Our criticisms of the police have served no positive purpose and have only heightened our disinclination to realize that this is the institution on which our own safety and welfare hinge.

The enforcement of the laws of the land is not so simple as enacting them, for the limitations of manpower, and material, the technicalities of law and procedure, and the human side of the enforcer and those against whom the law is enforced come into full play to create an emotional and legal impact on the dynamics of human relations.

The Administration proposes to lay the foundations on which to sponsor a more intensive and extensive state-financed training program so that the fundamentals and the refinements in the enforcement of the law must be observed at all times. The days when a policeman is hired and immediately armed, uniformed, and placed on the streets, leaving the community at the mercy of his inexperience and incompetence, has long been forfeit in the new dimensions of training, the key to the satisfactory accomplishment of the police purpose.

The complexities of modern society have produced constantly shifting patterns of human conduct and criminal behavior, thereby necessitating equally changing concepts, techniques, and law enforcement. Only through training in all its phases—pre-service, in-service, and specialized—can the police gear itself to such a peak of efficiency and effectiveness that it could properly perform its role as the guardian of the public welfare and security.

Training is a constructive leadership tool for eliminating weaknesses and waste in our governmental machinery. In its positive form, it is discipline. This is the best weapon the police can muster to combat public apathy and gain for itself favorable attitude, win respect and support. Discipline is the true distinctive mark of police service. From it springs the official courtesy that is demanded and should be manifested in your daily contacts with the public. The untrained and inefficient police organizations today still resort to third-degree methods and practice all sorts of abuses as an expedient to bring about the solution of a case or compel performance in obedience to the law by brute force. This conduct has let loose the sweeping tide of public criticism and indignation which the press and the radio have, on many occasions capitalized upon and dramatized, thereby throwing the whole perspective of correction and reconstruction out of focus. This slant has, inadvertently, sowed the seeds of distrust against the lawful exercise of authority among the law-abiding and awakened the people’s inherent concept of personal liberty against all forms of control, whether regulatory or merely directory, of human conduct and intended for the public weal.

Such a training program must perforce be centralized in one agency in order to achieve uniform standards in instruction, techniques, and procedures, where all the leading authorities in the police field can be committed so that the police can be the beneficiaries of combined knowledge of the best available talents.

It is gratifying to note that the National Bureau of Investigation has ably performed its mandated task of providing instruction and training, to a good number of our city and municipal policemen through its Academy in Manila and its regional ambulatory teams in the province. It has given the widest dissemination of police knowledge that its instructors have acquired from different police training institutions in the United States, England, Australia, Canada, Japan, France, and other countries of the world.

This Administration also recognizes the fact that whereas the police service is no place to amass materialistic gains, the policeman must receive a decent salary sufficient to enable him to look after the welfare of his family and education of his children; to enable him to sneer at temptations and cast them aside; to enable him to square his shoulders and hold his head higher; to enable him to discharge his job with dignity and pride; and to enable him to sacrifice his life on the altar of service with courage, secure in the thought that those he leaves, behind will be looked after.

Without impairing the rapid strides in local autonomy, the standards in the maintenance of an adequate and truly responsive police force must be supervised by a national police commission of qualified police experts, and national aid must be extended to cushion the expected stringent requirements and standards which legislation must impose.

The role of the National Bureau of Investigation as a service agency to local police forces in terms of training, records and identification, statistics, and laboratory facilities must be given wider latitude to compel local police organizations to avail themselves of these services to hasten their improvement. The Philippine Constabulary must remain as an operational aid to help local police forces cope with the sporadic rise in criminality at the request of local chief executives. The outlines for the relocation of these functions in the NBI and in the PC must find support in the national appropriations to avoid duplicity, to establish responsibility, and to effect true economy in the wise use of public funds.

Police service to be a profession is not all standards, but a reflection of the day-to-day image which you and your department create before the public. To inform instead of reprimand, to request instead of command, to persuade instead of to compel, to summon or cite instead of arrest, to liberate the human dignity from embarrassment and duress are wise policy decisions in observance of the civilities of public office.

Through the varied disciplines of police training, you are expected to rise above the level of this unfavorable climate. You are to treat criminality as a complex social illness which can be traced from man’s birth to death, and human dignity must not be violated. You should consider your position not as a source of power which will compel respect but one in the judicious exercise of which will earn respect; you should perform your duties with candor and zeal without wanting unnecessary fanfare, with complete impartiality to all without distinction as to social position, race, color or creed; and with that degree of pride, dignity, and courage, so inherent in the profession you have chosen. In this broad concept, we hope that you may render a more positive philosophy of public service. But you should never forget that more than training, manpower, money, and material, the climate for the proper growth of police service as a profession begins and ends with you and with no one else.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.