Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the Manila International Air Show

[Delivered on November 25, 1962]

FOUR-YEAR AVIATION DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

WE ARE gathered here today to witness the climaxing event in the national observance of the 15th Annual Aviation Week. The Manila International Air Show is now a tradition. This tradition should continue in future years with ever-mounting interest and pleasure on the part of our people.

What have we come to see today? Is it the thrilling stunts by intrepid pilots demonstrating to us the capabilities of modern aircraft? Is it the display of technical products and skill? Or is it because you want to get away from the drab routine of daily life and join in an absorbing aviation festival?

This aviation activity is more than just a show for our entertainment. This occasion is primarily intended to bring to us all an increased awareness of the role of the airplane in promoting a more abundant life for us and our countrymen. The aircraft on display in the Air Show, whether military or civilian, are tools designed to insure the continuance of life and the preservation of those elements that make life worth living. This is the main idea behind these aerial activities today. It is our hope that, with increased awareness of the role of aviation in the quest of mankind for a better life, we can summon the will to utilize it more effectively in extending its blessings to everyone.

[ FIGURE 1 – Flights of saber jets, the country’s first time line of defense, roar across Philippine skies.]

In the beginning, the aim of Aviation Week was to arouse as widespread interest in aviation as was possible among our people. We wanted our people to be air-minded, and from the momentum of that particular state of mind, to become air-faring, that is, to travel by air and take advantage of the benefits which aviation offers. This was the first phase of our government’s air promotion campaign. Before a decade had passed, since the first Presidential Proclamation of Aviation Week was made fifteen years ago, this first phase was attained. Today air travel is already a common mode of transportation. Today, there are four times more people in our country traveling by air than there were ten years ago; and three times more mail and cargo are being carried by air. This increase in the use of air transport by our people shows that our campaign to make them air-faring has been fruitful. This accomplishment must be sustained. There should be no relaxation in our effort to develop the air potential of our country. There should be no let-up in our effort to bring aviation closer to the masses.

Unlike the winning of a sports game, the attainment of an aviation goal is not characterized by completeness. The attainment of our air transportation goal is a continuing process of exercising unrelenting efforts to secure grounds gained and to improve continuously upon them. These gains must be firmly entrenched in the general program of the country, day by day, week by week, month by month, year by year. Aviation progress is a dynamic process. Inaction or procrastination not only definitely sets it back but adversely affects all segments of the nation’s economy, culture, and political stability.

Our archipelago is composed of over seven thousand islands. For the national progress, it is imperative that these islands and their inhabitants be connected by adequate and as fast transportation as possible. Road transportation cannot do this task; and water transportation is slow and inadequate. Meanwhile, world air transportation undergoes a revolutionary growth as men ventures successfully into outer space. In this situation, it is imperative for the Philippines to develop aviation if our country is not to lag far behind in a comparatively primitive state in transportation facilities. Believing in this, my Administration is ready to the limits of our financial resources to support the growth and modernization of aviation in our country.

It is for this reason that I have taken action toward the implementation of the 4-year program of airports and airways improvement formulated by the Civil Aeronautics Administration. We have included this air development plan, which was drawn up in cooperation with the experts of the Philippine Air Lines, the Philippine Air Force, and the other aviation entities in the country, as part and parcel of the socio-economic development program of my Administration. Under our Administration, aviation will be given a greater share in the annual outlay of the government for the maintenance and improvement of overall transportation facilities.

The topography of the Philippines demands the building of an aerial merchant marine, not only to complement our surface transportation—bus, railroad, and sea services—but also to meet the steadily-expanding requirements of air-borne commerce. Progress in commerce and trade depends upon fast transportation and communications. The 4-year aviation development program is geared to meet these requirements. Under this program, we shall see to it that the major airports are reconstructed and improved so that they can accommodate the operations of medium-range jet transports. We shall improve secondary airports in Luzon, the Visayas and Mindanao so that turbo-prop transports like the Fokker Friendship can land there. We shall spread good feeder airports all over the archipelago so that the small towns and communities can receive the blessings of aviation.

All these plans, which I fully endorse, require financial support. I call upon our people and Congress to extend all-out cooperation in the realization of this goal.

During all the years that we have been holding the Air Show, we have invited foreign contingents to participate in our Aviation Week although it is essentially a domestic afflair. This is because air transport is fundamentally international. While air transport has been linking more and more of our rural communities to progressive towns and cities in Luzon, the Visayas, and Mindanao, at the same time it has been instrumental in bringing our country closer to the principal centers of trade and commerce in the world. In these internal and external activities of domestic and international air transports, this country’s progress in culture, commerce, trade, and in other aspects of human endeavor has been considerably speeded up. This is the by-product of the operations of both domestic and international air transport. This mode of transportation is spearheading the overall development and progress of this nation and of all nations.

We must all appreciate the fact that the airplane is an international tool with unlimited potential for eliminating tribal and provincial attitudes and for fostering greater goodwill among people. Our part in the community of nations is becoming more and more important, particularly in the Far East. Whenever, therefore, we see an opportunity for bringing the people of various countries together, we do it, hoping that there will come forth among them greater understanding and liking for each other. Regardless of their nationality, creed, or social status, peoples are moved to admiration and friendliness by the skillful performer of an extraordinary undertaking. We see these extraordinary performers from abroad in our midst now, doing aerial feats in our Air Show or contributing various technical skills and scientific knowledge to this occasion. They do not only enchant and thrill us by their performance; they also evoke in us an admiration for their personal achievement and for the country they represent. It is in this spirit that we welcome and appreciate the participation of our friends from other countries. It is upon this spirit that we seek to build closer relations with other nations.

In this spirit, I now declare the Air Show officially open, expressing to our friends from other countries words of greetings and goodwill and to our countrymen my fervent best wishes for a happy celebration and a happy future for aviation in our country.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.