Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines During the Graduation of Trainees

[Delivered at Fort Magsaysay, February 23, 1963]

The Military Trainee

I WISH to congratulate you, trainee graduates, for having successfully completed a rigid and intensive military training course. Likewise, I congratulate your parents who have endured the hardships imposed by your absence from home in order to see you fulfill your obligations as upstanding Filipino citizens. I wish also to express my appreciation to the Governors and Mayors of the provinces and communities where you came from for their contribution to the efficient administration of trainee selection in coordination with the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

To the officers and men of the Armed Forces, I give my congratulations for this continued effort to discharge that paramount responsibility to defend our land from its enemies from within and from without and to support the Nation’s policies abroad. Our people expect nothing less than the effective accomplishment of this mission. To General Ernesto Mata and the personnel of the First Infantry (TABAK) Division, I offer my congratulations for keeping this unit, a major command of our Armed Forces in a high state of efficiency and combat readiness.

Twenty-two years ago before any of you were born, our country was thrown into a world-wide conflict in which, but for the courageous stand of free men, the forces of tyranny almost triumphed. The gallant resistance of the Filipino soldiers in that conflict, under the most adverse conditions and in the face of a better armed enemy, earned the respect of the free world for our people. The great bulk of those soldiers who bore the brunt of battle within our shores were reservists like you who had been trainees. They were the product of the implementation of the National Defense Act which is the basic law for the procurement and training of our manpower for the armed forces.

Today on the occasion of the end of your training as citizen soldiers, you have followed in the footsteps of those heroes of that war. You are now members of the. Reserve Force of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and for this I congratulate you and bid you Godspeed. Looking at your young and eager faces I feel a surge of pride and exhilarating assurance that if and when the time comes, you will heed the call to duty and live up to the glorious tradition of those who before you performed feats of valor and heroism in the fields of battle that we may today live in freedom.

I have a younger brother who was a trainee like you at the outbreak of World War II. Together with the other trainees, he was put in active duty as a private and sent to Bataan. He managed to survive the Death March. Now, he is living a modest life as a humble, government employee. Although he leads a humble life, he is respected by the community because he is a former trainee and veteran. I myself esteem him highly not merely out of love for a brother but because of his being a former trainee and veteran. Although in some ways I may be above him, including the fact that I am the president of our country, I feel that in one way, he is superior to me—in that he bears the high honor of being a former military trainee belonging to the elite, group of noble citizens, the trainees, who are ready at all times to consecrate themselves and even to give up life, if need be, for our country.

In a land of liberty like ours, the trainee is the bulwark for the defense and preservation of our freedom. In the possession of this responsibility and honor, you are the heir to the legacy of courage and patriotism from our heroes who offered their sacrifices and their lives in order that we shall be a nation of free men.

The trainee is the heir to the heroism of Lapu-Lapu who fought to oppose the subjugation of his people by a foreign invader whom he killed in combat. You are heir to the patriotism of countless Filipino leaders from all regions of our land who for over three hundred years revolted incessantly and even in futility against the oppressive might of the foreign master. You are heir to the valor of Andres Bonifacio who, despite the lack of arms, dared to challenge a world imperial power for the emancipation of his people. You are heir to the sublime selflessness of Gregorio del Pilar who, knowing that he was facing overwhelming odds, held his ground because the death of some was needed for the victory of the cause. You are heir to the qualities of Emilio Aguinaldo and Antonio Luna and to the tenacity of Miguel Malvar. You are heir to the gallant men in Bataan and the Death March and to our heroic underground fighters whose blood and tears made it possible to restore the freedom of our land from enemy occupation. You have a rich inheritance of courage, heroism and patriotism from those who have gone before you in the defense of our Nation.

With your training, you are now better prepared to assume your role in your respective communities and to contribute your share in the national effort to promote the prosperity of our countrymen.

The main efforts of our Administration are geared toward the improvement of the living conditions and economic well-being of the common man. We are increasing the tempo of our economic development so that our people can enjoy a better life out of the fruits of our rich and beautiful land. All our energies are directed towards this goal—to uplift the common man from his misery and poverty so that this land shall not be the monopoly of a privileged few but a country that spread the blessings of a good life to all the people.

We must have the ability and willingness to sacrifice in this task of nation-building. Unless we take positive steps to improve our economic development, we can never hope to provide for a strong national defense. With an eye to this end, the main effort of our Administration is geared towards the economic well-being of the common man through the vigorous implementation of a socio-economic program.

It is gratifying to observe that the Armed Forces is contributing its share to this national undertaking. The new settlements and agricultural areas opened with its assistance, the feeder roads constructed by its engineers, the vocational-technical activities promoted by its leaders and the helping hand it extends to the people in times of calamities are but a few examples of what it is doing by way of contributing to our mission of providing, a better life for our people.

While providing our youth with the required military training, we also teach them various trades and vocation among others, farming, animal husbandry, operation and repair of tractors and heavy equipment. The military training of our youth help attain some of our goals, namely: the eradication of corruption and delinquency since military training infuses in the youth a greater sense of discipline, patriotism and civic-mindedness; the creation of conditions that will provide increased incentives to our people to pioneer in new fields of endeavor; and the encouragement of our youth to meet the challenge of the time—to become morally upright, mentally alert and physically strong. We are confident that are our trainees become conscious of their responsibilities as citizens of our Republic, they can be expected to turn their energies to activities that would contribute to national progress.

Today, as an independent and sovereign nation, our country is faced with even greater obligations in the development of her defense forces not only for internal security but also for the fulfillment of her international responsibilities.

You have inherited a land of freedom fit for a noble destiny in the annals of mankind. It is your responsibility and honor to consecrate yourselves to the cause of making your country achieve its destiny and become the home of prosperous and happy people. Your Government has embarked on a program of rapid economic and social progress that will provide one of the highest levels of living for our people in our region of the world. With national solidarity and dedicated leadership, this endeavor, although difficult, is within reach of accomplishment because with our population now less than 30 million, God has blessed us with land, resources and national wealth that, properly organized, can provide a prosperous life to even 100 million inhabitants.

With its vast economic and material potentiality and its invigorating spiritual heritage of freedom and heroism from its forebears, the Filipino people after four hundred years of bondage and repression are now achieving their rightful personality among nations and playing an expanding role in international affairs. After many centuries of anonymity and ineffectually, it is unmistakable that the Philippines is moving .perceptibly and inexorably towards its just destiny in this part of the world.

It is significant, in this connection, that our national budget provides for national defense expenditure second only to that for the education of our people. This defense expenditure is necessary not only because the success of other governmental functions depends on the maintenance of peace and order but also because we must accelerate the military training of our youth pursuant to the National Defense Act in order to amply prepare them physically and mentally to discharge their duties as citizens now and in the future.

Upon assumption of office, it was with dismay that I found that the Philippine Army is today training only 4,500 trainees annually. In the face of the massive communist offensive to dominate the countries of the world, and of the growing responsibilities of our Nation, this build-up on our part is so pitifully inadequate that I shall be remiss in my duties if I do not urge the speedy provision of adequate trained manpower for our national defense. I call upon Congress now in current session to discharge their share of our common responsibility in remedying this perilous deficiency for the security and future of this Republic.

The defense of the state is a prime duty of our government and in the fulfillment of this duty, all citizens must be required to render personal military or civil service. These are the mandates of our Constitution. Pursuant to these mandates, our National Defense Act requires the training and maintenance of a trained reserve that is ready to respond to the call of the colors, when necessary. This is a duty that we must keep in mind and implemented at all times.

Meanwhile we in the Administration have endeavored to strengthen the morale, efficiency and capability of our armed forces. We enforced the law in the armed forces without favoritism and discrimination. We respected seniority and merit in the appointment and promotion of officers and increased their pay.

Above all, we attended to the well-being of the enlisted men. One of my first acts as President and your Commander-in-Chief which gave me a feeling of intense joy was to increase substantially the pay of our enlisted men. We have also embarked on a program to provide better living quarters for the enlisted men and their families. We have given special attention to the enlisted men because we believe that the common soldier is the core of strength of the armed forces and that in life to the common man of our country through the economic and social policies of the Administration, we must also give the same manner that we give primacy to providing a better preferential attention to the needs, problems and well-being of the enlisted men. Our policy in this regard has been rewarding as shown by the fact that soldiers who retired from the organization in previous years have been re-enlisting because of the importance, service and attention that the present Administration has given to the interest and welfare of the members of the armed forces.

To enable our people to meet the challenge of their destiny among nations, we must continually maintain the endeavor already started of building our country’s material strength and conditioning our manpower to shoulder the responsibilities of the future. To do this, we rely on the youth. We rely on you. Gratified by your performance in the training that you have just undergone, we are grateful to Divine Providence for the feeling that the Filipino youth shall be equal to the noble heritage of our people in the past and will be more than equal to meet the severe challenge of an even more glorious future for the Filipino race.

In time, your mission is not ended with the completion of your training. Your responsibility has just begun. Your obligation now is how to put to good use the training that you have acquired during the few months that you have been subjected to the rigorous schedule of military life and adapt them to the civilian efforts so that the power in your hands, gained through the knowledge and insight of discipline and military organization, may be multiplied a thousand fold to maximize and fully accelerate our march toward economic, social and spiritual progress. Thus, you will be contributing to the development of a people that looks forward to the service of mankind, to the strengthening in word and in deed of the cause of freedom for which your predecessors have fought and died and to the building of a strong and glorious Nation. May God bless you and may He bless our great country.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.