Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Convention of Government Auditors

[Delivered in Baguio City, April 3, 1963]

FAITH IN THE GENERAL AUDITING OFFICE

WE FEEL happy to be with you here today not only because we know we are with friends and comrades in the great and continuing moral crusade of this Administration, but also because your convention centers on a theme which is very close to our heart—the Five-Year Socio-Economic Program. Upon assuming leadership, we launched this Program as a concrete and sincere program of government by which our people can judge our actions in their paramount interest during these crucial years of national growth.

In a democratic society such as ours, a government program can not succeed without the support of the sovereign people whom we serve. We are, therefore, extremely pleased to know that you who are in a very decisive position to help promote the great goals of moral regeneration and vigorous economic growth under this Administration are exerting your utmost to give such help. May your deliberations in this convention bring forth the new light of guidance you seek in the performance of your work in relation to the over-all socioeconomic improvement program for the people. But regardless of the tangible outcome of your efforts in this convention, we would like to commend you beforehand for your responsiveness to the challenge of public service for national development and improvement.

We have complete faith in the high importance of your function in the scheme of government as laid down in our Constitution. And we have faith that so long as your vital constitutional function continues, so long shall the cause of good government in this country be served and safeguarded.

The proud tradition of the audit function through the ages makes it one of the most highly respected institutions of balance and checks in democratic governments. It takes roots in the great tradition of legislative supremacy over public funds, born out of the victorious struggle of ancient popular parliaments to hold down royal proclivities. Thus has evolved through the long and painful years of growth of democratic governments the zealously guarded axiom that expenditure of public funds must be made strictly in accordance with legislative authorization and should be checked by an independent auditing agency.

We are well aware of the proud tradition of independence built up by the auditing office in this country since some 60 years ago. Even at the earliest stage of its organization, the compelling necessity to make the auditor independent to enable him to discharge his tremendous responsibilities fearlessly and impartially was already felt and recognized. As far back as 1912, the Supreme Court of the Philippines had occasion to promulgate a decision which bolstered the concept of the auditors as an independent officers. In the case of Lamb vs. Phipps, the Court said:

“In the performance of his duties, the Auditor is not subject to the jurisdiction of any officer of the executive branch. He is not a mere machine to register or blindly execute the opinions or acts of other officers in matters which pertain, by the laws of the fiscal system of the government, by well defined policy, and by long practice to the jurisdiction of the accounting officer—a jurisdiction which it is his duty to maintain, even in cases in which its existence may be doubtful.”

This was in line with the pronouncement of President Manuel Quezon that a government auditor should be looked upon as a paragon of honesty, integrity and dedication to duty.

Such was the undisputed position of the auditor in the governmental machinery that by the time we were ready to assume the responsibilities of independent nationhood under our own Constitution there was unanimous sentiment in the constitutional convention among the delegates for the establishment of a truly independent General Auditing Office. As conceived and created in the Constitution, the General Auditing Office is protected by strong safeguards to maintain and insure its freedom of action. It was placed expressly under the direction and control of the Auditor General who is provided with a fixed term of office, longer than that of the appointing power, with a prohibition against reappointment and diminution of salary, and who is removable only through the difficult and cumbersome process of impeachment.

Through the years, the General Auditing Office has kept zealous guard over its powers and prerogatives. The legislative and executive departments in turn, have shown their support for a stronger and more effective auditing office by the passage and approval of appropriate legislation. For instance, Republic Act No. 1890 empowered the Auditor General to reorganize the General Auditing Office; Republic Act No. 2266 granted additional powers and duties to the Auditor General; and Republic Act No. 2716 exempted General Auditing Office personnel from application of the WAPCO pay and position classification plans.

Thus, in this country, the tradition of independence of the auditing entity has been upheld. As an imperative of orderly government, the freedom of the auditor should be preserved and insulated from extraneous interference or influence.

We understand there is now a move to further strengthen the General Auditing Office. This is a healthy sign. It signifies the determination of the General Auditing Office to equip itself better to carry on its tasks more effectively. We fully favor this move. You can rest assured that you shall always find in us an advocate or adherent of any cause to make the General Auditing Office truly independent and effective.

Thus, for example, any doubt on the extent of the duties and powers of the Auditor General as delineated in the Constitution should be resolved in favor of an interpretation that shall give full effect to the intent of the framers of our fundamental law to make the auditor a check on the executive.

In the recent case of Guevarra vs. Auditor General, the Supreme Court ruled that the only duty of the Auditor General in cases of expenditures which are excessive, extravagant or unnecessary is to call the attention of the proper administrative officer. Although this judicial pronouncement has its basis in law and jurisprudence, we shall lay down the policy that the proper administrative officer shall take official cognizance of the observation of the auditor and, if still feasible should stop the expenditure involved. Extravagant and wasteful spending of the people’s money will never be countenanced in our Administration.

To improve this situation, we endorse an amendment to the Constitution which would clarify the specific power of the auditor in the examination and audit of expenditures of the public funds.

Likewise, if only to make the General Auditing Office truly independent of the executive, we favor an amendment to the Constitution eliminating appeal to the President, from decisions of the Auditor General, to the making of such appeal, instead, directly to a court of record.

These two proposed amendments, involving as they do the basic function of the General Auditing Office, are also in accord with the pledge we made to the people in asking for their mandate for national leadership that the powers unduly concentrated in the Office of the Chief Executive shall be dispersed or decentralized for a more effective and responsive government. These changes, we trust, should serve to strengthen the people’s faith in the fundamental mission of the General Auditing Office as ordained in our Constitution.

There may be several areas more on which we can take action to enhance the independence and prestige of the General Auditing Office in the best tradition of democracy. These, we leave to your judgment and deliberations, but it may be worthwhile to draw your attention to the need for updating the accounting law under the Revised Administrative Code and for the need for legislation creating a special fund exclusively for the operational requirements of the General Auditing Office.

We urge, further, that continuing efforts be exerted to bring sound business practices in government auditing and to improve auditing procedures to keep them abreast of the times and, specially, to fit them to the demands of our developing nation. We refer, in particular, to the shifting emphasis from the role of auditing as a means of detecting frauds or irregularities in the handling of public funds and property, which is essentially negative in character, to a more positive activity of providing heads of agencies more complete managerial tools for the accomplishment of their work programs through adequate systems of internal control, performance evaluation, and financial reporting. Accountability as exacted by the General Auditing Office in this manner then becomes constructive, rather than merely critical or negative. It not merely insures fidelity in the custody of public resources and the legality of expenditures of public funds but also enhances the accomplishment of the substantial operating program of governmental agencies.

The Government Auditor and the Socio-Economic Program

Over and above its proud tradition and constitutional creation, the auditing function in this government today assumes new dimensions in the context of the two great national programs of moral regeneration and socio-economic development. As public servants who occupy a sensitive post in the governmental hierarchy with the sacred task of keeping watch over the public treasury, your influence in the combined efforts to make of these programs a living reality is indeed decisive.

Thus, your constitutional duty to bring to the attention of the proper administrative officer expenditures of funds or property which, in your opinion are irregular, unnecessary, excessive, or extravagant fits well in our announced standard that in our actions we should not be guided only by what is legal, but that we must go beyond legality into the demands of morality. It is not enough that our actions are legal. They must be moral as well in order that we may measure up to the high standard of integrity and virtue set in our moral regeneration drive. This standard must apply to public expenditures as well, if not more specially so. Spending public money under irregular circumstances, for unnecessary purposes, to excessive proportions, or in an extravagant manner, although within the pale of the law is clearly immoral and highly prejudicial to the public welfare. Where the administrative officer of the government fails to observe the desired criterion for public expenditures, the auditor must be empowered to check him in the true tradition of his role as the “conscience of the government.”

As guardians of the people’s money, you can undoubtedly do much in ferreting out the obnoxious practices that would drain the public cash box of the taxpayers’ money. To be worthy of the distinct responsibility placed upon you by the Constitution, you should do your duties without fear or favor, exposing anybody who has breached the law or prescribed moral standards, be he big or small, rich or poor. In so doing, you shall have our full support, for the oath of office we took upon assuming the presidency of the land enjoins us “to do justice to every man,” and justice each one shall get from the humblest citizen to the most powerful or exalted. In so doing, you shall also be given life and substance to one of the cardinal missions of this Administration “to establish the practices and the example that will strengthen the moral fiber of our Nation and reintroduce those values that would invigorate our democracy.”

Above all, no one of you should himself get involved as a participant in an anomaly. It is a compounded and abominable infidelity to the people for those whose duty it is to prevent offenses against the people’s interest to themselves commit or take part in the commission of the offense. For an auditor to place himself in this fix is like a police officer or policeman in league with criminals in the commission of crime. In our grim and relentless resolve to bring about good government, we have formulated measures to break and smash this conspiracy between members of the police and criminals where we believe it now exists. We trust that you will not make our appallingly difficult task any harder by constraining us to extend such measures to your branch of the public service.

One problem which tends to seriously jeopardize the Administration’s program for the people is bureaucratic red tape. Many vital decisions may get bogged down in their implementation as they wend their way through a seemingly labyrinthine administrative process. We have been concerned with this problem and studies are under way on how to reduce and eliminate unnecessary and harmful red tape. Thus far these studies indicate that the turtle pace at which policy and high decisions are implemented are due to (1) the nature of existing administrative regulations, (2) to the failure of subordinate officials and employees to perceive the urgency of the matter involved and particularly its relation to the Administration’s program, and (3) to an attitude and habit of routine and procrastination on the part of many officials and employees.

You can help us in meeting this altogether unnecessary problem.

Time is of the essence in carrying out our Socio-Economic Program during the short span available to us. Each phase has to be prosecuted according to plan. As in the case of a time-piece, each component part must perform its function with precision. In this regard, you, as government auditors, have your own share of responsibility in making the wheels of our Socio-Economic Program turn in accordance with the schedule. A break in the pace we are pursuing—no matter how brief—may upset our time-table and prejudice the success of our endeavors.

This is not to say that government auditors have actually and deliberately obstructed the progress of our governmental program. During the more than one year of our Administration, we noted with satisfaction the assistance and cooperation you have extended to us. We pointed this out merely to underscore the importance and imperative necessity of expediting all matters or transactions submitted to you for action, particularly those which are important to our economic program.

We do not mean to impose upon you to pass in audit financial matters that you think are of doubtful legality or propriety nor do we ask to trespass the bounds of your independence. We are the first to exhort you to perform your duties without fear or favor and in accordance with the dictates of your conscience. We are the first to sustain your actuations which are in conformity with law and regulations. It is our position, however, that if the defect you discover in the course of audit is merely technical in nature, then we would ask you to help by finding ways, if this could be legally done, to cure the defect so that the required action can be taken with the least possible delay.

These are the new proportions of your duties and responsibilities in this period of founding for our people a lasting regime of social contentment and economic prosperity. You, as auditors, constitute the vanguard of official morality and the rear guard to governmental efficiency and economy.

Conclusion

These, then, are the thoughts we would like you to reflect upon as you meet in convention now and in the next few days. At the risk of over-simplifying or exaggerating, we are inclined to say that what is good for the General Auditing Office as an institution with a proud tradition and a proud birth in the law of the land, is good for the people. You have our assurance, therefore, that whatever you do to keep the faith and confidence of the people in your organization shall always receive our unqualified support.

Keep up the good name you have carved out for your organization through the years. Keep high the proud and ancient tradition of your work in the total scheme of democratic government. But above all, we ask you to look around always from your time-honored pedestal for new horizons of service to your people and your country. Do not fail them as we are ourselves resolved not to fail them.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.