Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Rotary Club 20th District Conference

[Delivered at the Baguio Country Club, February 9, 1963]

Urgency of a Constitutional Convention

IN MAKING a bid for the Presidency, we told our people that if elected, we would usher in an era of change that would enable the country to effect a breakthrough out of its condition of futility in which there was so much poverty in the midst of plenty. Acting in accordance with the people’s mandate, we have started to bring about measures of moral regeneration, economic reform, political change and social progress that loom to succeed in an atmosphere of expanding national solidarity in the acceptance of change, without which no progress is possible.

In this state of tremendous relentless effort, the time has come to take note of one basic fact: that being a democracy, our national life, activities and future are hooved to the Constitution and that reform and change would not be realistic and effective without an updating of the Constitution that was written in different circumstances and with an eye to different aspirations. As this occasion marks the 28th anniversary of the signing of the Constitution of the Philippines, it is fitting that we avail of this opportunity to turn our thoughts to the fundamental law which should ever embody the ideals and aspirations of our people.

Sixty-three years ago today, there was framed within the walls of historic Barasoain church a monumental instrument of freedom—the Malolos Constitution. Thirty years later, the present Constitution was drafted. The series of events that led to the enactment of the old and the present constitutions reveals two different phases in the history of our people’s struggle for freedom, two contrasting means used by our people in their fight for one goal—independence.

The Malolos Constitution was the climax to a long and bloody struggle of the Filipino people to be rid of the yoke of a foreign power. In contrast, however, the Constitution which we now have was drafted under circumstances that did not constitute an upheaval.

While the Malolos Constitution was a full and free expression of the will of our people, the 1935 Constitution was the product of controlled and guided freedom. The United States, for all her virtues, was still a foreign colonial power whose presence and authority prevented us from fashioning a fundamental law which we could truly call our very own, which could mirror the true and full image of our national soul.

As the present Constitution partakes of the nature of a colonial constitution in the sense that it was adopted during the time of the Commonwealth and that it could not take effect without the approval of another country, the time is long-overdue to update it in accordance with the fresh spirit of constructive nationalism that invigorates our nation and which cries out for a fundamental law which is not for an unindependent Commonwealth but a constitution for our free Republic as the expression and embodiment of the true and exclusive will of our sovereign people.

And this by no means is the only consideration which makes the revision of our Constitution imperative. Since the framing of our Constitution, vital changes affecting our political, economic, and social and moral life have taken place. Since that time, the difficulties inherent in independence have given us the added perspective so essential to perceiving the inadequacies of our Constitution as underscored by significant events. There is a wide feeling among our people from all walks of life that there is need for change and that the time for change is now.

The Philippine Constitution is the theory and system of government, and a way of life, shaped by its framers in the light of experience and knowledge. But as reality changes in form and substance, so must theory undergo change and develop in the light of the knowledge derived from freshly developing reality and experience. That the Philippine Constitution was never intended to be a static instrument, may be gleaned from the very provisions for its amendment. Therefore, the Constitution must be amended if and when, in the midst of changing circumstances and metamorphosing conditions, such amendment becomes a necessity.

Among the needed constitutional changes is the case of the Presidential Electoral Tribunal. The framers of the Constitution did not make any provision for such a body, for the realities then did not demand the creation of a supreme tribunal to take charge of resolving a presidential election contest. But adverse conditions of later years and the resultant moral degeneration and decay brought to the fore the perplexing problem of clean, peaceful, and honest elections. The legislative representatives of the people accordingly adjudged the necessity of creating- such a tribunal and did create it by lodging authority and power in the Supreme Court. But that step does not reasonably conform to reality and necessity. A Presidential Electoral Tribunal created by law may be as speedily abolished as it was created by repeal of the law, and the repercussions are not difficult to imagine. Moreover, considering that legislative election contests are resolved by constitutional bodies, it is derogatory to the position and role of the Presidency for a mere statute to establish the corresponding tribunal. Consequently, we urge that provision in the Constitution be made for the creation of a Presidential Electoral Tribunal, in such a way as to take due account of the separation of powers ordained by the Constitution itself.

Then there is the case of the Vice-Presidency of the Republic. Experience has shown us that a President, in a spirit of cynicism or partisan politics, may attempt to negate a Vice-President’s service and usefulness by denying the latter a responsible post in the government scheme and by otherwise shutting him out, as it were, from the life and activities of government. To allow this situation to continue is to contradict both the spirit and the fact of the Constitution, taking particular account of the truth that the Vice-President must always be ready to assume the role of President. It would also place a premium on inefficient government, since the service potential of the Vice-President would be frustrated to the detriment of the people’s welfare. Hence, the Constitution should be amended in order that the Vice-President may be made the presiding officer of the Senate, as is the case in the United States, Bolivia, Cuba, Liberia, and other countries, or be assigned some other definite official role, as the convention on its wisdom may decide.

We have previously expressed ourselves as in favor of limiting the President to a single term without re-election, leaving it to a convention to decide whether it will be four or six years. We reiterate our stand on this matter.

On the subject of presidential succession, the Constitution provides that in case of the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office, these shall devolve on the Vice-President. There is here a constitutional vacuum because just what inability is, is not defined.

The Constitution should be amended so as to authorize the disabled President, or upon his failure to do so, the Cabinet to direct the Vice-President to take over completely until the President is able to resume his duties. The question of physical ability or inability may be determined by a commission representing the three branches of government on the basis of expert medical advice.

With respect to the members of the Senate, the system we previously discarded of electing senators by districts would be more practical and productive of desired results. We are convinced that the achievement of the ideal of having a Senate composed of men of insight and wide experience lies in our reverting to the old system. At present, our electorate is called upon to choose eight, sometimes even more, senators every two years. What has happened is that after writing down two or three names which are their real choices, the voters add whatever names they can remember in order to complete their list or simply copy the names contained in the sample ballots which have been handed to them. This practice is not conducive to the election of the most qualified candidates. Moreover, the present system has discouraged many deserving and capable men who, lacking the influence to land a nomination in the party ticket or the means to finance or to contribute to a nationwide campaign, have desisted from running for the Senate.

Another needed amendment is that which will promote the purity of elections which is said to be one of the most important and fundamental requisites of popular government. To attain this goal, laws have been enacted to “banish the spectre of revenge from the minds of the timid and defenseless, to render precarious and uncertain the bartering of votes and to secure a fair and honest count of the ballots.” The Commission on Elections has exerted every effort to achieve the full attainment of this objective, but experience has shown that it is wanting in strength and authority to prosecute the saboteurs of popular sovereignty. The authority of the Commission on Elections should, therefore, be expanded by giving it the power to prosecute in court those who violate the provisions of our election code, and punish for contempt those who disobey its orders without having to secure assistance from our courts.

Let me take you now into the realm of the judiciary.

The judiciary must be kept free and independent and its standards must be held high. It is important that provision be made in the Constitution to the end that the members of the judiciary be kept as free as possible from the interference and control of politicians and safeguarded from the influence of corruption. This will require the creation and establishment of a career judiciary.

Starting from the very base of our judiciary system, we renew our proposal that the President shall make his appointments to the judiciary, from justice of the peace to the justices of the Court of Appeals, upon the recommendation of the Supreme Court, with the consent of the Commission on Appointments. In the case of the justices of the peace, the selection of qualified candidates should include competitive examinations given by the Supreme Court. Furthermore, once a justice or judge of court of first instance has been appointed to the bench, he can neither be reorganized out by Congress nor shall further congressional confirmation be necessary should the judge of first instance be appointed to another district, the change of district being observed merely promotional. Any instability or weakening of the tenure of office of the members of the judiciary sharpens and intensifies more dependence on the executive and legislative branches of the government, thereby undermining their independence.

There is complaint or comment about the heavy burden on the shoulders of the Supreme Court, the clogging of its docket, and the backlog of cases submitted for its consideration and decision. A remedy to the problem may be the lightening of the present burden of the Supreme Court as provided for in the Constitution. Towards this end, paragraphs (3) and (5) of Section 2, Article VIII, which refers to cases wherein the jurisdiction of any trial court is in issue and cases in which an error or question of law is involved, may be modified in order to apportion the appellate jurisdiction between the Supreme Court and other appellate courts, particularly the Court of Appeals.

It is our belief that the Supreme Court’s main task is the resolution of only very important and fundamental questions. With the achievement of a career judiciary, the Court of Appeals whose members have the same qualifications as the Supreme Court justices, can decide questions of jurisdiction as well as question of law, without prejudice to the elevation of cases involving legal and jurisdictional issues to the Supreme Court by way of appeals by certiorari, in which event, it would be up to the Supreme Court to appraise the importance of any particular case thus appealed and to decide whether the certiorari would be allowed or not. In this way, there will be assurance that only important and fundamental questions of law would be before the highest tribunal of the land, and its burden would be considerably lightened without in any way diminishing its importance and category in its vital role of laying down judicial precedents.

A constitutional change that is urgent is the reallocation of powers among the three branches of the government calculated to diminish the powers of the President, bolster the judiciary from political control, improve legislative practices and decentralize the government by allocating more powers and responsibilities to the provincial, city, municipal and barrio governments.

It is a consensus that the President of the Philippines is too powerful, more powerful internally than the President of the United States. This situation was due to the influence of the strong leadership of President Quezon at the time of the making of the Constitution, as well as the impact of the world situation at that time when the democratic governments of even the United States and the United Kingdom appeared inadequate to meet the challenge of the dictatorships of Adolf Hitler in Germany and Benito Mussolini in Italy. We are in conformity to the need for reducing the powers of the Philippine President but how else can it be done other than by amending the Constitution? At the start of our Administration, we initiated by overt act the reallocation of powers, in anticipation of the calling of a constitutional convention, which we feel imperative by starting with the return to Congress of the Presidential power to create municipalities and other political subdivisions. Congress not only failed to call a constitutional convention but the opposition has since shown that while they would allege abuse of executive powers, they would go to extremes in the abuse of congressional powers, thereby making it clear that it would not be safe and good for the people that the presidential prerogatives be unilaterally tampered with without a general and well-balanced reallocation of the prerogatives of the three branches of the government.

Among the needed change involving legislative procedures are the proposal for the automatic continuation of the current budget if the yearly appropriation bill is not passed, for obvious reasons of continuity and efficiency. There is the proposal for the counting of the thirty-day period within which the President should act on a bill, not from the adjournment of Congress but from the date of the bill’s submittal to the President, which proposal conforms very much to fact and reality. And there is the proposal that would require the concurrence of Congress, in joint session assembled, preferably by two-third vote, in the matter of suspension of the writ of habeas corpus and the declaration of martial law, or with the concurrence of the Supreme Court whenever Congress is not in session, which proposal is in line with our pledge to be in the vanguard to defend and protect the Constitution and safeguard civil liberties.

As a corollary to the inadvisability of reducing the presidential powers without an equitable reallocation of the prerogatives of the three branches, it will be impractical to effect decentralization and the increase of powers to the local government except as a flow from constitutional changes that would recast in their entirety the balance of governmental powers.

These consideration should give a sufficient indication of the harm to the national interest and the obstruction to the vital needs of our people being caused by those who, for partisan and other unmeritorious considerations, would thwart the updating of the Constitution.

After having scanned and given thought to every stated basis of objection to the amendment of the Constitution at this time of change, we frankly have failed to see the merit that we sought in the objection. Some conservatives have advanced the proposition that the Constitution is adequate and resilient enough to cope with novel conditions and modern necessities. This observation, however, is an empty generalization.

Indeed, last year both parties in Congress, through their recognized spokesmen, were for calling a convention to amend the Constitution, which was officially proposed by the House of Representatives, and which, if not done by the Senate, was said to be due to lack of time because of the abrupt adjournment of the Senate session.

Now it is reported that the Opposition in Congress is no longer in favor of the calling of the constitutional convention. If there should be opposition to the amendment of the Constitution, the real reason is political and partisan and not the welfare of the country. Considering that it is the consensus that members of Congress should be made ex-officio members of the constitutional convention because they are vested by the constitution itself with constituent prerogatives, the opposition leaders were agreeable last year to the convention because they were in control of the Congress. Now that the control of the House of Representatives has passed to the administration party, the Opposition has changed its mind about the merits of considering a constitutional convention.

This is unfortunate for the country because it not only would forego needed changes in the fundamental law at a time when they could assist towards the efficacy of reforms but would also betray a tendency on the part of our leaders to sacrifice the needs of the nation for sophisticated considerations. One possessed of intellectual ability could adduce a number of high-sounding reasons for opposing now the amendment of the charter but our people need today not intellectual ability but intellectual integrity and sincerity.

New reasons are being adduced for not calling a convention. One is that this being an election year, the convention should not have a political air. If this is a valid objection to a constitutional convention, the Constitution would never be amended. Next year, the same objection could be put up on the ground that it is approaching a Presidential election which produces a more partisan atmosphere than the local elections which will be held this year.

Another objection being put up is that because of the methods used by the President in his Administration, it is not advisable to call a convention because the President may influence the selection and the actuations of the delegates. This is the most ridiculous objection ever yet asserted. Not that we intend to influence the convention, but when President Manuel Quezon influenced the making of the present Constitution, did anybody then find it objectionable and has it caused the impurification of the present Constitution? The fact is that those who put up these objections will be members of the convention, while we will not be in the convention.

The objection simply means that the objectors, have no faith in themselves and in the others who will become delegates. Worse still, it betrays lack of faith in our people. This is the worst affront yet on the dignity, capacity and quality of our people. If some politicians have no faith in their quality to fight for the interests of our people, they should not infect the people as a whole with their sense of moral weakness.

When we were fighting for the Presidency, all the odds were against us. Those who now mouth loud and hypocritical lamentations, bewailing alleged threats on our democracy, are the same ones who, smugly partaking of the haughtiness of conscienceless power, then joined with alacrity in wielding the club of ruthless authority to destroy us completely who were then in the Opposition. Did we raise the bugaboo of democracy becoming a corpse in discharging our tasks as fiscalizers? No, because we had faith in our people who are the ultimate source of power, judgment and wisdom in a real democracy. Instead of resorting to intellectual ability to raise false alarm, we worked hard to bring our case to the people because we had faith not only in ourselves but also in our people. We reject with vehemence as preposterous any opposition to the calling of a convention for the amendment of the Constitution, which is based on lack of faith in our people because our own faith in the quality and virtues of our people is such that we are certain to the core of our being that long after the hollow words of the intellectual sophists peddling false alarm over our liberties for partisan and selfish purposes have been erased in the sands of time, long after real would-be dictators have fallen in defeat, long after the ignominy of those poseurs of leadership who attribute their own weakness as the weakness of their people is forgotten, our people will still be in this land, from year to year, from epoch to epoch, increasingly virile in the pursuit of their well-being and majestically triumphant in the preservation of their liberties against the excesses and despite the weaknesses of their so-called leaders.

The most enormous evil behind the sophistication of the opposition to a constitutional convention is that it is a stand being made in favor of the status quo and the resistance to reform. In this light, history will be severe in its judgment on those who have used the cloak of the Constitution as a shield to resist progress and to preserve the growth-choking bastions of special privilege and vested interests. Designed to promote the well-being and the economic security of all the people, the Constitution will have been used to frustrate the promotion of the people’s welfare by prolonging and perpetuating the system of a few getting richer and richer and the poor getting poorer and poorer.

If the Constitution were to be amended, the amendment to which we attach the highest importance and urgency is one which, in the light of favorable experience in other countries, would guarantee, among the Bill of Rights, the right to dignified existence to every citizen. The objective of the present Constitution of promoting the well-being and economic security of all the people is one to be cherished, but if it is sought in a setting of obstructive economic, social and political practices which had piled up from generations past, such a noble and desirable objective may remain as unfulfilled unless the Constitution incorporates implementory principles that will compel compliance and thereby attain the constitutional goal of liberating the bulk of our people from the centuries of poverty and misery in which the constitutional pledge of promoting “the wealth and economic security of all the people” is to them a meaningless shibboleth.

In moments of paying homage to the Constitution by examining its provisions, divining its strength and its inadequacies, we have always felt elation at its long list of guarantees to personal liberties. We felt disheartened to observe, however, that out of the many provisions of the Bill of Rights, there is no protection to one’s right to dignified existence. Importance has been given to the right of man to his liberty and to his property—emphasis on his individual freedom and material possessions. This emphasis on civil liberties is laudable; but the lack of emphasis on a dignified life for the common man is lamentable. It would appear that our Constitution has taken the right of man to live for granted. Indeed, while it threads a beautiful garland of human rights, embellished with the different blossoms of liberty—freedom of speech; freedom of the press; freedom to assemble and petition the government for redress; freedom to contract; freedom to form societies; freedom to change domicile; freedom from unreasonable searches and seizures; freedom of religion and belief; and many more—our Constitution is wanting in a positive and mandatory injunction for the state to provide for the citizen’s right of existence and the dignity inalienable to it.

The Constitutions of other countries expressly recognize and protect man’s right to dignified existence. The Constitution of the Republic of China has this provision: “The right of existence, the right of work and the right of property shall be guaranteed to the people.” (Art. -15.) “The state, in order to promote social welfare, shall establish a social insurance system. To the aged and the infirm who are unable to earn a living and to victims of unusual calamities, the state shall give appropriate assistance and relief.” (Art. 155.)

The Constitution of the French Republic declares: “The National Assembly shall ensure to the individual and to the family the conditions necessary to their development.

“The National Assembly shall guarantee to all and particularly to the child, the mother, and the aged worker, protection of health, material security, rest and leisure. Any individual who, because of his or her age, his or her physical or mental condition, finds himself or herself unable to work shall have the right to obtain from the community the means for a decent existence.” (Constitution of the French Republic, Oct. 27, 1946.)

The right to work is expressly protected in the constitution of the Italian Republic which provides, thus: “Every citizen unable to work and deprived of the means necessary to live has the right to support and to social assistance.” (Constitution of the Italian Republic Dec. 27, 1947.)

In Japan, the right to work is likewise guaranteed. Its Constitution declares: “All people shall have the right and the obligation to work.” (Art. 27, Constitution of Japan. Promulgated Nov. 3, 1946, effective on May 3, 1947.)

It is said that “life means more than mere animal existence—it means the enjoyment of all the faculties given to men by God: the right to see, the right to hear, the right to eat, the right to contract, the right to use any part of the body through which it should communicate with the outside world.” If this be so, then it is the duty of the state to provide tangible means so that the citizen may fully enjoy the faculties that God has endowed him with not just to see, but to see things that are pleasant; not just to hear, but to hear things that are agreeable to his hearing; not just to eat, but to eat food essential to his body; not just to work, but to earn enough for himself and his family—in short to enjoy life as a decent human being.

The opponents of constitutional change and defenders of the status quo will, perhaps, rationalize their complacency by pointing out that where there is life, there is hope. We submit, however, that where there is life, there must be more than hope—there must be a real opportunity for the common man to make that hope a reality. And upon the state rests the duty of taking every possible measure to insure that there be contentment among the citizenry.

Let us amend the Constitution to speak in bold, positive words of this obligation of the state to the citizens. Through a positive provision in our Constitution, let us exalt the importance of the Filipino life and take it out of the commonplace—where it has so often been relegated. Let our Constitution protect not only the life of the Filipino; let it protect his dignity as well. Anything less than this, we should not allow to remain. Let the Constitution contain an express mandate that would change an attitude of unconcern about the lot of the common man and replace it with an active concern to help the humblest Filipino to rise up in dignity and freedom as a true co-owner of his nation. These are moments of grave decisions and quick actions. Our Constitution has long cried for reform and innovation. We await the judgment of the representatives of the sovereign people in Congress while we, with all earnestness and dedication, shall strive to increase the peoples’ awareness of the Constitution as their vital and living pathway to the attainment of their common goals, ideals and aspirations. God willing, we can all join hands to make our Constitution as the basic and powerful force for the building of a greater republic of free and dignified men.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.