Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On the 23rd Anniversary of the Philippine Navy

The Philippine Navy (PN) shall exist as the country’s premier maritime defense force. Ito ay may pangunahing layuning pangalagaan ang soberanya, integridad ng teritoryo, at karagatan ng Pilipinas, gayundin ang pagtatanggol sa mga karapatan at interes nito bilang isang malayang at independenteng bansa. Specifically, the PN shall perform the following missions:

1.  Maritime Defense. The PN shall defend the Philippines from all external and internal threats, including armed conflict, terrorism, piracy, and other illegal activities in the maritime domain.  Ito ay isasagawa sa pamamagitan ng pagpapanatili ng isang credible defense posture, pagpapatupad ng maritime laws, at pakikipagtulungan sa iba pang ahensya ng gobyerno.

2.  Maritime Law Enforcement. The PN shall assist other government agencies in enforcing maritime laws within the Philippine waters. Kabilang dito ang pagpigil sa illegal fishing, smuggling, at iba pang krimen sa dagat.  This includes conducting maritime patrols, search and rescue operations, and providing support to law enforcement agencies.

3.  Disaster Response and Humanitarian Assistance. The PN shall provide assistance to civilian authorities during times of natural disasters and other emergencies.  Magbibigay ito ng logistical support, medical assistance, at search and rescue operations sa mga apektadong lugar. This includes deploying naval vessels and personnel to affected areas, providing medical supplies and equipment, and assisting in the evacuation of civilians.

4.  Territorial Defense. The PN shall contribute to the overall territorial defense of the Philippines.  Ito ay sa pamamagitan ng pagpapanatili ng presensya sa mga kritikal na lugar, pagmonitor ng mga aktibidad sa karagatan, at pagtatanggol sa mga isla at coastal areas. This includes conducting naval exercises, maintaining a strong naval presence in strategic areas, and developing capabilities for island defense.

5.  International Cooperation. The PN shall engage in international cooperation to promote maritime security and stability.  Makikipagtulungan ito sa ibang mga bansa sa pamamagitan ng pagsasagawa ng joint exercises, information sharing, at pagpapalitan ng mga eksperto. This includes participating in regional and international maritime security initiatives, conducting joint exercises with foreign navies, and sharing information on maritime threats.

I AM HAPPY to be with you on the occasion of the 23rd anniversary of the Philippine Navy. Young and small as it is, the Philippine Navy, during the past years, has performed its assigned tasks efficiently and successfully. In spite of limited means, the Navy has with credit accomplished not only its primordial duties but also manifold additional missions like ferrying of augmentation troops to areas where peace and order is to be maintained, extending help during floods and other disasters, and transporting persons to settlement areas. This is a retrospective view of the Navy’s activities. Of paramount concern to us today is the part or participation of this organization in the common task of nation-building.

As an integral part of the military establishment, the Navy’s primary responsibility is the naval defense of the country. A candid view of the geographical structure of our national territory alone will be more than sufficient to put in bold relief the magnitude of this mission.

The Philippines is an archipelago composed of approximately 7,100 islands located strategically in the geographic heart of the Far East. She has an irregular coastline of approximately 14,400 miles or about twice that of the United States. She has a total land area of 115,707 square miles, almost the size of England or Italy and a sea water four times as large. To safeguard this vast expanse of water not only within the islands but also around the whole archipelago is certainly an enormous task. In times of war, the fulfillment of this mission will demand the utmost of human effort and sacrifice. In time of peace, the task is not easier.

The geographical positions of our island-groups present a vulnerable target for clandestine illicit operations which, if not effectively neutralized or quelled, will gravely imperil national security and subvert the national economy. The possibility cannot be precluded that an enemy, taking advantage of our geography, will surreptitiously land agents or propaganda materials into our shores. This will lead to the subversion of our democratic way of life and sabotage of our economic growth. The forestalling of this danger is a prime responsibility of the Philippine Navy.

During the months preceding the last elections, I had occasion to visit almost every coastal point and remote ramparts of our archipelago. In my travels, I saw the importance of developing and maintaining our waterways as the life-blood of our country’s progress and development. Despite notable advances by our Nation, in recent years, there is still much poverty, disease and illiteracy in far-flung areas, practically cut off from all forms of government assistance by inadequacy of water communications. The Administration’s program of alleviation of the plight of the common man requires specific improvement in the over-all level of economic welfare and its distribution throughout the length and breadth of the land. Even today, our interisland fleet of merchant ships has not been built up in such quantity as would effectively bring the blessings of progress to the less fortunate in rural areas. It is expected, therefore, that the Navy will do its best to play its roles in the socio-economic program of the government and thereby enable those regions that have lagged behind in progress to participate more fully in the over-all national progress.

In my State-of-the-Nation address to Congress, I recommended the creation of the Anti-Smuggling Office to eradicate smuggling activities that seriously deprive the national treasury of customs and internal revenue receipts. In making this recommendation, I was fully aware of the rampant smuggling activities in the South. I note, with no small amount of satisfaction, the accomplishments of the Navy in helping curb this nefarious activity. It is my desire that this laudable public service be continued and intensified until smuggling is wiped out and this roadblock to a healthy and progressive economy is removed.

The Navy’s mission is embodied in Executive Order No. 389, series of 1950. The pervading spirit of the law calls for the Navy to contribute in time of peace to the establishment of a healthy climate for economic growth of the country by the zeal and vigilant guardianship of national security, and the uncompromising enforcement of the law, particularly customs and fisheries laws. This is another important concern of the Navy in concert with other law enforcement agencies of the government.

I am aware of the magnitude of the task before you and the dimension of effort you have to exert, even if only to achieve a modicum of success. I realize that the Navy’s foremost problem today is the inadequacy of ships and the obsolete condition of the small number that we have. Measures will be undertaken to remedy this situation.

In surveying the problems of the Navy, I must say that I have particular concern for the welfare of the naval enlisted men. The feasibility of uplifting the living conditions of the personnel of the Navy is within our reach. In the budget that I submitted to Congress for approval, I provided for a higher rate of pay for the enlisted men. Aside from a realistic increase in pay, the improvement of the housing conditions of the enlisted men will be one of the chief concerns of the Administration.

I now refer to the problem of morality. It is gratifying that the Administration’s effort to effect a moral renaissance in the government service finds fertile grounds in the Armed Forces. Perhaps, more than any other government official, the man in uniform is looked upon by the public as an example of decency and morality in public office. Steeped in traditions of loyalty, courage, and integrity, the military man should be a model of decorum and ethical living. The traditions hallowed by practice and military law expect him to act in a manner becoming not only an “officer” but also a “gentleman.” This indeed points to a high degree of virtue and morality worthy of emulation by those below them and by the public. I call upon you, men and officers of the Navy, to set examples of honesty, integrity, and uprightness not only in public life but in your private life as well.

Lastly, as your Commander-in-Chief, I say to you, “work well done” for previous years’ accomplishments. For the coming years, let us approach the future fearlessly and hopefully, ever conscious of the immensity of the task before us and willing to exert maximum effort for a successful accomplishment of our mission and for the security, prosperity and happiness of our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.