Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Convention of Rice and Corn Farmers, Millers and Traders

[Delivered on December 11, 1962]

OUR GOAL: RICE SURPLUS FOR EXPORT

I FEEL highly honored and delighted to be with you today and to be able to participate in your auspicious convention activities.

I have looked forward to this opportunity to discuss with you one of the most vital problems of our country the program for its solution which the government, in concert with those who are engaged in the rice and corn industries, must undertake vigorously and effectively.

I refer to the problem of marshalling all our available resources, both government and private, toward the attainment of food sufficiency for our people at the earliest possible time.

It is elementary that an individual must first be able to provide himself with his basic needs—and obviously food is the first of these—if he should be expected to aspire for a desirable standard of living. As it is with individuals, so is it with a nation. We must accordingly strive to bring the national production of rice and corn, which are the staple items in the diet of our people, to the level that would readily meet our increasing consumption requirements. As a minimum target, any program for the development of the rice and corn industries must aim at providing, at the very least, the minimum requirements of the population.

Indeed the first goal of my administration is to attain self-sufficiency in the staple food of our people. This I made clear in my inaugural address wherein I said:

“Our mission is to attain self-sufficiency in the staple food of our people, namely, rice and corn. The elemental needs of every people are food, clothing and shelter. While attending to the people’s needs for adequate clothing and shelter, the urgent emphasis shall be on their need for staple food. With the cooperation of Congress, we shall launch and implement a rice and corn program that shall bring about sufficiency in the production of these cereals and make them available at prices within the reach of the masses.”

I emphasized this in my inaugural address because I believe in a sensible approach to our task of nation-building. It is sheer common sense to keep uppermost in mind that rice and corn are our first problem and need. It will be in vain and an empty claim to achievement to talk of grandiose plans and feats of success if we cannot even provide sufficiently and within easy reach the rice and corn needed by our people. Before anything and everything else, let us first feed our people.

There is good reason to lay emphasis on this simple fact. In 1957, a world survey showed that the Philippines was the third lowest among the 23 palay-growing countries. Our average yield per hectare was 27.5 cavans as compared to 136 in Spain, 95 in Japan and 64 in Taiwan. It is paradoxical that despite our extensive and fertile agricultural lands with 100 inches of rainfall, the Philippines occupied the third lowest in palay productivity.

Our population has been increasing at a rate of 3.2 per cent every year. We are now about 30 million people. After five years, we shall have grown to 34 million people. At this rate of growth, our yearly consumption requirements for rice alone, which are about 90.53 million cavans of palay, will be approximately 106 million cavans of palay in 1967. This means that we must increase the yearly production by average of not less than 3 million cavans of palay if we are to prevent famine or exorbitant rice prices from knocking at the doors of the mass of our people, particularly, the poor. We have increased our production of the staple cereals every year. However, with the trend in the annual rate of production increase, which has been approximately 1.5 million cavans of palay and 0.86 million cavans of corn, our rising consumption requirements have outpaced our production gains. Moreover, occasional typhoons that destroy our crops and the uncertainties of the weather have aggravated the problem.

The solution to the problem is not simple. This is indicated by the fact that in the last 50 years, agricultural efforts have been characterized generally by the annual importation of rice to supplement local production. But it is my conviction that the problem can be solved if we exert earnest, aggressive and sustained effort toward its permanent solution. My Administration is ready to provide the needed leadership in bringing about the permanent solution.

As an immediate measure, we have endeavored to stabilize the prices of rice and corn through the skillful operation of the Rice and Corn Administration. The RCA has succeeded in forestalling the occurrence of rice crisis this year, and without resorting to the seemingly traditional, and certainly expensive, measure of importing the cereal.

By this commendable feat, the RCA has kept faith with the expectation of congress and the administration by implementing the government’s price support program as prescribed by Republic Act 3452. It has been purchasing palay at the support price of P11.50 per cavan and corn P9.00 per cavan from the farmers, thus helping to influence farm prices to follow a trend, per ganta and corn grits at P0.40 to P0.50 per ganta, making these cereals readily available at prices which the common tao can afford.

I strongly favor continuation of the price support program for rice and corn for as long as it is necessary, and I shall exert all efforts so that adequate funds are provided for the program in order to insure the protection of the interests of both the producers and the consumers.

Consistent with the policy of my Administration to provide widening freedom for private enterprise, the RCA unloaded its stocks on the market this year only when the prices of the cereals started to show signs that the supply flowing through the private channels were inadequate. I am glad to know that in line with the same policy, the RCA has utilized and will continue to utilize, privately owned warehouses and mills located at its centers ©f operation. These facilities by RCA should give the millers the opportunity to assist in the government’s stabilization function and, at the same time, enable them to expand their volume of business.

Through the RCA, we have licked the short-run or emergency phase of our rice and corn problem, which is the avoidance of shortage and a consequent crisis during the non-harvest and lean months. The more difficult phase of the problem, which consists of sufficient production that will provide in a sustained manner the growing needs of our population, will now be our major concern and endeavor. The larger part of the government’s program toward self-sufficiency in food over the long run consists of a multipurpose endeavor which includes the following:

1. High Yielding Seeds . We are boosting the production of certified seeds as the availability of trained personnel and funds may permit and we are encouraging the wide-spread use of high yielding seed varieties.

The use of ordinary rice and corn seeds of the non-Seed Board varieties has caused the low productivity of these crops. Seed Board Varieties have given 11 cavans more of palay per hectare and 12 cavans more of corn. The Bureau of Plant Industry has been establishing additional rice and corn breeding stations in selected regions calculated to serve the increasing needs of our farmers. Our goal is to produce 12,500 cavans of registered seeds, 273,000 cavans of first-generation certified seeds and 2,620,000 cavans of second-generation certified seeds in 1967. This should more than meet the requirements of the farmers as called for by our production goals.

2. Irrigation. Under our public works program, we are expanding irrigation facilities so that more and more land can be utilized to produce not only higher unit yields but a number of crops a year.

The use of irrigation increases production at an estimated 11 canvans of palay per hectare. Of the 3,260,000 hectares under rice cultivation, about 760,000 hectares, or one-fourth of the total rice areas, are irrigable, but actually only 286,000 hectares are effectively irrigated, in the sense that water is available any time when needed. Hence, under the irrigation phase of our five-year socio-economic program priority is given to water work systems, completion of unfinished ones, and repair of those which are damaged. Our goal is to irrigate a minimum of 1,000,000 hectares, and 10,000 additional hectares every year until our production goal becomes a reality.

3. Fertilizers . We are taking steps to make a greater quantity of fertilizers available to the farmers every year and to provide appropriate technical assistance to insure the use of the proper fertilizers by the farmers.

The use of fertilizers was found to increase the yield of palay by 20 cavans and of corn 13 cavans. Our farmers have begun to realize the relation of the use of fertilizers to increased yield. Now they clamor for more fertilizers. In 1961, there were distributed to the farmers, 670,140 bags of fertilizers worth P7,834,913.00 whereas in 1962, we distributed 1,307,400 bags worth P7,834,913.00. The increase in fertilizer distribution was due to the timely release of increased funds by our Administration and to more effective ways of procurement and distribution eliminating unnecessary delays, middlemen and blackmarketing. Steps have been taken to ensure delivery of fertilizers next crop year to farmers before the planting season. I have recently extended the life of the Rice and Corn Coordinating Council so that our farmers may enjoy the benefit of fertilizer subsidies. We have also encouraged the manufacture of fertilizers in our country because it would not be in consonance with sound economic policy to depend on foreign sources for our fertilizer needs.

4. Insecticides . We have encouraged the profitable use of insecticides to protect the plantings of the farmers from harmful insects and pests. Control of plant pests and diseases increases production at an estimated 5-10 cavans per hectare of palay and 6 cavans of corn.

5. Agricultural Practices . Through intensive information and extension work, we have vigorously sought to change the unproductive agricultural practices of our farmers to improve methods and techniques.

The problem is how to disseminate and bring directly to the knowledge of the farmers these agricultural methods so that they can be properly applied. In anticipation of this problem, I caused the appropriation of P7 million for additional extension workers who are to do this job. The Emergency Employment Administration is in the process of employing 2,480 extension workers, livestock campaigners and farm aides. With these additional personnel, funds and facilities, a crash food production program is now being undertaken in 10 selected provinces to educate and to show our farmers in their farms what modern agricultural practices can do to increase production of crops. It is premature to evaluate the effectiveness of the work done by these extension workers, but from the preliminary reports received, the result is positive and encouraging.

6. Financing . We are providing liberal financing for deserving farmers. Toward this end the government financing institutions, including the Philippine National Bank, the Development Bank of the Philippines and the Agricultural Credit and Cooperative Financing Administration have extended substantial credit facilities to the farmers.

The ACCFA is now revitalizing its activities in the extension of credit facilities and in the formation of cooperative marketing associations which are essential in servicing the produce of farmers in order that they may realize more income. To improve the financing of farm operations, the offices concerned have a project of extending supervised credit, that is, loans with the necessary instructions and supervision on how they could be utilized in rendering the farms more productive so that the farmers may be able to repay the loans and the lending institution may be better assured of repayment. The important consideration is that every peso loaned must be spent for the productivity of the farm.

7. Marketing . We shall foster the better organization of the farmers, millers, and traders to enable them to develop, through group initiative, skill and resources, a more efficient marketing system for their economic advancement. Through the Rice and Corn Board, we are fast shifting the control of the rice and corn trade from alien to Filipino hands.

8. Floor price for palay and corn . Another incentive to production is a guaranteed floor price for palay and corn where the farmers can be assured of a margin of profit. The RCA is now busy buying palay at P11.50 per cavan of 44 kilos and corn at P9.50 per cavan of 57 kilos.

9. Research . We are deeply interested in providing adequate support and the right atmosphere for research work on the development of high-yielding and disease resistant varieties, the use of effective fertilizers, better cultural practices, and various cropping systems. Excellence in patient and thorough scientific research work must be promoted so that we can find the lasting answers to many of our age-old farm problems.

The appropriate arms of the government, including the Bureau of Plant Industry, the Bureau of Soils, the Bureau of Agricultural Extension, and the government agricultural colleges are conducting, within the limits of their financial support and technical know-how, work on plant varietal improvement, cereal chemistry, soils and agronomy, plant protection, agricultural engineering, and agricultural economics.

We are fortunate that the International Rice Research Institute, which is jointly supported by the Rockefeller and Ford foundations, has been established in the Philippines. This Institute, with its facilities and highly trained personnel, offers a great promise in the build-up of scientific knowledge on rice in this part of the world. Because it is located in the Philippines, we have the rare opportunity of being the immediate beneficiaries of the benefits of its research programs.

With this multi-purpose line of action in our rice and corn program, we expect to achieve self-sufficiency and, we hope, a reliable surplus in rice and corn for export within the next five years. For crop year 1962-63, we aim at a production of 90.2 million cavans of palay and a carry-over of 11 million cavans, making a total of 101.2 million cavans which is 8.2 million cavans more than our national requirement of 93 million cavans.

At the end of crop year 1963, we expect a surplus of around 8.8 per cent of the total national requirement which includes the estimated carry-over from 1962. By 1964, production is expected to be 1.9 per cent more than the requirement. By 1966, the required stockpile of 5 per cent of the national requirement would have been met, which will act as a buffer stock for meeting emergencies, like the effects of typhoons, floods, and other calamities. For corn, the stockpile requirement of 5 per cent of the national requirement shall have been met by 1963. The increasing surplus differences over said stockpile requirement may be more than enough to meet any sudden and abrupt increase in the rate of development of our poultry industry.

An estimated 2 million cavans of palay are used as animal feed every year. If we could increase the production of corn to take the place of palay as animal feed, we can make these 2 million cavans of palay for human consumption. After all, corn is better for animal feed than palay because it contains more protein.

When we attain a rising level of surplus production, problems may be expected. One is that surplus stock would tend to weigh on the market and depress prices. This problem, however would not be too difficult to solve. In its face, we intend to seek a foothold in the world market for our surplus and to gradually withdraw the marginal land from rice and corn production and use it instead for other suitable and profitable crops.

For this comprehensive rice and corn program which I have described briefly, we shall provide as much financial support as may be justified by the requirements of the program and by the pace and extent of our accomplishments.

But plans and money alone will not bring us to our goal. Plans must be implemented aggressively and money must be spent wisely. It is, therefore, imperative that those who are at the helm of the implementing agencies for this program must be thoroughly competent and imbued with a high sense of devotion to the task of achieving our objective, realizing that achievement would mean the amelioration of the economic and social life of our people and that failure, in contrast, would bring misery and justifiable discontent, particularly to the less fortunate of our masses.

I, therefore, seize this opportunity to enjoin all officials and agencies of this administration, particularly the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources and the bureaus and offices concerned under it, to exert utmost and extraordinary efforts to insure the attainment of our national objective of food sufficiency. In candor, I must state that the actual attainment of this objective shall be the measure of the merits of their official efforts and actuations. Whatever else they do, whatever qualities and merits they display, while noteworthy, these shall be inadequate as a gauge of their performance, unless and until they and we succeed in attaining sustained self-sufficiency in rice and corn. Any official, employee or citizen who contributes in a particular manner to the attainment of this, our goal of self-sufficiency and rice surplus for export, shall be, in the eyes of this administration, a hero deserving of recognition and the gratitude of the entire nation.

Yet, the government’s efforts alone will not bring the desired success, unless you who are directly engaged in the production, storage, processing and marketing of the staple cereals lend your full cooperation in a determined drive toward our objective.

Recent surveys conducted by the Government show that wastage in harvesting is about 1.45% and that the use for poultry and animal feed and for commercial and other purposes is about 6% of production. In milling, the recovery in “kiskisan” is reported to be 50% while in “cono” is about 67% or a difference of 17%. As 50% of palay production goes to trade and 50% of this is milled by “kiskisan,” conversion to the use of “cono” will give the advantage of recovering more by 17% of one-fourth of the total production, or an addition of about 1.9 million cavans of rice per year. Similarly, RCA has reported that loss in drying, defective storage, milling, etc. is about 10%. I, therefore, appeal to all concerned to consider the causes of waste and losses with a view to minimizing, if not totally avoiding them.

The RCA recently approved a resolution increasing the milling fees to be paid by it to make your milling operations economical. I urge that further studies be made so that the milling tax of 2% shall be applied to the milling fee and not to the selling price of rice.

I urge you all to continue to go about your respective endeavors with a deep feeling of devotion for the welfare of our people. The government will seek new ways in order to provide you with a better climate for obtaining, through higher productivity and efficiency, fair and just returns for your investment and labor. As your collective orientation and actuation develop fully to a real, mature sense of responsibility toward your group interest in relation to the general welfare, I am certain that the government shall limit its activity in this field more and more until it entirely eliminates its active participation in the rice and corn business.

I have faith in the patriotic zeal of the members of this convention and the thousands of farmers, millers, and traders whom you represent. I close with the hope that, as we move and hasten toward the attainment of self-sufficiency in food and in our goal of surplus for export, we have a right to feel that complete success will bless us. Partly, because in the solution of our food and other problems, the government and the private sector have, in ideal partnership, deserved new strength and effectiveness in our common mission of bringing about the economic and social progress and happiness of our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.