Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the 7th National Convention of Filipino Businessmen

[Delivered in Baguio, February 21, 1963]

THE CHALLENGE TO FILIPINO BUSINESSMEN

WE ARE PROUD and privileged to greet you on the opening of the 7th National Convention of Filipino Businessmen and to congratulate the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines on the occasion of its 60th anniversary.

We are struck by the theme of your convention which is “Economic Progress through Cooperation and Understanding.” It is reminiscent of the post-war economic epic of German prosperity through competition which is another way of expressing free enterprise. Our country, too, has adopted free enterprise as the means through which the Nation seeks a rapid rate of economic growth and progress.

It is gratifying to note the implication from the theme of your convention that free enterprise is assumed as the accepted mode of seeking the economic progress and that what remains to be explored is how this mode of economic progress that the Nation has accepted can become effectively utilized and implemented through cooperation and understanding.

Your convention signifies that the Filipino businessman is increasingly discovering his place in his own country and is gaining more and more masterful control over the economic destiny of his nation. It has been a long, hard rise from the days when the Filipino was a mere customer of foreigners in his own land to this day when he has risen to become a producer, trader, banker, and assertive leader in the conduct of his country’s economic affairs. The members of this gathering are an impressive testimony to that progress.

While it is one thing, however, to celebrate in retrospect the growth of Philippine business, it is another thing to look upon its future course as a challenge. In the spirit of the theme of your convention, the first thing that requires understanding is that many a Filipino businessman in the past was able to establish himself successfully under the protective umbrella of controls and political favors. For a good length of time, the system of controls was explicitly used by the public authorities to favor Filipinos over resident foreigners in the allocation of foreign exchange. While these arrangements succeeded to some extent in promoting the expansion of the Filipino private sector, it also succeeded to a large degree in promoting the wrong types of enterprise by means of wrong inducements, and gave rise not only to the spread of graft and corruption but also to the visible distortion of investments and misdirection of our industrial development. The phenomena of overcrowded industries and the multiplication of packaging establishments are the most conspicuous evidences of such misdirection. Thus under a system of controls, the promotion of Filipino business was indeed advanced, but this was gained at a high price, too high a price for a developing country like ours to pay.

Hence, our first major act upon assumption of office was to abolish exchange controls, remove from the government the power to allocate our foreign exchange resources, and let the free market be the chief factor in regulating business activities in the country. To the Filipino businessman, this means essentially two things. The first is that he has lost the protection of controls and must now prove his strength under competitive conditions to meet the prospective rewards and the prospective penalties of a free market, a market in which foreign capital has to be reckoned as a competitor. The second is that the Filipino businessman must be ever more aggressive, ever more imaginative, and ever more efficient than before in order to turn his newly-won freedom to his own advantage.

One of the basic principles enunciated by the Five-Year Socio-Economic Program is that: “The principal responsibility for development belongs to Filipino citizens. They must be the principal determinants as well as the chief beneficiaries of economic progress.” One of the foremost objectives, of the government in pursuing its economic development program is to support the vigorous expansion and development of the Filipino business sector: to strengthen the Filipino businessman’s capacity to exploit the resources of his own nation and to direct the rewards of economic growth chiefly to our own countrymen. This does not mean that we intend to revert to a system of controls in order to let Philippine industry develop in protected isolation from foreign competition. What it means is that the Filipino must rise to the task of proving his own ability to compete with others within a free market and to prove himself the equal if not the superior of his counterparts anywhere in the world. In this task, he has his government’s full support.

At the moment, our country is most in need of investment, of capital formation. To increase it is one of the chief tasks of our Five-Year Program. We have, in fact, submitted to Congress this year, as part of our legislative program, a new Investment Incentives Bill to encourage and promote the investment of domestic and foreign capital in our country. The Bill specifically stresses the development of a number of basic and essential areas of industry to which venture capital would be most welcome. These include steel and allied metal industries, mining, basic chemicals, heavy electrical products, industrial machinery, pulp making, synthetic fibers, ship-building and drydocking, fertilizers and other vital fields.

This bill gives substance and meaning to our adherence to two basic principles: that a system of free enterprise is the most conducive climate for the growth of private business and that our development as a nation will depend on our deliberate effects to mobilize sufficient capital to induce a massive growth in our country’s productive capacity. In accordance with these two principles, subject only to the reservation of certain vital areas as the exclusive domain of Filipino nationals it should be a matter of understanding that there should exist cooperation with foreigners in exercising the freedom to venture into the basic industries just mentioned. In the spirit of such cooperation, we should guarantee to foreign investors certain normal prerogatives: the right to remit their profits, the right to repatriate their capital, protection from unjust expropriation, and protection from unwarranted requisition. We are, in other words, making the country a safe and attractive place not only for domestic investment but for foreign investment as well in a cooperative effort, as a realistic and long overdue concession to our need for foreign participation in our capital formation.

The acceptance of cooperation from foreign capital will require greater alertness and aggressiveness on the part of the Filipino businessmen. It is the energies of our own entrepreneurs which can prevent our newly-restored free enterprise system from turning by default into a substantial capitulation to foreign capital. It is the boldness of their planning and the swiftness of their action which will determine how much of our development potential can be captured by our own nationals. It is their ability to look beyond the quick-profit opportunities of the day to the longer, more demanding, but more rewarding task of building our nation’s industries that will spell our success as a people to develop our economy as our own precious patrimony.

Given the vigor of our Filipino businessman today, of which this group represents some of the most outstanding, there is no reason why the incentives extended to Filipino and foreign nationals cannot be exploited by our own people to strengthen and accelerate the development of a strong and dynamic Filipino business sector. These incentives are substantial. They include the carry-over of initial operating losses for deduction from taxable profits the accelerated depreciation of fixed assets, and the exemption from customs taxes and duties of the parts and equipment needed by basic industries during their period of infancy.

As part of cooperation as a basis for economic progress, we welcome foreign investments in the Philippines as a necessary complement to our own resources. But this does not absolve us from the fact that our economic development is ultimately our own responsibility. Foreign capital is a help, and a welcome help, but it can never be a substitute for Filipino effort. The magnitude of our responsibility expands to its true perspective when we think of the character of the investments that must be undertaken in the future. In contrast to the light and finishing industries that have emerged within the past decade, the industries which must rise henceforth will entail heavier investments in fixed assets and more intense utilization of domestic raw materials. This calls for a large reorientation of prevalent attitudes of our businesses, for more depth and thoroughness in their planning, and for greater efficiencies in their operations.

Specifically, our businessmen must stress in their future activities the following elements:

First , the exercise of more initiative and aggressiveness in searching for new investment opportunities, especially opportunities for translating into specific projects the broad industrial areas which the government has singled out for emphasis under the Five-Year Program and which have been included in our Foreign Investment Incentives Bill. This aggressiveness is all-important. While the cost of mistakes in the more complex task of the future will be greater than in the past, the cost of timidity will be even heavier.

Second , the achievement of greater depth and rigor in their project planning, that is, their study of the market, of costs, of supply and manpower availabilities, and of financing sources and patterns. In view of their predictable need for heavy foreign financing, the quality and standard of these project studies must be high enough to qualify them for submission to any financial institution abroad.

Third , the availing of domestic and foreign sources of financing to full advantage. This element is related to the two others just mentioned. Although there is a need for making more long-term capital available to our businessmen, the more serious shortage prevailing at the moment is not that of long-term financing. It is the lack of adequate projects to finance. In addition to our government’s financial institutions, particularly the DBP, GSIS and SSS, we shall soon have the Private Development Corporation and a subsidiary investment corporation of the Philippine National Bank to augment our sources of long-term capital. For our foreign loan requirements, we have the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Finance Corporation, the International Development Association, the U. S. Agency for International Development (A.I.D.), the Export-Import Bank, the Kreditanstalt and other banks in Germany, and various financial institutions abroad which we can use increasingly for financing our domestic projects. But our business sector must first draw up the projects, and design them according to required standards of quality and depth. We cannot stop to emphasize that the ability of our businessmen to command these resources for their ventures will be measured by the soundness and the quality of their plans.

Fourth , the exercise of care and foresight in their capital programs and the utmost efficiency in their actual operations. This is indispensable both for the profitability of the enterprises which our Filipino businessmen will set up in the future and for attuning our people to the discipline required of a growing industrial society.

The principal drive behind our future growth, therefore, must come from the Filipino businessman. It is for his support and his assistance that this Administration has drawn up its Five-Year Integrated Socio-Economic Program. The program is designed to bolster the competitive effort of our business sector on four fronts.

The first of those four fronts is the systematic program of government investment to provide the transport, power, irrigation and other facilities that our productive sectors will need in order to make their investment feasible and rewarding.

The second is the preferential provision of financing for the private projects which conform to the priorities of our economic development program and which fulfill the standards for project proposals which the government financial institutions will insist on.

The third is the grant of protection, chiefly through the instruments of tariffs and taxes, to young and growing Filipino industries to shield them from undue foreign competition in their infant stages. Let me repeat, however, a principle which this Administration has time and again expressed in the past: that tariff protection will be used not as a permanent support for inefficient industries but as a help for strengthening the competitive position of sound enterprises.

The fourth is the pursuit in practice of a policy which would encourage foreign equity participation in our developmental efforts preferably by means of joint ventures with Filipino capital and management. This last principle, while doing no damage to our policy of attracting foreign capital into the Philippines, will have the virtue of allowing Filipinos the highest participation possible wherever they themselves are willing and equipped to invest.

Having turned the light of understanding and cooperation in relation to foreign investment, we may now turn the searchlight to the broader and fundamental need for understanding and cooperation for economic progress. We start with the estimate that the Republic is at the crossroads of its economic destiny. We have cast aside the 12-year system of controls because, apart from being a breeding ground for corruption, it had served its maximum usefulness and had begun to suffocate economic growth. The economic transition from a controlled economy to free enterprise was a hazardous operation but it is the informed consensus that it has been carried out satisfactorily. There is one thing we are particularly gratified about the successful shift in the pattern of the economy. Under the discarded system of controls, success in business and the country’s growth were in the hands of the politicians. Now, under free and private enterprise, business success and the economic progress of the country are where they properly belong—in the hands of the businessmen.

The fact that business success now, as well as the nation’s economic growth, depends primarily on the businessmen should be the beginning of understanding that should forge the necessary cooperation. We stand strongly on the proposition that we must keep the politicians, specially the nationally powerful politicians, out of business ventures, especially vital ventures. If these persons want to be politicians, let them be politicians but they have no business competing in business with legitimate businessmen. If these persons want to be businessmen, let them be businessmen but they should not at the same time be big-time politicians in order to use their high political positions and power in unfair competitions with bona-fide businessmen.

It should, therefore, be a matter of understanding that in proceeding against some big politicians who are at the same time businessmen, we are not against businessmen at all. Nor is there basis for the partisan calumny that the Administration is undertaking punitive action against those businessmen who were on the opposite political side.

To cite only one instance, the Jacinto family which promoted under the past administration, the P250-million enterprise for the establishment of an integrated steel plant and is known to have supported the opposite political group in the last polls not only has not been the slightest inconvenienced by the Administration but, on the contrary, forgetting politics and remembering only that this enterprise is good for the economy, the Administration gave assistance to the Jacinto project in the form of terms and credits in million which it could not obtain even from the past administration because this Administration is for helping businessmen and entrepreneurs, irrespective of political considerations, who can contribute to the harnessing of vast productive potential of the country to spread prosperity to all the inhabitants of our country.

We are only against one category—the politicians who, occupying high elective office, use their public trust and political power to advance their business interests. We are for helping all other businessmen, whatever their politics may be. If you are a businessman who is not holding elective public office, you can feel absolutely at ease in going about your legitimate businesses without being subjected to any inconvenience and the Administration will even help you with what it can in your problems and needs, irrespective of your politics, past, present or future.

We are against politicians who use high public office and political power to advance their business interests because these politicians are fixtures of the discarded system of controls when political power and influence was the decisive factor for business success. Because these politicians gave grossly unfair competition to the hardworking businessmen and thereby dampened the climate of fair competition that should pervade in the business community for the healthy growth of business and the prosperity of the country. We have sought, through means sanctioned by the Constitution, the law, and fair contest, to weaken the hold of these politicians in the business field precisely because we seek to protect and help the true businessmen because we desire that in the spirit of free private enterprise, business should be dominated by legitimate and hardworking businessmen and not by politicians whose only business know-how is using high political office and power.

Another thing that deserves understanding is that in order to make effective the system of free and private enterprise, particularly during the early period after the transition from the pernicious system of regimented economy, the Government should exercise firm leadership in order to bring about the maximum cooperation necessary for success in the tremendous endeavor of economic progress through freedom. It is this necessity that has constrained us to be firm in our actions and that has given rise to unjustified assertions of alleged dictatorial tendencies on our part.

The truth that merits understanding is that motivated by unselfish purposes, we maintain a broad-minded and tolerant approach to our responsibilities and problems. At the same time, we believe in the necessity for leadership in any endeavor of national magnitude. There are many factors that make leadership necessary and unavoidable. First, there is the tendency of those who are adversely affected by the new system of free enterprise and who, thinking only of their interests and without regard for the general good, will resist the change and seek to frustrate the new system. Second, there is the rabid partisanship of well-placed politicians who would prefer the downfall of their political opponents above the general welfare. Third, there is the lack of sufficient understanding of the requirements and implications of the nation’s economic effort on the part of those who, in their blissful state of inadequate understanding, would block the economic effort to make their own views prevail. Fourth, there is the apathy of so many who could be useful to the nation’s drive but who would not lift a finger to help or would be indifferent to the failure of the program. Fifth, there are those who for one ignoble motive or another would engage in an effort to destroy the country’s task. In the midst of such forces moving confusedly in all directions, cooperative effort would be unattainable unless a leadership is established whose own susceptibility to human error is compensated by the authority that is rightfully his as a trust from our sovereign people by the lack of selfish interest for himself and by the nobility of his motives for the general good of the greatest number. We believe, therefore, that without leadership there cannot be brought about the condition of cooperation which you acknowledge is the means to economic progress. Realizing this, it became our duty to act vigorously in order to bring about maximum national solidarity and cooperation which are necessary for the success of our economic program. We would not have received cooperation from the House of Representatives if we had not succeeded in our efforts to establish leadership in that august chamber. We are not receiving enough cooperation from the Senate because we have so far failed in our efforts in that body. Whether we finally succeed or fail, we shall continue our efforts to bring about national solidarity and cooperation in the Senate and wherever it shall be needed because during the time that we discharge our trust from our people it is our inescapable duty to do everything legal and proper to insure the success of our economic program because of our conviction that economic progress is the salvation of our people.

What is the cooperation that we speak of in our domestic system as necessary to implement successfully a program for economic and social progress? It does not mean either dictation or subservience. Neither does it mean lip-service belied by action.

Cooperation takes place in either one of two situations. For those who believe in the program and find no obstacle to lending their support thereto, cooperation occurs in the normal course. For those who may not believe in the program or have some inconvenience in supporting it, cooperation would still be possible through an acceptance of the decision of those in whom the power of decision is constitutionally and statutorily lodged in our system ruled by law, after an opportunity is accorded for an exchange of ideas and views. It is obvious that all cannot be right in a conflict of views. It is certain that those who had made it habitual to attack and oppose the Administration in the implementation of its program are not right in all their views. Likewise, the Administration may not always be right in its decisions although it may be convinced in the soundness of such decisions. All that can be done by human leaders is to endeavor to reach the right decision and action and all that they have been afforded as the means for doing so is an exchange of ideas and views; and out of the divergent ideas and views, some official or office has been assigned by the rule of law the authority to make the decision for the general good on the country. This is the way towards cooperation, otherwise there would be destructive conflict, confusion and failure in the handling of complex problems and programs.

This is the way through which we have sought the necessary cooperation for the success of our program; we believe it to be the legitimate and the only possible way. In pursuing this manner of duty to achieve cooperation, we declare that it is our deep belief that without national solidarity and cooperation, our ambitious economic program cannot succeed; that, therefore, it is our duty to bring about maximum national solidarity and cooperation; and that in doing this and in making the decisions where the rule of law assigns to us the authority to make them, we are ready to assume full responsibility for our decisions. Specifically, if we are given the necessary national solidarity and cooperation in the implementation of our program, if we succeed, the credit shall justly be shared by us all, but if we fail despite the solidarity and cooperation extended to us, we alone shall assume responsibility for our shameful failure to our people.

We trust that there is one thing that will be understood by all. It is the fact that the Administration has concentrated on economic progress as the main task of the Nation. No administration has done this before and there is no probability that one would do so in the near future. This in itself poses a challenge particularly to the Filipino businessman. The Ad-ministration has adopted officially a five-year integrated socioeconomic development program. We have asked Congress to concentrate on economic legislation. We have filled our Cabinet with leaders possessed of economic orientation. We have surrounded ourselves with a staff of competent economic thinkers and leaders.

We venture to say that no President has depended more on the counsel of business and economic leaders than our self in running the affairs of the Nation.

We have done all this and more because of our creed that it is only by a faster and full rate of economic growth that we can solve the multiple and complex problems of the country and be able to give a chance to all our countrymen to attain a higher level of livelihood. This Administration aims to give the chance of generations to our people to effect a breakthrough out of the poverty and misery of the bulk of our population. It is a tragic and disgraceful parade that in a land that can comfortably support 100 million people, a population of less than 30 million is, in the main, languishing in poverty with small portion enjoying the boon of modern living. There is only one thing to do if we are to do our duty. We must unite in a national endeavor to bring forth as fast a rate of economic growth as our national resources and human endeavor can humanly achieve. To do less is to fail in our duty. Considering this rare opportunity given to the country and its future, to obstruct those who could pour out their soul and energy into the imperative undertaking for economic progress is to commit treason to the welfare of the Nation.

The main challenge is addressed to the Filipino businessmen. It is only the authority of the necessary government leadership that constitutes the limitation to the authority of the businessmen as the ones who are primarily responsible for the conduct of business and the operation of the economy in the pursuit of our goal of economic progress. The exercise of that government leadership is intended merely to assist you, the businessmen, in discharging your responsibility as the prime leaders and determinants in our economic and business life. This government leadership seeks to assist you to obtain the laws that you need from Congress; it seeks to provide to you the needed infra-structure facilities in a maximum and most efficient state; it seeks to so organize public credit as to make it available to you in the most equitable and useful manner. The rest is your task and responsibility—and it is the substance of the task; the making of investment plans, the investment of capital, the able management, the fair competition and the consideration for the general good of the economy and of the people. It shall be your particular task and responsibility of directing the country’s resources into those industries for which our standing needs are highest, and in the light of the participation of friendly foreign investments in our growth, yours shall be the challenge of establishing yourselves in the predominant and dynamic force behind our own country’s development.

Indeed, it is the inevitable result of the shift from controls to free enterprise that the businessmen should assume the main responsibility for our economic progress. Under controls, the success of the economic effort depended on the government. Under free enterprise, the success of the economic endeavor depends on the people generally and on the businessmen particularly. In free enterprise, the Nation stakes the growth of the economy in the hands of the people and the businessmen. The system seeks to exploit the creative power of freedom which is the people’s right. This right is at the same time a responsibility not to misuse it or to waste it by default. You, the businessmen, as the leaders of the people in the field of economic activity and growth, have it in your hands, in the system of free enterprise that we have agreed to adopt, whether to use your right of freedom and use it well or whether you will waste it by inaction or by deficient initiative, risk acceptance, activity and persistence in the utilization and development of our abundant natural and human resources. Convinced that we in the government will do our part, we conclude in candor that if free enterprise shall fail to give us the economic progress that we seek, you the businessmen shall bear the prime share of the infamy but if free enterprise shall succeed, as we pray and feel that it will, then both the profit and the glory shall be yours as the true leaders and builders of this Nation in a system of freedom.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.