Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On Philippine Constabulary Day

PC—A MOLAR ARMOR

IT IS with pride in celebrating the 62nd anniversary of the founding of our great organization, the Philippine Constabulary. I recall that when I was with you on an occasion like this last year, I was even then looking eagerly forward to being again with you in warm comradeship. I said then that I would not stop working for the welfare and upliftment of my dear comrades-in-arms in khaki and red, and I am happy to tell you now that I have never ceased doing so and I shall never cease to do so.

As you all know I have signed into law the bill raising the pay of officers of the armed forces and that improving the lot of the enlisted men in regard to longevity pay. I have also approved other pieces of legislation affecting the welfare of our men in uniform including one which would place by your side, in the interest of efficiency and morale, women in uniform who aim to prove that the fighting spirit and patriotism of Gabriela Silang and Tandang Sora is not yet dead and will never die. This is a positive step towards the modernization of our armed forces for there is no modern army in the world today that does not recognize the role that women play in national defense.

We hope to find that the women constables will prove their worth not merely in office work but as well in missions related to peace and order as the custody of women detainees and the supervision and guidance of juvenile delinquents. It may also be expected that many of these women in khaki and red will develop a proficiency in crime detection in roles which men could not naturally perform. So, with the addition of the WACs to the constabulary and the creation of a versatile PC battalion combat team, together with such progress as the organization has made along the road of moral regeneration, we find the Philippine Constabulary considerably strengthened. This we are proud to report to our people on the 62nd organization day of this noble throng of fighting men and women.

We are stepping, therefore, into another year of service to our people which may even be more difficult than the past. But whatever may be the magnitude of the challenge of the future which we are facing together, as long as we are bound by the warm camaraderie and the noble traditions of this organization, as long as we are determined to enforce the law without fear or favor, and as long as we stick to moral principles, we cannot fail. We intend to meet here again next year to see how far we have gone ahead together in our common task of upholding the rule of law and morality.

The Philippine Constabulary, indeed, has gone a long way since that day on August 8, 1901, when it was organized by Brig. Gen. Henry T. Allen and led by some 68 officers. Since the days of Brig. Gen. Rafael Crame, whose memory this camp seeks to perpetuate, Filipino commanders have proved their worth in leading such a nationwide police organization.

The 62nd-year history of the Constabulary is replete with deeds of heroism in the fight against banditry, subversion, and other crimes. There was the fight against the Pulajanes in Samar in the first five years of the PC. There was the Mindanao campaign which had displayed the gallantry of constables in hand-to-hand fighting. It was here that General Paulino Santos won distinction in combat leadership.

The PC also saw glorious action in Luzon in the 20’s and early 30’s. The constables battled the fanatic colorums in Pangasinan. Among the fighting officers of that campaign was General Castañeda. There was the fighting against the Sakdalistas and the Asedillo gang in Laguna where Generals Balao and Vargas distinguished themselves.

Even when war came over our beloved country, the Constabulary led by General Francisco was the first to join the USAFFE and the unit’s deeds of valor in Bataan are now history.

In the fight against communist dissidence the PC also had written a saga of blood and valor in Central Luzon and the Visayas. Many of those who took part in that grim task of upholding the sovereignty of our Republic against an insidious ideology that seeks to dominate mankind are still among us today. To these combat veterans, the new blood that has joined the organization should seek guidance and inspiration for the job that is ahead. We aim today to fight crime in whatever form it may present itself, for it is our bounden duty to ensure peace and order so that our socio-economic program for the progress of our country and the upliftment of our common people may go unhampered.

While we face the challenge of the future, we need as ever the armor of virtue. This is the armor that has been handed over to us by our fallen and retired comrades-in-arms in 62 years of selfless devotion to duty. This is the armor which a past corrupt administration has schemed to tarnish and which today we are together shining anew with the spirit of moral regeneration. With this armor, we cannot fail. Not all the diabolical mudslinging in the world, not all the corrupt intent of any Stonehills and Peter Lims that some may wish to have back or to create in the future, not all the attempts of venal politicians to subvert this gallant institution, not all the diabolical schemings of the evil-minded, can prevail against the moral armor that is the PC. The rule of law and justice must be supreme and to uphold that rule we are, one and all, pledged to lay down our lives, if need be. Our comrades-in-arms in the 62 years of glorious history of the PC have done that willingly and gladly. We intend to do no less.

I am elated, therefore, over the fact that you have chosen as the theme of our celebration today, dedication to duty with moral regeneration. Now, I find that you and your Commander-in-Chief speak the same language.

We are one in thought and thus may confide to one another on the means whereby we may make this theme more meaningful.

Let us start from the agreed premise that the PC is an organization of men of action as contradistinguished from men who claim that they can serve our country with words. If that is so, then our adherence to the principle of moral regeneration should be one of deeds and not of empty words, words and more words.

The glorious history of the PC proves this point. Capt Julian Olivas, for instance, is a hero not because of anything he said but because of the deed of supreme sacrifice he performed in the line of duty. The long and noble list of heroes in khaki and red from 1901 to 1963, down to Lt. Bonilla who died in an anti-smuggling mission, illustrates the PC tradition of morality demonstrated by deeds, not by words.

We should all be proud of these Constabulary heroes. I would like to see the day when some thoughtful people in the organization would compile the biographies of these heroes because we would then have some reading material useful for the moral upliftment and inspiration not only of our personnel but also of the rest of our people. It might also be sensible for you to start a hall of fame where pictures or busts of PC heroes are displayed. The HPC lobby or the officers’ club might be a good site for this laudable project. But above all, our hearts and our minds should be the best shrine of enduring honor and devotion to our constabulary heroes who, in spirit, are here with us today to behold our organization and, perhaps, to see how far we have kept faith with the ideals for which they have rendered the supreme measure of devotion. I want all of you to start studying the lives of these valiant comrades-in-arms of ours and labor with determination to emulate their glorious deeds. Our troop information people should well be capable of compiling materials for this purpose.

The example of our constabulary heroes should be one beaconlight for us in our advance along the road of moral regeneration. Another is leadership because, more than ever before, we need leaders with moral courage in the PC. It is not enough that leaders should be able to lecture on honesty and integrity. I would rather have it that the lecturing be dispensed with and the leaders teach their men by force of example.

Let the leaders of this organization be aware of the fact that there is practically nothing in what they do that will not be known eventually by their subordinates. And while there may be secrecy discipline in the organization and its military secrets can be kept under the hats of these subordinates, the private secrets of the brasshats eventually find their way to the community. The slightest suspicion that our people have against the honesty and integrity of the leaders of this organization will bring the entire Constabulary into disrepute. All of us, therefore, must strive to remove that cloud and restore the reputation of this organization which has been conceived as a byword of honesty and integrity. You all know that the smallest black spot could be discerned in an object we want to be entirely clean. It is therefore our duty to keep the Constabulary escutcheon immaculately clean and unspotted, whether by black spots or blue seals, or any other unwanted smudges. Let us have good leaders and dependable followers and the situation will be well in hand. Our old folks have an appropriate saying on this subject; they say “Ang ibinubuti ng nasasakupan ay nasa may hawak ng kapangyarihan.”

Now, while we are on the road of moral regeneration we should not tolerate the presence in our midst of any of our brothers with other ideas that militate against our worthy objective. If anyone cannot keep in step, let him fall out of our ranks. If anybody here has any doubt or reluctance about our efforts towards moral regeneration, for goodness sake, let him get out of the service.

Since the day we celebrated PC Day last year, I was aware of the fact, which I appreciate very much, that there has been started a cleaning tip process in this organization. You call it here the weeding out of misfits. I want this job to be a continuing operation because it is as important as fighting the enemy in the battlefield, for the enemy within is even more dangerous than those without. I want to tell you how distressed I am whenever I hear of any verified derogatory report against any member of this organization. It is because I love it so well and because I am profoundly proud to be your Commander-in-Chief. You know very well that I feel so deeply attached to you and that I have been trying my level best to work for your welfare. I like to think that the feeling is mutual and that you will keep our Constabulary family on a moral level that would be the pride and admiration of our people.

Under our rule of law, the dishonest and the unfit will have all the chances to avail themselves of prescribed procedures and even the benefits of trial by civil courts. But let the indomitable axe of justice—which you see on your shoulder patches—cut those who believe in the contrary doctrine of moral degeneration out of any link with the organization whose reputation and efficiency we desire to preserve.

If there are any people in khaki and red who deserve to go to jail, let them all go to jail. I don’t want to hear the legal people of this organization to say they are short-handed in prosecuting the black sheep of the family. There are many lawyers in our reserve force. If we need all of them to do the job we can call them in. I would consider the money spent to call in additional probers and prosecutors well-spent because no amount of money in the world could equal the value of the good name of the Philippine Constabulary.

I trust, my fellow constables, that you will live by the theme of moral regeneration you have thoughtfully set in this year’s PC Day to achieve. This citadel of peace and order whose ramparts you man should be no less than a shrine of honor and virtue which is symbolized by the knight on your shoulder patch. This citadel should stand out like a haven of hope for our people at a time when demagogues are out to misguide them with their own warped ideas of vote-snaring morality, of out-and-out hypocrisy, of feigned indignation at being confronted by their link to corruption. This demagoguery has its roots in the mire of selfishness. There is no place for selfishness in the dictionary of a true constabularyman whose life is one of selfishness and love of country. Truly has Dr. Rizal said that cowardice begins in selfishness and ends in shame. You all know that there is no room for cowardice in the family of the khaki and red.

I must tell you that the task of moral regeneration is not an easy one. There is the physical law which says that for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. Already, you may have noticed that in the Administration’s efforts to sweep corruption away from our country there is already a scheming reactionary force which seeks to destroy what we have begun to achieve. Corrupt elements are moving to creep back into power and again bring about a reign of greed over our people. You know that corruption in the past had deceit, fabrication, and forgery as its instruments of filthy gain. You will find that the reactionary elements are brandishing the same weapons anew. Beware of them and let them not drag this organization into mire and muck. Keep up your good work and your armor of virtue will keep you clean of their clutches. Remember this saying in Pilipino:

Even if a pile of poison is offered to you, think about it, you will not die unless you consume it.

With these reactionaries and agents of corruption persisting to be active in our midst, abetted by their witting or unwitting tools, indeed we can say that these are times that try our souls. With the noble traditions of our organization deep in our hearts, with the inspiring example of our Constabulary heroes ever before us, with the determination, to lead our people along the path of moral regeneration, and with unshakeable faith in Almighty God whose protecting hand is ever with the good, we of the Philippine Constabulary cannot fail. We have plenty of fighting days ahead in the struggle for a better life for our people, but true to the constabulary tradition, the nation can rest assured that we will never be outfought in upholding the honor and glory of the PC and in serving the highest interests of our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.