Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the 10th National Convention of Manufacturers and Producers

[Released on March 23, 1963]

Integration in Economic Development

THE TEST of our age is the test of survival—not survival in war, where the weapons are the cannon and the bayonet and the stakes are victory or annihilation—but survival in peace, where the weapons are wisdom and decision and the stakes are economic prosperity or hunger.

Unlike the rich countries of this world, our aspirations are not primarily concerned with such grandiose aims as world dominance or the stretching of our spheres of influence or victory in the race for the moon. Our aspirations are bound up rather with the elemental requirements of a people’s existence. We seek nothing more ambitious than the capacity to give our countrymen a little more food, clothing and shelter, to educate our young and to free our people from unnecessary disease and misery.

Yet though modest our desires, these are goals that can be achieved only through the most searing labors, for the hosts of poverty and ignorance do not fall at the sound of trumpets, nor are they vanquished by the mere statement of pious motives and noble intentions. Quite often, as in our country’s case, the way to the fulfillment of these aims involves nothing less than a revolution, though a peaceful one, in the structure of the economy, in the values and thinking of our people, in the role that government and private enterprise are asked to play in economic development.

The Socio-Economic Program that we have presented to our people and to Congress assumes that such a revolution is a necessary ingredient in our economic growth. Its grand design is that it will seek to free in one great effort the economy from its traditional sluggishness, introduced a new dynamism into all its sectors, and lay the foundations upon which sustained prosperity can be built. Thus, the monetary and financial portion of the Program not only sets investment targets. It also underscores the fact that these targets are to be achieved only through a reform of our financial system—through the removal of investment bottlenecks, the development of new financial institutions and the provision of channels for the entry of foreign capital.

In the same spirit of change, our agricultural program aims not only to meet actual food requirements and expanding traditional export production. It also envisions the increase of agricultural production and land productivity to an extent sufficient to provide surpluses for industrial processing.

Similarly, our industrial program seeks to go beyond mere increase of industrial production. It aspires as well for an expansion in our production of finished, intermediate and capital goods to lessen our undue dependence on imports and for the virtual creation of an export industry dealing in manufactured goods as opposed to our exports of raw, unprocessed products.

Through the whole Five-Year Program runs this probing, daring finger of change and innovation seeking out the weaknesses and distortions in the economy, and laying down in clear unequivocal terms the decisions, the processes needed to set things aright. The commitment to growth through change is an evident hallmark of the Five-Year Program.

It is generally noted that our socio-economic program is for five years. What is not generally noted is that it is an integrated program, hence its full appellation is “the five-year integrated socio-economic development program.” What I would like to focus attention before you is that the word “integrated” was deliberately used in our program for a purpose, that if change is an extremely persistent trait in this document, so, too, is the concept of integration.

The Program not only advocates change in the various economic sectors; it advocates change in an integrated manner. It prescribes for the improvement of one economic area measures that also enhance the attainment of the goals of another. Thus, the steps recommended to be taken under the foreign exchange program are intended not only to build up our dollar reserves but also to build up our pool of industrial capital. The financial and monetary program is conceived to work hand in hand with the fiscal scheme, not at cross purposes with it as happened in the past.

The Program’s emphasis on change and integration is perhaps most eloquently illustrated in our scheme for the development of industry, the word as used being intended to embrace manufacturing, mining, construction, transport and communication. The industrial sector constitutes not only the major area of the economy into which are intended to be poured the greater bulk of our investments, the area where some of the most basic structural changes in the economy are intended to take place.

The capacity of agriculture to absorb our growing work force to provide jobs and food for our people, is comparatively limited. Industry alone can provide for the type of expansion that can allow us to meet the demands of a growing people pressing more and more upon the same area of land. The decision to increasingly shift primary emphasis from agriculture to industry is not so much a decision as the acceptance of an inexorable economic fact.

Because industry constitutes the major field of development under our Program, it is also in this sector where the greatest complementarity and integration in growth with other economic areas must exist. The programmed expansion in agricultural production, for example, must be conceived as a necessary process of industrialization since agriculture and industry must, in growing, provide each other with adequate markets for each other’s products or else fail together. Development is primarily a process of growth in both productivity and markets. An increase in productivity can hardly be possible without a market to absorb the additional goods produced. And the expansion of a market without a corresponding increase in the amount of goods available can only result in an undue rise in prices. Thus, we accelerate agricultural growth, because in so doing we grant that sector the capacity to act as a more effective and adequate market for the products of an expanded industrial system. Conversely, we seek to foster industrial development because in so doing we widen the market for agricultural produce.

The integrated concept of industrial development is similarly demonstrated in the manner in which we have planned our five-year financial, fiscal, foreign exchange and public administration programs.

Our financial program aims at the reform of our financial system in order to dissipate bottlenecks to production and capital formation which may arise either through an inadequacy of financial resources or the inaccessibility of such resources as are available to priority economic ventures. It endeavors to provide the twin attractions of security and adequate return in order that foreign capital may be encouraged to enter the country either as loans or as direct investments in indicated enterprises. And it seeks to reform or to develop new financial institutions, instruments and procedures so our people may be encouraged to increase their savings and to channel such savings into industrial ventures.

Our fiscal program contemplates public investments of some P2.8 billion for power development, the extension of railroad and telecommunications facilities, irrigation and water supply, roads and highways not only to service the needs of the general public but also to enable industrialists to power their mills, open up wider markets for their products and reduce the costs of their production and marketing.

The foreign exchange program is designed to raise the country’s foreign exchange reserves so the industrialist may be able to import his machinery, equipment and raw materials. It will continue to concentrate as well in stabilizing the exchange rate so the investor in industry may be able to program his expansion and operations in a more predictable manner.

Our public administration program seeks to place economic planning and execution on a more coherent and unified basis so that the various government units may work harmoniously within the over-all economic scheme and not frustrate each other’s objectives. It will attempt to unify government policies on credit, tariffs, investments, commerce and other fields so that private businessmen may be provided with clear-cut landmarks and guideposts in the making of their own decision. It will strive to strengthen key government offices whose functions intimately relate to industry so that they may serve and facilitate rather than hamper the conduct of private enterprise.

Our commitment to the integrated approach in industrial development lies at the root of every government plan and decision bearing on this subject. Within the present legislative milieu, the government is exerting every effort to encourage, foster and spur the operation of all its components in a manner that would make their operations conform to the general pattern laid down by the program. But if the idea of integration is truly to be achieved, our action must not be confined to the existing legislative framework. Many of the more positive remedies called for by our economic problems can be brought into being only through the passage of enabling legislation.

In this thought we have presented to Congress a set of economic bills bearing on diverse topics—on domestic and foreign borrowing, investment incentives, reforms in our corporation, mining, banking, and commercial laws, governmental reorganization and, lately, land reform—all of which however, have been designed to complement or to remedy old laws or to create new ones so as to better fit governmental policies and action into our master plan for growth.

In the messages accompanying our twenty-six economic proposals as well as our recommendations on land reforms, we discoursed at length on the overriding reasons for their passage. But perhaps it may be worthwhile to view these proposals once more, particularly in the manner in which they are intended to further our plans for developing the industrial sector.

We have proposed the amendment of Republic Act 1000 to raise the government’s domestic borrowing authority from one billion to two billion pesos. We have done so for many of the power systems, the roads, harbor and power projects that are intended to support accelerated industrial growth can be built only if the government is empowered to borrow more funds to finance their construction.

We have asked for the amendment of Republic Act 16 to increase the foreign-debt authority of the government and we have proposed the passage of an investment incentives bill. We have made these recommendations for it is only through the grant of such increased authority and through the provision of inducements to international investors that we shall be able to bring foreign capital into the Philippines in the magnitude desired. There is no legitimate misgiving for any misuse of this power because it can only be exercised to the extent that foreign credit institutions find a loan a worthwhile venture.

We have proposed measures designed to protect minority corporate investors and depositors of public savings institutions to encourage investment and savings on a more widespread basis. As the final step in our decontrol program, we have advocated the enactment of a selective raw materials export levy both as a source of the funds that alone can give life to our development program and as an incentive to the processing of raw materials into finished goods before their exportation.

The idea of integrated industrial development permeates even our program for land reform, the measure by which we shall seek to eradicate the festering inequity that has ruled the lives of our farmers for centuries. The land reform program seeks to increase the productivity of our farmers by abolishing tenancy, giving them economic, family-sized farms and providing them with adequate farm credit and agricultural extension services. The increase in the productivity of our farmers will enable them to increase their incomes and thereby absorb the products of our growing industries. Within the next decade at least, our farm population will continue to be the major potential for a truly mass market and any effort to increase their capacity to purchase goods will be reflected immediately in the tempo and vigor of our industrial enterprises.

At the same time, since the land reform program will strive to make the ownership of corporate securities in industry more profitable than mere landholding, it will thus encourage more and more of our agricultural landholders to shift their investments from land to industrial ventures. Such a development would of course widen the base of ownership of our industries at the same time that it will make more funds available for the expansion of the country’s complex of enterprises.

During the fifteen months that we have assumed the duties of national leadership bestowed upon us by our people, we have been guided in all our actions and decisions affecting the economy by the integrated concept of development embodied in the Five-Year Socio-Economic Program. Before this assembly of the nation’s economic decision-makers, we reiterate our adherence to the targets, objectives, and policies set forth in that document.

Specifically, we reaffirm our belief in the oft-stated cardinal tenet that the task of economic development belongs principally to private enterprise and not to government. But while private enterprise is intended to be the prime mover in economic growth, the government also participates in our plans for progress. While leaving to the private sector the primary responsibility for investment, it is to government that the country must turn for that framework of laws and policies within which individual ventures may be able to flourish. There is in fact an inescapable need for the integration of governmental and business decisions affecting the economy. Enterprise is as much a creature of its environment as man is and it cannot prosper m a milieu which makes it impossible for business to plan for the future because economic policies are erratic or contradictory, or move into costly, virgin ventures because the government has not provided adequate inducements, or risk its fortunes in particular geographical areas because the government has failed to provide supportive public investments and developmental services.

In connection with the needed integration between the effort of the Government and the private sector, we may perchance mention the projects to establish steel plants in the country which are needed to give a spurt to manufacturing ventures. There are two ventures in this field, one the Jacinto project to put a P250-million integrated steel plant in Iligan and the other, the P150-million Sta. Ines steel plant project in the Rizal area in Luzon. Prior to our assumption of office, these projects had bogged down due allegedly to government indecision or inaction. As soon as we took over, realizing the importance of these projects to manufacturing and production, we lost no time in not only supporting these two projects in principle but in committing the government to grant the loans and guarantees needed from the government to push through these ventures. Frankly, and we hope we are wrong in our feeling, we feel that the government under our Administration has done and committed its part, but the vital projects have seem to bog down due to the slower pace of the private sector in doing its part.

We have made reference to the state of these steel plant projects to emphasize one fact: that the Administration, relentlessly and energetically pursuing the effective implementation of our five-year program, is eager and ready to do its part in assisting you towards more manufacturing production and other economic enterprises. Since our program is based on private enterprise, its success lies in your hands by matching and exceeding the Government’s earnestness and pace of performance. Without doing your role, the Government’s efforts, for all our sense of urgency and enthusiasm, will be in vain. But if we do our assigned parts together, assisting each other in every way, matching enthusiasm with enthusiasm, urgency with urgency, performance with performance, the dream envisioned in our program will inevitably materialize into the reality of profitable ventures for our businessmen and an abundant life for all our countrymen.

Finally, there is need for integration between the effort of Congress and the Executive. I speak to you on this need for integrating the objectives and decisions of the government and the private sector in the awareness that Congress as well as business and the public in general are deliberating on our set of economic proposals. Some of our legislative recommendations have been criticized because they would grant more effective economic mandates to the executive department. But the question is not whether these measures do constitute an additional mandate or not but whether they are needed to enable this nation to realize its dream of attaining prosperity within this age.

This Administration does not ask for more effective laws for the sake of economic power. You all have been witness to our decision to decontrol, a decision that took away from the hands of government the power of life and death over business and industry.

We know that control of foreign exchange was a source of tremendous economic power which meant also tremendous political power in our hands but we had no hesitation in giving up the power because we are not interested in such but in what is good for the people.

If your government has asked for certain legislative mandates it is because these mandates are right and proper and needed. For the unavoidable truth is that under any leadership, any party, the government must always be vested with that authority sufficient to enable it to foster the pace of growth, to point out economic directions, to nurture and encourage enterprise, to regulate business for the common good and to promote social justice and lessen inequities to the end that the economy may prosper and the people prosper with it. Without the mandates necessary to transform its plans into action, government will remain an ineffectual thing, standing helplessly by, rendered impotent by the inhibiting administrative shackles that prevent it from coming to the succor of a distressed economy, a suffering people.

Our people beset as they are with the elemental problems of survival cannot and will not countenance a government that will deliberately deny itself the instruments necessary to lift our people from their bed of misery. An abdication of authority in the face of a demand and a necessity for strong and decisive leadership is—in its most tragic sense—a betrayal of the waiting millions who have reposed their faith in us.

This Presidency will not betray that faith. It will not shirk its responsibility of leading this country decisively and surely. And it will not cease to seek those legislative mandates and exercise those legal powers that alone can enable government to redeem its pledge to act as a true partner to business—to help businessmen and industrialists help themselves—to dissipate the social wrong and economic ills that hamper growth and deepen inequity—to forge the plans and programs, policies and decisions of the various economic sectors into an integrated, dynamic mould and thereby right the economy and start it surely along the road that leads, we pray to God, to our long-cherished dream of peace and plenty, not only for a few, but for all our people.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.