Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On the 28th Anniversary of the Philippine Air Force

[Delivered on May 2, 1963]

Philippine Air Force Day

THIS IS THE SECOND time during our tenure that we have had the pleasure of joining the officers and men of the Philippine Air Force, their families and friends, in the observance of PAF Day. For us, this happy experience is even more gratifying than before. In fact, it passes full explanation but it is a fact that amidst our heavy responsibilities in our lonely post as President, we feel most reassured and at home when we are with the air force and other armed forces. One explanation for this strange but refreshing feeling is our conviction that in the travails of our Nation searching for its destiny, in the midst of so many hypocrites paying lip service to the people, the officers and men of the armed forces under our command are authentic and sterling in their love of country because they offer not words but sacrifice and even their lives on the altar of their country.

Looking back at the year and a third that have passed, we are gratified at the improvement in our armed forces and at the part we played to help bring this about. We feel that our armed forces have improved in morale, effectiveness and prestige. We are gratified that the organization has also materially advanced in the provision for its needs. One thing we never get tired saying because it is a fact was that among the thousand and one things that we have done as chief executive, one that gave us singular happiness was to increase the pay of the officers and enlisted men of our armed forces. We are also looking forward with eager expectancy and anticipation to the materialization of our project, for which we have already provided the millions needed, to provide better housing and living quarters for the enlisted men and their families. We feel that what we have done for our armed forces has not been enough for what they deserve. In the current session of Congress, we are exerting effort and are confident that we shall be able to provide for longevity pay to the enlisted men and for more increased pay for the officers. If we are to be candid about our conviction, we feel that everything that we can do for our armed forces will never be enough for what they deserve because when the hour strikes for the decisive test of love of country and loyalty to our noble cause, it is the officers and men of the air force and other forces who will surely not be found wanting and who, in the words of the Chief of Staff, General Alfredo Santos, in the moment of crisis will not bother to question why but will ever be ready to do and if necessary, die.

We can look back together at a year of hard work, 12 months crammed with a tight schedule of missions and tasks that had challenged our air force. What justifiably gladdens the PAF is not merely that it had labored hard, but more so because its labors had brought results that had enhanced the strength and effectiveness of the force, the security and welfare of our people, and the honor and prestige of our country.

Let our accustomed candor go further so that this we will say: that while our faith, trust and affection are full for all the services of our armed forces, considering that our country is a maritime archipelago of seven thousand islands, we pin particular hope for the over-all needs of the Nation in the capability of that service which has the fastest mobility and compasses the maximum territorial reach in the minimum time, mainly, the Philippine Air Force whose 28th anniversary we glorify today.

Active and passive defense systems are therefore indispensable if we are to achieve a force structure designed for the defense of the Philippines. This is one reason why I have come to regard the Philippine Air Force as a vital segment in our force structure. We do not believe in rigid concepts but we do believe in giving the threat factor primary consideration in the composition of our force structure. We are therefore prepared to spend for the Philippine Air Force so much of our resources as will not impair our capability to survive economically.

I realize that the stages of development of our Air Force have had its share of “growing pains.” But in spite of these growing pains and because of the dedication, fortitude, and sacrifices of its officers and airmen, we have today an air arm which had established and can take its rightful place among the best air forces of the world. I realize too the stature attained by the Philippine Air Force in the eyes of our people and the people of other nations—of our staunchest ally, the United States of America, for which I express the gratitude of our people on this auspicious occasion.

The future of our Air Force looks bright with the assurance that their equipment, particularly the fighter-interceptor aircraft, will be augmented with fighter aircraft comparable with the most modern equipment of other Air Forces. I feel almost secure and confident with the knowledge that in the near future the Philippine Air Force shall be able to accomplish its primary mission of air defense with adequate supersonic fighter interceptor aircraft. I would like to point out, however, that interceptor aircraft by itself, no matter how efficient, cannot provide the air defense we may need for our national survival. I refer to the other elements of a weapons system which should provide the warning, control, and direction of these supersonic fighter interceptors—the other important member of the air defense team—which should function as efficiently and effectively as the supersonic interceptor.

We cannot help on this memorable 28th anniversary of the Philippine Air Force to think of those early heroes of the Air Force who in the Second World War fought valiantly against terribly unequal odds unsurpassed in the annals of warfare, among them Barsac, Gozar, Villamor and Juliano. We cannot help thinking of Paredes who fought and gave his life in the skies of London as proof that the modest Philippine Air Force exists not for this country alone but for all nations who cherish democracy and freedom. We cannot help thinking of those officers and men of the air force who in the faithful performance of duty, whether in training and in peaceful missions, have plunged to a noble death in our soil and waters.

We cannot but think, too, of our brothers who have gone to the Congo on the noble mission of helping the United Nations keep the peace in the area. We also remember that when disaster struck in Bali, Indonesia, our airmen responded with dispatch by airlifting medical supplies and paramedics to the disaster area, an accomplishment that speaks highly of the readiness and mobility of the Philippine Air Force to perform its mission in times of emergency. More important perhaps is the fact that the airmen willingly chose to be thousands of miles away from home fortified only by the universal brotherhood of free men of which they are and feel a part. As their commander-in-chief I take great pride in their competence and dedication to duty and I find justifiable relief in knowing that there are more of their kind who are ready to take off and leave their contrails in the sky, their reminders and their warning that Philippine skies are sacred to the Filipino and that no enemy can afford to violate this sanctity without paying dearly for the attempt.

It gave us particular satisfaction that through our air and medical forces, we could show our friendship for our Indonesian brethren in disaster-stricken Bali because the Indonesians are not only our racial brothers but our next-door neighbor in the South. Indonesia and the Philippines are to each other like Canada and the United States or Mexico and the United States. Whether we like it or not—and we rather like it than not—Indonesia and the Philippines shall be contiguous neighbors together with our other next-door neighbor and racial brother, Malaya, until the end of time. Indonesia, Malaya and the Philippines must learn how to live in peace and harmony among themselves because not only do they belong to the same Malay race but also because they are stuck to one another by the will of Providence throughout the ages. Malaya and the Philippines happily are in complete ideological harmony while it is possible that Indonesia for the present is not in complete ideological communion with us. This is perhaps understandable because these three Malay peoples fell under the tutelage of three different colonial powers, Indonesia under the Dutch, Malaya under the British and the Philippines under the Spaniards and the Americans. On our part, we move in the conviction that neither ideology nor any other obstacle will long hinder an affinity of effort and purpose on the part of these peoples whom the Almighty in His infinite wisdom made only one race and next-door neighbors. Let the big powers who provide leadership and guidance in the crusade for freedom ponder upon this thought, that as mankind steps into the threshold of equality in sovereignty and dignity of all peoples, when the intermediate machinery of imperialism and colonialism dissembles itself as an instrument for the progress of man in order to return to all subject peoples their natural right to sovereign statehood and personality, answering as part of their self-assumed responsibility for the adjustment of the aftermath and complications of colonialism, instead of promoting dissension, animosity and lingering coldness among these three neighboring Malay peoples, it would be a better service to a better world if these three nations could be assisted to adjust their aftermath problems and differences in peace, good will and harmony among themselves because if these former colonies tutored under three different mother countries could thus be brought together as friendly and cooperative nations despite their different colonial tutelage, such a feat will be a historic tribute to the virtue and constructive quality of imperialism, otherwise colonialism shall continue in the chronicle of man’s history to be an indictment of the selfishness of brute might and the exploitation of weaker fellow men.

On this year’s PAF Day, it is heart-warming to note the fact that the Philippine Air Force is engaged in a splendid display of comradeship with neighboring air forces. We refer to the Flying Brothers 1963 or the Fourth Asian Fighter Weapons Conference which is successfully coming to a close. We feel honored and pleased to see the representatives of our Flying Brothers here today and congratulate each and everyone of them for the brilliant exhibition of skill that they made during the international air shows. Seeing them fly here today and gazing in admiration at the craft of brother nations, we long for the day when all nations in the world bound in brotherhood would join such a wonderful fraternity of free men not for war but for peace and human progress.

This demonstration is a credit to the international fraternity of airmen who are prepared and are willing to bridge, not only the voids of space, but also the voids of normal day-to-day communication among peoples everywhere the better to foster mutual understanding, mutual cooperation and mutual respect.

From a common milieu, freedom-loving airmen have derived a common approach, albeit a common regard, for the potential of military aviation, not as an instrument of violence, but as a vehicle for common safety, protection and peace. Peace is a commodity we all want in bountiful proportions—may we all have it through the togetherness you have demonstrated and may we all continue to discover other venues to promote as close a brotherhood among all peoples of all creeds and of all races everywhere.

I would like at this juncture, to make public recognition of the valuable contributions which the Philippine Air Force is making in furtherance of the socio-economic program of the Administration In the first place, the mere fact that our airmen with their air vehicles and their ground environment are on the alert twenty-four hours of the day, in fair weather or foul, to secure our skies, is itself a contributory factor in instilling a wholesome sense of security and confidence among farmers, businessmen, industrial concerns, manufacturers, and other entrepreneurs to proceed with their production and expansion plans. In the second place, certain non-military capabilities which inhere in the very nature of the equipment and the technical know-how available in the Philippine Air Force, can be and are being harnessed for socio-economic purposes. Aerial photography is a great boon in the survey, assessment, exploitation and preservation of our natural resources. The earth-bound surveyor, the forest ranger, the soils expert, the mineralogist, the engineer and other technical specialists can now avail themselves of the aerial photograph and, with the advanced techniques of photo interpretation and of photogrammetry, they can now complete needed surveys in weeks or months which before took them years and years. And then, of course, wherever disaster strikes, the Philippine Air Force is there to bring urgently needed supplies and medicines, evacuate the sick and wounded or otherwise give aid and comfort to our unfortunate countrymen. These are contributions whose pecuniary value is considerable just as their impact on the over-all socio-economic program is tremendous. I cannot, therefore, fail to make public recognition of this report, determined as we are in this administration to accelerate the economic and social well-being of our country and people.

We must trust that the Philippine Air Force will continue to enhance its level of skill. With skillful management to what we have now we could improve in a large measure the effectiveness of air force. The challenge of improvement is before us. We are not afraid to accept it. We had taken on last year’s challenge with inspiring results. Thus, encouraged and inspired, let us soar confidently into the future to the end that next year, God willing, we shall meet again to celebrate an even more inspiring and satisfying PAF Day.

In closing I would like to quote the now famous tribute of Sir Winston Churchill to the RAF in the battle of Britain when he said:

“Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few.”

On this 28th anniversary, we say with justifiable pride that the Philippine Air Force, in its own modest way, deserves a similar tribute.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.