Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Manila Overseas Press Club

[Delivered on September 4, 1962]

THE PHILIPPINES IN WORLD AFFAIRS

THE two major concerns of the Administration are domestic in character—the adoption of the five-year socio-economic program and its speedy implementation, and the moral regeneration of our people. However, the various initiatives we have taken in foreign affairs, including the State Visits we recently made to Spain, Italy, the Holy See and Pakistan, would have shown that this Administration is by no means indifferent to foreign affairs and international relations. Ours being a new Administration, primacy has been given to domestic policy because foreign policy is essentially a function of domestic policy. That is to say, our basic attitudes and policy decisions in international affairs are organically related to and concomitant with the conduct of our domestic affairs. Our foreign policies are effective and sound only to the extent that our domestic policies are effective and sound.

Having already set the main guidelines of our domestic program, it is appropriate that we do likewise in the field of foreign policy. Our foreign policy aims, like our domestic policy objectives, are simple and straightforward. These are to assist and accelerate the economic and social progress of the nation, and to help ensure the freedom of our people and the security of our Republic.

To achieve these objectives, we have but one fundamental rule of action, namely, to develop relations of closest sympathy and cooperation with all friendly states of like mind and interest, for mutual benefit or for collective advantage, on the basis of respect for each other’s rights, the principle of non-interference and the sovereign equality of States.

Because of its population of nearly thirty millions, its abundant natural resources, its affinities with Asia and the West, and its strategic location in an important crossroads of Southeast Asia and the Western Pacific, the Philippines belongs to the category of middle-sized States that are called upon to play a fairly important role in international affairs. In effect, we know the approximate weight of our country in world affairs and this knowledge dictates the nature and extent of our foreign policy initiatives and decisions.

Since we are not a Great Power, we are relatively exempt from the vast extra-national concerns that are the lot of those who are. We are obliged, however, to pull our own weight in the collective endeavors of the international community and of the free world. If our resources permit, we should of course try to do more than that and help those that are poorer or weaker than we are.

Further, the growing realization of the need for the inter-dependence of nations and the integration of humanity requires that we contribute all we can to the common pool of human welfare, without asking to know what our exact stake is or what is there in it for us.

We shall, therefore, continue to participate actively in the work of the United Nations and its specialized agencies, as well as in the activities of such regional organizations as the Colombo Plan, SEATO, and ASA. We are especially partial towards the regional groupings of Asian States, including the idea of a Malayan Confederation which we recently advanced. This is because such groupings constitute an eloquent manifestation of the spirit which is driving the Asian peoples to rediscover the ancient well-springs of their economic and cultural unity. This drive towards Asian unity is a virtual law of nature, and it will gather momentum as the Asian countries recover their prerogatives of sovereignity and independence and as they begin to level down the wells which the former colonial powers had raised between them.

In the main, however, we are well advised to be aware of the limits of our power and responsibility. We have been told of our so-called emerging image abroad as a leader in Asia. In Spain, well-meaning government and civic leaders suggested that we make a tour of Latin America to help unite in world affairs the nations that share with us the heritage of Hispanic culture. Now, there is criticism of our Administration that by not pulling out of the Asian games in protest against the conduct of the host country, our supposed image as a leader in Asia has been impaired or distorted.

This criticism is based on a false premise because we are not aspiring to become a leader in Asia. Our ambition is to be a faithful, effective and successful leader of the Filipino people. In world affairs, our aspiration is not for the President of the Philippines to be a leader in Asia, much less in the world, but for the Filipino people themselves to fulfill their obligations and play their role among nations in good faith and with honor and, by the efficient and effective administration of their affairs and the solution of our national problems on the basis of freedom, prove that democracy can work successfully in an Asian country like the Philippines as an effective instrument for the prosperity of the masses of the people—an achievement which will be the Philippines’ best contribution to the freedom, peace and welfare of humanity.

Among our many concerns in the domain of foreign affairs our relations with the United States of America will continue to occupy first rank for a long time to come. Although it is true that our special trade relations with the United States will continue to diminish and finally to disappear in 1974, there is no doubt that our overall relations with the United States will long remain highly important. This is because the attitudes, habits and ways of life, whether on the emotional, intellectual or material levels, which both peoples have developed in the course of their relations over the past sixty years are certain to endure. Therefore, the means and procedures needed to satisfy the exigencies of that relationship will be devised.

The vicissitudes of the Philippine war damage bill in the United States Congress clearly illustrate the point. The happy ending of that checkered story proves that occasional indifference or neglect, occuring whether by design or accident, merely serves to emphasize the generous reservoir of goodwill which the two nations have towards each other. Because ours is a developing country strongly attached to freedom in a crucially important region of Asia, and because the United States is a Great Power having the means and the will to assist free peoples and to defend the ramparts of freedom everywhere, the two countries are destined to share the same fundamental purposes and objectives in domestic and foreign affairs. In this common purpose to defend the priceless heritage of freemen, Americans and Filipinos can be depended upon in future as in the past to work, fight and, if need be, to die together.

But short of any need for fighting and dying together in order to defend freedom, Americans and Filipinos have many opportunities to act together in close cooperation and support. One such field is the struggle against communism. You all know that the Philippine policy towards communism is straight-forward and unequivocal. We are inflexibly opposed to communism and all its works, and nobody is left in doubt about it. We have no relations with any communist State and we do not propose to have such relations in the foreseeable future. Soviet Russia has recently suggested the establishment of diplomatic relations with us, but we have rejected such advances because we have decided that such relations would, on balance, be detrimental to our national interests.

We avoid the equivocal position of a number of countries which condemn and prescribe communism at home, but then permit communist States to establish embassies within their territory from whence communist agents disguised as diplomats can freely carry out their plans of infiltration, subversion, espionage and sabotage. We prefer to take no such risks. To those who remind us that the United States not only maintains diplomatic relations with communist States but has flourishing cultural and even economic relations with them, and then suggest that we do likewise, our answer is that the United States can afford such relations, but we can’t. For those who are attracted by the imagined profits of trade with communist China, our answer is that there is not a single pound of sugar, copra, coconut oil, iron ore or lumber for which communist China would or could pay us more than what our present customers now pay.

From our clear-cut policy there flows for us the direct advantage of reducing the risk of communist subversion. For the United States and other friendly countries there comes the absolute assurance that no part of the economic and financial assistance which may be given to us will ever be channeled, wittingly or unwittingly, to communist ends.

On the contrary, our entire domestic and foreign program is aimed at an exactly opposite result. Our domestic policies aim to protect and promote the system of free enterprise. But in order that this policy may not play into the hands of the communist, we have made it a condition that this must be free enterprise with a social conscience and a sense of public responsibility. We shall not allow this system to be used by free-wheeling adventures to amass enormous fortunes at the expense of the many or to use their economic resources to gain political power for their own ends. The “malefactors of great wealth” were denounced by the late President Roosevelt during the thirties as the real enemies of the system of free enterprise. He reminded them that the far-reaching economic reforms of his Administration were, in reality, being undertaken in their own interest, in the interest of the system under which they operated, even if they refused to acknowledge the fact. Today, we say to the “economic royalists” in our midst that we are determined that the system of free enterprise should be made to work in the interest of all the people and to provide equal opportunities for all citizens, and that we are prepared to use all the constitutional powers of our office and all the authority at our command in order to accomplish this.

Our approach to the question of communism is inspired by two considerations. The first is that we are not impressed by the so-called friendly or peaceful intentions which communist States and Governments profess in season and out of season. Nothing they say can divert us from the certain knowledge that communists everywhere and always are dedicated to the sole objective of world domination. Our Administration is not prepared to open our country’s doors to communists so that they may come in freely to work out their evil purpose.

The other consideration is this: We have absolute confidence in the ultimate triumph of liberty over communism and of individual freedom over totalitarian tyranny. We believe that the open society of freemen will eventually emerge triumphant in the contest with the slave society of the communists.

In Asia, Africa and Latin America, the communist tide may have reached its highest point, and from here on is likely to recede. But in all of these three vast and populous areas, there are three necessary conditions for the advancement of liberty nd the recession of communism. The first of these is to maintain constant vigilance, to take nothing for granted, to unmask communist deception, to resist communist pressures, to combat communist threats and to repel communist subversion and agression wherever these manifest themselves.

The second is to help provide to the peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin America the instruments of their own salvation so that by their own efforts, through the rational use of their abundant manpower and natural resources they can improve their living standards. This, in the long run, is the only way to render them immune to the communist plague.

The third is to strengthen the ideological support for the fight of the free world. Whereas, the communists have succeeded in formulating ideals that arouse fanatical frenzy among their supporters, such as that workers have nothing to lose but their chains, the democracies have failed to rally their people behind an electrifying or revolutionary ideal. American leadership of the free world has not been as effective as it could be because it has relied more on material power and less on spiritual and ideological weapons. The ironic fact that althought America spends billions of dollars in foreign aid, she appears not to be popular in the recipient countries, may find explanation in the lack of proper attention to spiritual and ideological values. For instance, the United States has often given the impression that it lack a proper regard for the pride and sensibilities of other peoples, a proper recognition of the need to put a premium on the loyalty of steadfast friends as against fickle fence-sitters, and a proper degree of consistency in upholding principles in her dealings with nations big and small, instead of sacrificing such principles to maintain the support of the big powers.

The free nations must explore the greater potency of ideological and spiritual weapons and get solidly behind them. Democracy as an ideology must itself be clarified and strengthened so that all free peoples can rally united in practice behind it and not in lip-service alone.

We venture to suggest that the free nations may unite behind the concept that democracy is an ideology which seeks the triumph of “a God-blest system of freedom restrained only by a rule of law based on equal opportunity for all.” This is an ideology for which all free men and all free nations can fight and die. Such a universally agreed system may be the answer to the communist ideology. It is a system that pits squarely the natural hunger of man for freedom and his instinctive faith in the existence of a Supreme Being against the communist system of fictitious equality without God and without liberty. This democratic ideal of freedom restrained only by a rule of law based on equal opportunity for all may be taught and popularized as a way of life superior to communism. Above all, the truth and the blessings of this free way of life must be demonstrated by every State practising the system faithfully within its borders and in its relations with other States. In this task, the big powers are called upon to play an important role, since it is in their conduct that the discrepancy is often most marked between actual performance and the ideal of freedom and equality.

Insofar as the Philippines is concerned, this ideal of freedom and equal opportunity is the system which we uphold and upon which we are ready to stand or fall in discharging our responsibility to our people and upon which we are ready to stake the fortunes of our Republic in the world affairs.

With the mailed fist, the late President Magsaysay broke the back of the communist movement in the Philippines. Today, we propose to destroy the evil of communism in our country by breaking and fructifying the soil of our national economy so that it may yield in freedom all that is required to satisfy the needs of a free and contented people.

This is our program. It is our purpose to employ our diplomacy primarily to create new or stronger and more effective modes of cooperation with all friendly States that are ready and willing to assist us in our program on the basis of mutual respect and mutual benefit. This is the principle that inspires our relations with the United States and other friendly countries. It is our purpose to make a new approach in our relations with Japan, which is our close neighbor. We intend to enhance our economic and financial relations with Western Europe whose capacity to use our products and supply our requirements on a competitive basis is being proved conclusively more and more. Because of the inevitable pull of racial, cultural or geographical factors, we propose to develop our relations with our neighbors in Southeast Asia and in Oceania. And because of the powerful Latin element in our civilization, we shall conserve our cultural ties and develop our economic relations with Spain and the other countries of the Latin world.

These are the main elements of the task that confronts us. In addressing ourselves to this task, we shall not be overly concerned about creating an impressive leader-image abroad. Provided our achievement measures up to the expectations of our people and our national interest, the international image will take care of itself.

We Filipinos are fortunate in many peculiar respects. Though we are of Asia, we have roots both in the East and the West. Nourished by the Asian soil, we yet partake of the two mainstreams of Western civilization, the Latin and the Anglo-Saxon, together with their respective achievements in the domains of Spiritual grandeur and material abundance. Though they inhabit an archipelago of many islands, our people are strikingly cosmopolitan in outlook and behavior. Living right on a vital crossroads yet surrounded by the China Sea, they are close enough to sense the tumult of the Asian continent without being caught in the very vortex of it. They live in a country rich enough in resources to be able to sustain a population two or even three times the present one.

In this country so richly endowed by nature and so specially favored by history, we Filipinos have the opportunity to build a happy and prosperous nation of free men living in a free society, under a system of responsible free enterprise, that shall be a stout bulwark of liberty in the world. I urge all our people to join, and I invite all our friends and allies in the free world to assist us in this exciting task and epochal undertaking.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.