Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On Memorial Day

[Released on May 30, 1963]

THE COMMON CHALLENGE TO AMERICANS AND FILIPINOS

ON A DAY like this when we pause to remember those Filipinos and Americans who have died in order that we may live in freedom and justice, we can only bow our heads in humility as we search our souls for an explanation of our fitness to do honor to those whose glory can neither be enhanced nor effaced by anything that we, the living, can ever say.

Nothing we can utter can raise nor pull down the stars in the heavens. All we can do is to stand in awe and behold their glory and thank God for the elevating experience. This indeed is the puny thing we can do today as we remember the immortals of two republics separated by thousands of miles of ocean yet united eternally by the blood of thousands of sons and daughters who have rendered the supreme sacrifice for common ideals.

We are gathered here today to honor particularly the memory of the American soldier.

The fame of the American soldier rests upon the fact that he has been less often employed than the soldier of any other Great Power, past or present, to serve only the ends of selfish national interest or to achieve the imperialist domination and exploitation of other peoples.

The glory of the American soldier is that none has fought more often or more loyally than he in defense of his native land as well as the freedom of others.

This is a shining record in a world long governed by the doctrine of might makes right.

In honoring the American soldier, we honor also the great American nation in whose name he fought and died. It is a nation that has kept faith with its honored dead.

Because they share a common legacy of freedom, it is fitting that today Americans and Filipinos should join together in this act of commemoration.

It is equally fitting that the two peoples, on this occasion, review the bases of their common allegiance to freedom in order that they may gather new strength and courage for the tasks and challenges that lie ahead.

The power and influence of America today rests mainly upon two things. The first is that, at home, American life and the institutions that have grown around it stand firmly on the principles of liberty, equal opportunity, and justice under the law. The second is that, abroad, the image of America more or less fairly reflects the life and institutions of the people so that she can assist other peoples in defending their freedom without incurring suspicion of her motives or fear of her ambitions.

These two propositions are somewhat over-simplified. For it is unfortunately true that there are spots on the American record, both at home and abroad. At home, the constitutional guarantee of rights for all American citizens regardless of race is yet to be enforced and respected throughout the land. This is a situation, however, which the vast majority of the American people have accepted the responsibility to change and which the United States Government is endeavoring to correct with all possible speed. It is this recognition of the evil of racial discrimination and racial segregation as well as the acceptance of responsibility to do away with it that distinguishes the American record in this sensitive area of human rights. Any country that justifies this evil is self-condemned in the eyes of God and man; and any country that condemns the evil as a matter of principle without having suffered from it can take little credit for courage and righteousness. Only a country like the United States which is plagued by the evil of racial discrimination and is using every means to overcome it, including where necessary the use of the police power, can take just pride in its devotion to freedom and in its efforts to make fundamental human rights the common heritage of all its citizens.

We Filipinos applaud these efforts of the American people and their government. We know that on Bataan and Corregidor and on a hundred other battlefields during the Second World War, our men fought shoulder to shoulder with Americans and that the blood they shed together had the same color of red and that their commingled dust is the dust of heroes.

This is to say that the life of the American people and the ideals by which they live constitute our best assurance that the defense of liberty, within and without, shall always remain their paramount purpose and objective. We have faith that these American ideals and institutions shall continue to develop in increasing prosperity and freedom, because it is by this token, even more than by placing more astronauts in orbit, that the validity of her principles and integrity of her purposes shall be impressed upon the minds of men.

We Filipinos are perhaps more concerned than any other people over the image that America shows to the world. We are, after all, a part of that image. It was not, to begin with, a lovely image—if we go back to the origins of Philippine-American relations at the turn of the century. But after a cruel period of revolution and pacification came a system of colonial administration that was relatively benign, and that in effect constituted a revolutionary departure from the practice of imperialism then extant. The American rule in the Philippines was subject to conflicting influences of benevolence and selfish interest, but it is certainly correct to say that on balance and in the end, the impulse of generosity triumphed over its opposite.

This explains Bataan and Corregidor. This justifies the special relations of affection and consideration that bind the American and the Filipino peoples. This is our insurance that, despite transient disappointments and occasional disagreements, nothing will ever break their faith in each other and their loyalty to common ideals.

The American record in the Philippines is part of the American image abroad. We Filipinos have an important stake both in that record and in that image. We should like to help keep that record straight and that image untarnished. It is hardly necessary to say that we are in a good position to do that. Americans will be judged elsewhere on the basis of what they do here, because from what they do in a friendly and hospitable country like the Philippines, so closely linked to America by enduring ties of affection and gratitude, others would be inclined to deduce how Americans are likely to act in their own countries.

The Filipinos are of course not without responsibility in this regard. They are a living example in the eyes of the world, and particularly in the eyes of Asia, Africa and Latin America, of American policy towards a former dependency that is today a true friend and steadfast ally. The Filipinos are expected to bear themselves in the pride and dignity of Asians, secure in their freedom and independence, while maintaining relations of mutual respect and equal dignity with the Western countries, including and indeed especially the United States of America.

On the level of international and regional affairs, the Philippines is of course determined to comply with its obligations under the United Nations Charter and under existing treaties of mutual defense and systems of collective security. Yet we must recognize that the changing patterns of power relationships in our part of the world impose upon us the unavoidable duty to be ever on the alert for opportunities to strengthen the position of the free world in our region. We must not allow any free and independent country in Asia to go over to, or fall under Communist control by default, through excess of timidity or through a misguided desire for accommodation. The only thing that Communists respect is determination backed by strength.

At the same time, we are determined to miss no chance to enlarge the scope of our cooperative action and the sphere of our friendships. We are today engaged in a vitally important endeavor to improve the relations among Malaya, the Philippines and Indonesia. We believe that these countries of Malay origin, destined by history and geography to be close neighbors, have an opportunity to rediscover the bonds which the colonial past has blurred or obliterated. It is our aim to draw out of this revitalized relationship new strength with which to accomplish the mounting task of security, economic development and social progress which await us. We covet the encouragement and help of all our friends as we face this historic responsibility.

We Filipinos shall accomplish our share of this joint responsibility in the sincere belief that the Malay peoples can solve their problems, establish modalities of cooperation and achieve eventual unity among themselves, by their own efforts, by their own lights, in their own best interest, without pressure or compulsion from any quarter. We shall do this also out of our shared conviction that it is necessary for the peoples of Asia to defend themselves against the depredations of imperialism, new or old, in any guise or manifestation. Now that we are free, we are not prepared to surrender our birthright of independence through intimidation or deception to any ideological movement or military power in the world. This is the conviction which we would like to share with our friends and neighbors in Southeast Asia.

The war in the Pacific was fought to counter the design of a single power to dominate our part of the world. That design was frustrated by an alliance of free nations, including the United States and the Philippines. But today another power is making a similar attempt, by ideological subversion, infiltration and jungle warfare, to achieve the domination of our region.

It is appropriate that, on this solemn occasion, we solemnly reaffirm our common resolve to ensure that Communism shall not be allowed to achieve its evil purpose.

It may be well that Memorial Day reminds us as individuals of the spirit of sacrifice without which humanity would not be as it is today and with which alone it could have reasonable hope of uplift for the future. It is this spirit which has kept the flame of democracy and freedom alive through centuries of crucial tests onto the years of crises of our times. Paradoxically, it is this very same spirit which has been shaped and merged with the operational code of a repugnant ideology for the destruction of democracy and the debasement of the human person. In the face of this threat that hangs over us and our children which has been disguised under the mask of a false friendship and humanism, the only way out is for us in societies of free men to surpass the zeal of the adversary that we may all labor together to buttress the ramparts of our economics, political and spiritual strength and invincibility.

In this hallowed place, within sight of the graves of those who died to keep Asia free, let us therefore dedicate ourselves anew to the continuing struggle to keep freedom secure in the lands of Asia.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.