Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the ceremony for the laying of cornerstone of New Balintawak Monument

[Delivered on August 26, 1962]

THE MEANING OF BALINTAWAK

ONE morning sixty-six years ago today, in the backyard of a nipa shack somewhere in these hallowed grounds, a young, daring Filipino in barong Tagalog, armed with a bolo and a revolver tucked to his waist, stood before his thousand followers and tore a piece of paper. Casting the mutilated shreds of paper, the young Filipino leader, his voice trembling with emotion, shouted: “Long Live Philippine Independence!” That patriotic battlecry not only resounded throughout the length and breadth of the land but also helped win for us eventually our political freedom.

That young, courageous Filipino was Andres Bonifacio, the Great Plebeian, who founded the Katipunan out of a burning obsession to liberate his people from political, social, and economic bondage. The nipa shack which was the setting of that historic occasion belonged to Juan Ramos, the son of Melchora Aquino whom we know as “Tandang Sora,” the gallant Mother of the Revolution. The piece of paper that Bonifacio tore to pieces was not just an ordinary document. It was a cedula , which symbolized the chain that shackled Filipinos to a life of subjection and misery under foreign oppression. And the soulful cry of Bonifacio which resounded throughout the land was the first determined assertion of our people’s desire to be free.

There had been other armed struggles put up by Filipino heroes before this epochal Cry of Balintawak. But none had been as widespread, none had been as consuming, as the inspired movement which Bonifacio sparked. Our history is replete with accounts of earlier uprisings which demonstrated our people’s will to be free, most of which were chiefly aimed at retrieving lost freedom and happiness.

Among these bloody expressions of our desire for freedom were the Revolt of Lakandula which took place in Manila in 1574, the Tondo Conspiracy in 1587 and 1588, Ladia’s Revolt in Malolos, Bulacan, in 1643, and Maniago’s Revolt in Mexico, Pampanga, in 1660 and 1661. There had been other uprisings, violent demonstrations against colonial domination, which scorch the pages of our history. These included Magalat’s Revolt in Cagayan in 1596; the Gaddang Revolt, also in Cagayan, in 1621; the Caraga Revolt in Mindanao in 1630; the Cagayan Revolt in 1639; the Revolt led by Sumuroy in Palapag, Samar, in 1649 and 1650; Malong’s Revolt in Pangasinan in 1660 and 1661; Dagohoy’s Revolt in Bohol, which began in 1744 and ended in 1829; the Ilocos Revolt led by Diego Silang in 1762 and 1763, and the Palaris Revolt in Pangasinan from 1762 to 1764. These armed uprisings were generated by abuses, high tribute, and forced labor imposed on our forebears by the colonizers.

But there had also been a few revolts triggered by agrarian conflicts, such as those which erupted in Bulacan, Batangas, Cavite, Laguna, and Rizal in 1745 and 1746. There were four other recorded revolts which had religious complications, such as Tamblot’s Revolt in Bohol in 1621 and 1622, Bankaw’s Revolt in Leyte in 1621, Tapar’s Revolt in the municipality of Oton, Panay, in 1663, and the uprisings led by Apolinario de la Cruz in Tayabas in 1840 and 1841. These revolts were, however, small in scale. Consequently, except in the case of the struggle led by Dagohoy, they were quickly and easily suppressed by superior might.

On the other hand, the resistance movement launched by Bonifacio and his thousand followers in this historic place exploded into a massive force which was soon to crush the armed might of colonial Spain. Barely two years after Bonifacio uttered his famous cry here, the independence of the Philippines was proclaimed by another youthful Filipino leader, General Emilio Aguinaldo, in Kawit, Cavite—thus marking the successful culmination of the gallant Filipino struggle for freedom and liberty. The sixty-fourth anniversary of this momentous climax of the Cry of Balintawak was observed by our people for the first time last June 12 as a token of the nation’s profound gratitude to the countless valiant Filipinos who sacrificed their lives that we the living might enjoy the blessings of justice and independence.

Today the Cry that signalled our freedom sixty-six years ago is still thundering all over the length and breadth of our country. Bonifacio’s voice still rings loud and clear. We the living must understand and appreciate its real message. Let us not believe that because we have become politically independent, that because we have acquired our national sovereignty and our cherished liberty which has been hallowed and purified by the blood of Bonifacio and our other heroes, we can become complacent. After suffering from generations of fear and subjugation, let us not be content merely to see the Filipino Flag wave proudly in our skies to proclaim that at last we have become free.

I enjoin you not to be carried away by illusions. The fight is far from over. We must remember that the revolution led by Bonifacio, the bloody uprising fanned by the sagacious writings of Dr. Jose Rizal, Apolinario Mabini, and Jacinto, was dictated basically by the clamor of our people for social and economic reforms. This was eloquently and brilliantly expressed in the deathless novels of Dr. Rizal—the Noli Me Tangere and El Filibusterismo . It will be recalled that in the constitution of La Liga Filipina, the forerunner of the Katipunan, this clamor of Filipinos for social and economic reforms was categorically expressed. In fact, two of the five basic objectives for which the Liga Filipina was organized were for “mutual protection in every want and necessity,” and “encouragement of instruction, agriculture, and commerce.”

These socio-economic goals were further emphasized when the brains behind the society adopted six fundamental objectives for which the funds of the Liga Filipina would be spent. These noble ends were:

First, the member or his son, who, while not having means shall show application and great capacities, shall be sustained;

Second, the poor shall be supported in his right against any powerful person;

Third, the member who shall have suffered loss shall be aided;

Fourth, capital shall be loaned to the member who shall need it for an industry or for agriculture;

Fifth, the introduction of machines and industries, new or necessary in the country, shall be favored; and

Sixth, shops, stores, and establishments shall be opened, where the members may be accommodated more economically than elsewhere.

It is therefore evident that the Philippine Revolution was launched by Bonifacio and our other heroes not merely to attain political independence but simultaneously to achieve social and economic emancipation for our people.

Bonifacio’s tearing of the cedula , which set off the fires of the Revolution, was dictated by circumstances prevailing during his time. He and his handful of gallant men had to do it, for the cedula symbolized the social and economic enslavement of our people at the time. Significantly, the present is to a large extent similar to that historic chapter of our national existence, for today there are cedulas to be torn to pieces; there are economic chains of bondage that must be broken. Our people must enjoy the fruits of social and economic stability which is the spirit and the very essence of political sovereignty.

Committed to the development of the nation and the progress of our people, the present Administration launched a nationwide socio-economic program shortly after I assumed the Presidency. Like the Cry in Balintawak, this five-year program is the first massive effort launched by the government geared to the creation of more employment opportunities for our countrymen to enable them to improve their lives as components of our society, and the production of more staple foods to enable our people to attain self-sufficiency. The lifting of controls and the institution of corollary protective measures were undertaken by the Administration to improve the national economy. If there are certain difficulties which are often magnified to unreasonable proportions by some people, these are temporary repercussions which we must learn to bear as the economy progresses and continues to assume a posture of stability.

The cedulas which we are called upon to tear to pieces in our time are the obstacles thrown on the way by powerful economic blocs and saboteurs. These are impediments that we must overcome. We must not, and cannot, allow the forces personified by a number of unscrupulous alien groups and local robber barons to subject our country to economic strangulation. The Administration has been exerting efforts to weed them out, for the blessings of justice, liberty, and independence guaranteed by our Constitution must be enjoyed not by a few but by all the Filipino people.

I came here because the people of this community are the same people who had drunk deep of the foundation of revolution, and they, simple and unsophisticated though they are, represent the conscience of the nation today as their forbears did during the darkest days of the colonial regime. For I want to bring to the consciousness of our masses the pertinence of my administration’s objectives to those for which so many lives and so much property had been spent during the revolutionary era. It is for you and the people in thousands of communities throughout the country, which you typify, that we are daring the mighty today—raising our voices and our actions—as Andres Bonifacio and his fellow Katipuneros had dared the mightiest of the mighty with their cry and their bolos! It is for them that I am determined to clear the ground and cleanse the atmosphere so that they may enjoy to the fullest their right to freedom and security and the opportunity to seek economic betterment and happiness in a regime that is just and hospitable to all, especially to the poor and the underprivileged who constitute the bulk of our population.

I am confident that a community like this would appreciate more the significance of what the Administration is trying to do today and be prepared to lend its support against that which I am fighting, against privilege, against vested interests, against unscrupulous and socially entrenched position, and against selfish power. It is not easy to storm the citadels and ramparts of concentrated economic might and political power and I know it—you know it from what you see today in the vilification and abuse to which I am being subjected—but, like Bonifacio and his small band, whose cause in the end triumphed, I pledge to continue with my crusade at whatever cost to me. I know we will win, for our aims are legitimate and just, our motives pure. Nothing can stop me now, for if I should stop or fail, the interests of the people as a whole will suffer and our nation will continue to be a victim of iniquitous enslavement. The poor will remain poor and become even poorer while the malevolent rich will become richer and greedier, exploiting to their advantage the helpless among our people, and denying us all our very patrimony.

The magnitude of the challenge of socio-economic development which faces us today cannot be met successfully by one man alone. It demands no less than the concentrated efforts of all sectors of our population. It calls for a total national effort as massive as the movement which Bonifacio and the Katipunan generated. We cannot allow our first determined and organized bid for socio-economic emancipation to suffer the same tragedy that befell the small and isolated revolts staged by our forefathers.

On this momentous occasion which marks the sixty-sixth anniversary of the Cry of Balintawak, I therefore call upon all our countrymen to dedicate their efforts and their energies to the great task at hand so that, like the patriotic movement started by Bonifacio in Balintawak, our present endeavor for socio-economic emancipation will lead to a proud and glorious climax that will mark the liberation of the Filipino common man from the chains of his poverty.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.