Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the Commencement Exercises of the Central Luzon Agricultural College

[Delivered in Muñoz, Nueva Ecija, April 9, 1962]

AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

TRAVELLING across the central plains of Luzon, such as I did at break of dawn today, never fails to bring back memories of my poverty-stricken childhood. Nipa huts and haystacks, farm boys tending their carabaos, and farmers on their way to or working in their fields, are a familiar and beloved sight. These are the same scenery, the same atmosphere of simple living and the same hard-working peasants amidst whom I spent a very pleasant portion of my life. Like many of you, I was poor, and still am, and I have never been ashamed of my humble hometown. In fact, the small rural community where I grew up, has always been a constant source of pride to me. I revel in its rustic charm and simplicity. I cherish its quiet contentment. I love its genial and friendly folks whose hearts are as wide as the fields that they till. Because I know how it is to be poor, it has now become my obsession to do something for the uplift of the poor and the more unfortunate segment of our society.

In this spirit, I congratulate you on your graduation from this agricultural school. There is dignity and beauty in your profession that associates you closely with God and nature. The farmer is the truest producer of wealth. He is God’s partner in bringing forth from the bowels of the earth the food that we eat, the clothes that we wear, the houses that shelter us, and the other good things in life that we enjoy with God’s blessings.

I congratulate you not only because you have successfully completed your studies but because by dedicating yourselves to the study of agriculture you are leading the youth of our country in the right direction.

For many years past the blight of Philippine education had been the tendency of the Filipino youth to prefer the academic courses that led to politics and the white-collar job. There was reason for this. Under the Jones Act of 1916, the Filipino people faced the challenge of demonstrating an aptitude to run a stable democratic government in order to merit political emancipation, a challenge which called for political leaders and bureaucrats. That task set the educational pattern in the country and shaped the propensity of the youth to take to courses that would make them outstanding politicians and office workers.

With the attainment of independence in 1946, the challenge to the Nation shifted from the political to the economic. Altho the necessary recasting of the educational system to gear it to the new challenge of economic growth remains to be undertaken, the instinct of a people born to greatness has created a realization, if vague and disorganized, of the need for a shift from white-collar courses to productive vocations like agriculture.

I have on purpose attended this graduation to give support to the new, growing and desirable orientation that the youth and the Nation must henceforth take to courses that can assist in the increase of production and the creation of wealth like agriculture. As I recognize this fact, you can therefore fully depend on my Administration to assist in strengthening our agricultural schools and in developing scientific agriculture in our country.

In the integrated five-year socio-economic development program which I have formulated as the guidepost of my Administration in the coming years, it may be said that greater attention shall be devoted to modern agriculture than to other phases of the economic effort. This is because altho ours is a rich agricultural country, agricultural development has lagged behind. For instance, in the production of rice, which is the staple food of our people, the average yield is as low as 27 cavanes per hectare, which is one of the lowest among the rice-growing countries in the world. In some provinces like Samar, the third largest island in the country, the preparation of the land for rice planting is still done by the hoofs of carabaos stamping the field to and fro. As a result, the yield is as tow as twenty cavanes per hectare.

Our socio-economic program, therefore, calls for development of scientific farming to increase agricultural production. Our goal is to increase rice production by an average of 5% annually, from an annual production of 3,740 thousand metric tons in 1960 to 4,840 thousand metric tons in 1967; corn production from 1,316 thousand metric tons to 1,595 thousand metric tons; fruits and nuts production from 1,046 thousand tons to 1,463 thousand tons; root crops from 1,590 thousand tons to 1,857 thousand tons; copra from 1,160 thousand tons to 1,380 thousand tons; sugarcane from 15,991 thousand tons to 16,675 thousand tons; abaca 110 thousand tons to 200 thousand tons; and tobacco from 73 thousand tons to 100 thousand tons.

Our agricultural goals likewise envision an annual increase of 10% in livestock, carabaos, cattle, swine and poultry; and fish production from 480.8 thousand metric tons to 585.1 thousand metric tons.

This agricultural program calls for new investments amounting to P985.1 million including dollar requirements in the amount of $125,380 million for agricultural implement and machinery.

This agricultural program is an enormous task. Its attainment involves complex problems, among which may be mentioned the following:

1) Land tenure improvement. It is necessary that the government give assistance to tenants and small farmers in securing their hold on their family-owned lots through agricultural extension, adequate rural credits and efficient marketing systems.

2) Improvement of marketing and distribution of our principal agricultural commodities. Low and uncertain income among our farmers can be remedied only by minimizing the seasonal price fluctuations and easing up the problems of regional distribution of production, especially in rice, through the nationalization of rice and corn and the inducements to private marketing organizations. The government desires to encourage private individuals and organizations to gradually take over the functions of government marketing or trading in primary commodities.

3) Development of financial and credit institutions that will assist our farmers in improving their agricultural methods and help build healthy and prosperous rural communities. The development of rural banks and of voluntary credit societies has been encouraging. However, we need more rural banks and more cooperative and credit organizations.

4) Incentives and direct government assistance for the establishment and growth of manufacturing industries that will utilize agricultural raw materials. Agricultural surpluses, like pulp and paper production and the manufacture of yeast and other food products, would necessitate definite public policies for their proper utilization so as to increase or supplement the farmer’s income.

5) Natural resources’ conservation as an essential aspect of resource utilization. We need to strengthen our laws for the conservation of our forests, rivers, streams, soil and mineral resources, while utilizing them for the benefit of present users. It is our duty to preserve these resources for posterity.

6) Price support for rice and corn. The passage of the Administration bill that will set a floor price for rice and corn and help stabilize the price-supply conditions in this primary industry is compelling. We need a law that will set up a buffer stock and indicate the manner of buffer stock operations which will guarantee a floor price and work towards stabilized conditions in the rice and corn industry.

7) Development of private cooperative associations in commodity marketing. These associations will coordinate with the price-supply stabilization agency. The strengthening of the National Cooperative Bank and further incentives for private marketing systems will help in this direction. We must have a central cooperative training center dedicated to the promotion and training of all types of cooperatives.

8) Incentives for the growth and expansion of village or cottage industries. Our rural communities abound in local raw materials which can be harnessed to enrich the lives of our people in the small towns and barrios. We have asked the Congress to provide the means for tapping these resources—particularly the abundant human resources—and have directed the utilization of reparations for this purpose.

9) Harnessing and utilization of cheap electric power and water control in our rural communities. Light in every home and a full meal at every table can only be realized by extending our power lines to the barrios and by damming our rivers and streams for irrigation and other uses.

These are difficult tasks involved in our program of agricultural development. I shall exert my utmost to attain them. But I cannot do the task alone. I need your support and assistance. Being technically prepared after your graduation today, you can play an invaluable role towards the realization of our agricultural program.

In the past, only lip service was paid to the common man. He was taken for granted. Little regard was given him for whom our Constitution guarantees social justice. Now is your chance to bring the colleges and universities to the barrio. You should transform your academic resources and skills into practical services which they can understand and, therefore, be able to utilize. You should strive to link your technical knowhow to the life of our farmers that it might help them attain economic well-being, intellectual stimulation and spiritual enrichment.

It is my hope that you shall go forth today to provide the leadership which has been missing from our rural communities. Your training in scientific farming makes you ideal partners of the Administration in uplifting the living conditions of our barrio people. “Ite et docete,” go and teach, were the words of Christ in exhorting His disciples to sow the seeds of Christianity. Because our cause is noble, I invoke the word of God in exhorting you to sow the seeds of progress throughout our country.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.