Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Philippine Medical Association

OPERATION COMFORT ROOM IN RURAL AREAS

FRANKLY, we do find much need to make a speech to you because you know much more than we do about the medical profession. We note from the theme of your convention that you are supporting the socio-economic development program of our Administration, so you can also count on my support and that of our Administration in your problems and needs both in your private and public responsibilities.

Indeed, the doctors have both private and public duties. These dual duties are exemplified in the set-up in the hospitals where there are private and charity wards. Your private duties are those which you owe to your patients, especially the paying patients; your public duties are those which as citizens you owe to your country. To a large extent, you discharge your private duties individually and discharge the public ones collectively, such as through the Philippine Medical Association. We need not refer to any length to your private duties to your patients because that is best taken up among yourselves. On this, we need only express the admiration and gratitude of the general community towards doctors and their profession. It is expressive of this public gratitude and admiration for the medical profession that the picture of the profession by Sir Luke Fields has evoked lasting fascination.

In this immortal picture, a little girl lies desperately ill—apparently with diphtheria. Her parents stand by, humble, fearful, but trusting. The entire room bespeaks poverty. Beside the improvised bed sits a doctor, clothes rumpled, head bowed. It is obvious that he is keeping a solemn vigil— that he will stay with her until either the crisis has passed or death has claimed her. It is uniquely obvious that there is little else he can do, except offer his comfort, friendship, and prayers. This touching picture, like thousands of deathbed scenes in fiction, is portrait-wise anachronistic today. A child so desperately ill would likely be in a hospital. A nurse would probably be beside her. Between her and her parents would be an oxygen tank, perhaps a transfusion machine, or even a heart lung device. Her personal physician might or might not look in on her during the night; instruction would long have been delivered to the nurse and hospital resident doctors.

Despite its apparent anachronism, the picture eternally appeals to people’s sentiments. It has the warmth and intimate concern that no hypodermic needle, no complex machine of steel and tubings can replace, however effective they may be.

The origin of the traditional regard for the doctor reaches deep into the past. From the beginning of medical history, the practising physician has been part technician, part personal or family counsellor. In modern times, medicine has become more scientific, but the traditional reliance on a mystical force and highly authoritarian doctor-patient relationship exists to a degree unknown in other contemporary human relations with the exception perhaps of the priest-parishioner in certain religious groups. The relationship of citizen and state, of employer and employee, of teacher and pupil, or parent and child has undergone profound changes as a result of the technological and socio-economic trends of the past few centuries. But the doctor-patient relationship essentially remained the same. Because of this, doctors exert profound influence over the people which make them persons to be contended with, revered, and respected in the community.

Perhaps, the most outstanding example of a man who kept and helped foster the sacred regard for the doctor attitude was Sir William Osler. His whole life was dedicated to the noble traditions of the medical profession. “Noblesse oblige,” the democratic concept that a privileged position, no matter how well earned, imposes a sense of obligation to those less fortunate—was the basis of his philosophy.

“Think not,” he said, as he exhorted medical students at the University of Toronto, “to light a light to shine before man that they may see your good works, physicians, and priests, sisters and nurses, all over the world, the members of which strive not, neither do they cry nor are their voices heard in the streets, but to them is given the ministry of consolation in sorrow, need, and sickness. Like the ideal wife of whom Plutarch speaks, the best doctor is the one of whom the public hears the least.”

We have our own Dr. Oslers, men and women who lived and kept the ideals of the medical profession untarnished and sublime. We have such great medical men as Rizal, Guerrero, Miciano, Singian, Sison, and many others, who are beacons of your profession. Many among you are awaiting your share in the service of your profession and of your country. The influence you exert on the people is your greatest asset. You can channel it for good and for productive pursuits.

This brings us to your public duties, to your duty to your country. It is in contemplation of this public duty of the medical man that we have figured on the influence that you can cast in the program of government that we have initiated. You can be worthy and active participants in our scheme to bring about a healthy citizenry which is the cornerstone and the indispensable foundation on which a sound socio-economic program will be built.

The public duty of physicians generally done in a collective manner is, of course, discharged most extensively by the doctors who have dedicated themselves in a public career in the Department of Health. Firmly believing in the value of health and in healthy citizenry in the development of our country, and concerned with the health problems that beset our people, I have given full and continuing support to the Department of Health in its program of intensifying disease prevention and expanding facilities for medical and hospital case.

On more than one occasion, I have underscored the theme on which this Administration seeks to gain public approval—the uplift of the masses. In line with this elemental principle, we have taken bold steps after we assumed the helm of the national government. Thus, we have initiated a five-year socioeconomic program in the firm conviction and resolute faith that it is the most potent weapon with which to tackle the nation’s primary concern—economic stability.

At a time when our country’s fiscal posture is in dire need for bold measures which our predecessors feared to take I find relief in the Philippine Medical Association’s Convention theme—”The Role of the Medical Practitioner in the Socioeconomic Development in the Philippines.” While skeptics are busy finding faults and shortcomings in the program, you have given it hope and encouragement. I do not, therefore, hesitate to express my gratitude for your acceptance of my Administration’s five-year integrated socio-economic program.

We do not have to recall the distant years behind the life of the Association to see the salutary influence it has exerted on the public health in general and on Philippine medicine in particular. Your activities have been varied yet all of them point to one direction—toward stressing the need for a better health system through the role played by the individual practitioner. For instance, you participated in the “Doctor for Doctorless Areas” project of the Department of Health. You initiated the drive for the raising of standards of medical education, resulting in the passage of the Medical Act of 1959. You also assisted the Department of Health to formulate a Philippine National Health Service Plan. Quite recently, you made available your entire manpower to help combat cholera El Tor, and prevent entrance of smallpox in our country.

These are but a few of the many accomplishments of the Association in the discharge of the doctor’s public duty. The achievements of the Association which we have just highlighted show beyond doubt that it has grown with the times. For this reason alone we can be certain that you will take further steps towards growth attuned to the needs and circumstances of the times.

Notwithstanding the giant strides taken by Philippine Medicine due to the collaboration and partnership of both government and the medical profession, there is still the need to make our health facilities more accessible to our less fortunate countrymen. To offset the imbalance proceeding from the divergence of the financial abilities of our social structure, our Department of Health has always striven, as it continues to strive, toward an expanded health service. The Department of Health has embarked on a program of improving environmental sanitation as part of its disease prevention campaign. The catch phrase is “keeping well people stay well.” Hospital services are also being improved and expanded to serve more people, and the over-all medical care readjusted to more effectively conform with the increasing needs of our masses in these changing times. In support of these on-going services, I included an increased budget for the Health Department—from P94 M in this fiscal year to P111 M in next fiscal year, which means P17 M more for our over-all health activities.

The Rural Health Act, which I had the privilege to author, will be amended to expand its scope and amplitude to meet the needs of our rural communities, especially in the frontier areas where people are beginning to migrate in search for better opportunities.

But all these, of course, can be rendered difficult unless a more effective health education program is launched and carried to a successful termination. We know for a fact that the Philippine Medical Association has done its share in this direction and it is hoped that it will continue doing so.

In many phases of the public health service, you can contribute immensely. You may:

We would like to say a word on the fourth contribution that you can make to the Nation’s effort, which is to assist in the rapid and general improvement of the hygienic conditions in which our people live. It was with this end in view that I have taken up with Secretary Duque the project to establish comfort rooms in the rural areas throughout the country. This is one phase of the health conditions of our people that is appallingly unsatisfactory and yet has been neglected. We commend Secretary Duque for focusing attention on this problem. Although we have many health problems, it is desirable that in our approach to our multiple problems, we single out particular ones for concentrated attention at a given time.

We urge, therefore, that while we attend to all the health problems of the country, we single out for increased and joint effort the need for comfort rooms in our rural areas. As in the case of Secretary Duque, we have directed the PACD to attend to this problem and devote to it intensified effort. We now ask you to join in undertaking this project in the largest magnitude possible. We would like to propose on this occasion that the Secretary of Health, the head of the PACD, and the President of the PMA get together on this “Operation Comfort Room in the Rural Areas” because of our belief that if this special operation of health service to our masses can be undertaken enthusiastically as a joint project of the Department of Health, the Philippine Medical Association and the Presidential Assistant on Community Development, the result will be an amazing revolution in the hygienic and health lives of our countrymen in the rural areas and a demonstration that the medical profession is truly a vital force in the promotion of the health of the masses of our people not only in words but in truth and in deeds.

By attending efficaciously to the five phases of service which we have enumerated, you will merit the benefits accruing to the medical profession in this country and likewise help us in the great task of nation building.

In this manner, governmental administration can better concentrate on other equally pressing problems. The objective is monumental; but it poses a challenge to our collective attitude as a nation. Many challenges have been posed before us and we have not shirked. We are sure that we Filipinos can stand one more challenge. We have in the past, and will do so in the future. It is so written in our destiny.

In urging you to this endeavor, we are inspired by the efforts exerted by the members of the Philippine Medical Association in the past in the uplift of the state of health of our people. We appreciate the worthy, self-sacrificing contributions which you, individually and collectively, have made to enhance the scientific advancement of our nation. As a token of that appreciation, and in recognition of your many achievements, I shall continue my policy of appointing illustrious members and leaders of your great association to various important positions in the government to be responsible for the conduct of the affairs of this Administration.

The future holds greater and perhaps more trying opportunities for you to serve our people. You may rest assured that I stand behind you always in the realization of our common goals.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.