Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Division Superintendents of Schools

[Delivered in Baguio, April 5, 1962]

EDUCATION GEARED TO SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

OUR COUNTRY has three fundamental problems today, namely, moral regeneration, poverty of the masses and communism. In the solution of these problems you and the schools are called upon to play an important role.

We are fortunate to have at the helm of the Department of Education an energetic and outreaching young man with remarkable dedication to the task of upgrading the quality of education. Even at this early stage, it appears that he has already set the tone for a realistic approach in the education of our people. My confidence in him is such that I can say that in the efforts of the department to give education in the Philippines maximum effectiveness, the Administration shall provide all the necessary encouragement and assistance.

To bring about the moral regeneration of our officials and people, our schools must emphasize to a greater degree than before the inculcation among our children and youth the virtues of integrity, honesty, simple living and love for honest labor to the end. If the leaders and elders of today remain unequal to the challenge of a higher morality, we can be sure that the leaders and citizens of tomorrow shall restore and invigorate the moral strength of our Nation.

Since communism usually chooses the schools as one of the main fields for its work of agitation and infiltrations because it seeks to win over the youth, you must ever be alert in keeping that godless ideology and its agitators from our schools which must be made an impregnable bastion against the enemies of freedom.

It is in the liquidation of the third problem of mass poverty that I call on you today to exert the utmost attention and effort. This problem can only be solved through the rapid and sound socio-economic development of the country. Poverty can only be reduced to the minimum possible in human society if the resources of the land are so utilized as to spread the blessings of a good life to the largest number of the people. It is for this reason that I have emphasized in my Administration the solution of our economic problems.

One of the objectives of my Administration’s integrated five-year socio-economic development program is the alleviation of the plight of the common man who has for countless years been chained to a life of poverty and misery. Toward this end, the Administration is determined to solve, to the maximum possible extent, the plague of unemployment, one of the most serious chronic afflictions of our country which continue to defy solution. The urgency of meeting this problem cannot be overemphasized. For the unhappiness that it causes on thousands upon thousands of our hapless fellow countrymen is growing serious every day.

This convention of division superintendents is therefore most timely, for we are here afforded an opportunity to amplify on the vital role of education in our socio-economic development efforts.

I believe that our school system must be realistically geared to the economic development of the country. Because of my preoccupation with laying the foundations for the twin tasks of the Administration of moral regeneration and economic growth, I have been unable to turn in a concentrated manner to the problem of our schools and their proper operation and utilization. It shall not be long, however, when I shall sit down with Secretary Roces and other educational leaders of the country to formulate a program that will revise our school system to gear it to a vigorous socio-economic development and to solve the aggravating burden of financing our public schools.

Without prejudice to a fuller scrutiny of our school system to which I look forward doing soon, it is my impression that education should and can be geared to socio-economic development for the good of the country. This may involve changes in the curricula, a more vigorous encouragement of textbooks written by local writers, more systematic and effective emphasis on vocational, agricultural, and trade schools, more attention to science and research, revision in the training of teachers, and other changes in the formulation of which you and other educational leaders can contribute.

One problem alone, that of unemployment, underscores the need for educational reform. You must be familiar with the fact that the number of our unemployed countrymen, estimated at more than a million, rises sharply every year. It is generally considered that a large percentage of the unemployed is represented by young men and women who have just stepped out of high school and college. We must particularly attend to the problem of these intellectual unemployed for if they despair and become disillusioned about the purported goal of our democratic way of life that breeds this mass unemployment, these intellectual unemployed can become the effective leaders of communism who can seriously threaten our existing way of life.

Obviously, it is not only the insufficiency of job opportunities that causes the problem of unemployment but the inadequacy of the preparation and training of our youth. It will be ill-advised to make a sweeping conclusion and blame our schools for the existence of this problem. But certainly it is reasonable to state that our institutions of learning, more specially the public schools, are mere channels of our rigidly standardized educational system. Our schools merely adopt the methods of instruction, courses of study and rules and regulations embodied in our system of education which, however, is too outmoded and inflexible to be adaptable to changing conditions and the new and varied needs of our people.

The rigidity of our educational system should be relaxed to a certain degree if we are to produce students who can be useful citizens of this country. The defects of our educational system cannot be remedied in an office. It is heartening that Secretary Roces, instead of approaching the situation from a purely clinical and theoretical point of view, has initiated a move to go deeper into the system by personally visiting our schools and universities all over the country. This, to me, is the only valid and effective approach, for this will enable us to see the problem as they actually exist, instead of just hearing about them. With a first-hand knowledge of the root causes of the ailments, it will definitely be easier to apply the necessary remedies.

Like other educational systems in many young countries, the system of education in our country has many good points. But at the same time it also suffers from several weak ones.

A system to be effective must be dynamic and take into consideration the rapid changes going on in the life of the people. Unfortunately, this can hardly be said of our educational system, which is too standardized. Our courses of instruction, to cite an example, are uniform and stereotyped, whether the schools are in the urban areas or in the remotest rural communities. We give our students the same patterns of tests and examinations, and the methods of teaching seldom vary. In the primary grades, pupils in the northern regions are required to read and study the same textbooks used by students in the south when, it must be admitted, these students possess different sets of beliefs and standards.

I firmly believe that what our country needs urgently is an educational system geared toward our socio-economic needs. We need a school system that is fully adaptable to the social and economic conditions obtaining in the various regions of the archipelago. The desirable system is one that is flexible enough to fit the needs, problems and conditions peculiar to a certain area or region. But at the same time it must be dynamic enough to grow and adapt itself to the changing patterns of circumstances and the evolution of ideas. Besides giving the students a full grasp of the power, beauty and structure of ideas, it should give them a body of knowledge essential to their particular lives as individuals.

To be effective in our country, an educational system should thus be stripped of rigid standardization. It must be responsive. The social and geographical structure of the Philippines is so diversified that no single method of instruction, much less a course of study, could apply with equal force and effectiveness in all our regions. In an area where fishing is the major industry, the students should not be taught how to cultivate palay or weave baskets. Rather, the concentration should be on the fishery industry itself. The students there should be taught the evils of dynamite fishing. They should be made to know the kinds of fish that abound in their region, and how to conserve them for the benefit of the community.

In areas where straws, fibers and other resources are plentiful and therefore conductive to weaving, students should be taught the value of developing that particular industry. They should know the immediate significance of its development—the multifarious benefits the community and the country as a whole would derive from it. This is a keystone to the students’ development of the proper perspective.

One of the causes of unemployment is the fact that there is unusual concentration of manpower in the cities, particularly in Manila. Every year there is a mass exodus of the population from the barrios to the urban communities. The result is that the rural areas they leave behind become neglected—the barrios of their birth continue to be backward and retrogressive. The lure of the white-collar job, the desk job, seems too overpowering for them to reject.

A live and versatile system of education could help solve this problem. Under such system, students in the different regions should be taught more about their communities, made to know the history, the culture, the customs and traditions of their regions and to be aware of the local problems and needs that have to be resolved to stimulate progress in their communities. Above all, they should be made to realize the brilliant opportunities, the potentials for growth, existing for them in their regions.

Knowledge on the part of the students that in the future they could be hailed as leaders of their regions would encourage them to return to their community after completion of their courses of study. Besides encouraging them to render patriotic duty by utilizing their education and expert knowledge to help the people of their communities, they should be taught that it would be to their advantage to become leaders in their areas rather than stay in the crowded cities where, in general, they would be either underemployed or, worse, dependents for doles.

A system geared to this end will result in the dispersal of the manpower resources now concentrated in the urban communities; consequently, there would be sufficient manpower to explore our untapped natural wealth in the hinterlands.

At this stage of the development of society, the need for scientific and technological men should be recognized. For the truth is that in the implementation phase of the country’s socio-economic development program, the demand for highly skilled manpower is as great and pressing as the fulfillment of the program’s financial requirements. We need technological experts and scientists to explore the untouched mineral and power resources so abundant in the country.

At the same time, we need experts in the vocational trades. But these vocations, the skills to be developed, should be geared to the existing facilities and resources in an area or region. A vocational trade or course should be taught in a region where materials for that particular vocation are available. To do otherwise would be to return to the antiquated, inflexible system by which a set of methods or procedures, or a single formula, is expected to be a miraculous cure-all.

The eminent Spanish philosopher and educator, Don Salvador de Madarriaga, recently made a cogent observation that society cannot be “mineralized.” For, indeed, people are not minerals, such as gold dusts or grains of sand, but human beings endowed with individual feelings, capabilities, attitudes. Consequently, no single set of patterns could govern all of them. Each must be given special treatment.

In the same light, education in the Philippines should be treated in a special fashion. For what is good for a region may not be good for the others. If we are to develop highly skilled, educated and useful Filipinos, our educational system should be adapted to the needs, conditions and peculiarities of every region. An educational system that does not possess this quality of resiliency is not ideal for the Philippines and the Filipinos.

You who are the educational leaders in your respective communities can do much in the task of evolving a system of education suited to the social and economic conditions of your localities. As you are conversant with the industrial and trade possibilities and the agricultural potentialities in your area, you can formulate a system of training in the schools under your jurisdiction that will frontally meet the socio-economic problems of your communities.

In this venture of seeking a practical approach to education that would develop such skills as are necessary in the socio-economic uplift of your regions, you will enjoy the full support of my Administration. The Administration will do everything in its power to make education a means for the achievement of a prosperous and economically stable country, and the elevation of the lot of the common man. But it is not enough that our youth, our millions of students, be given the necessary skills. Efforts should be exerted to encourage the students, after they have acquired their education and training in the cities, to return to their regions and there apply their knowledge in helping build their communities to the end that the full socio-economic development of the Philippines could be realized.

Our Nation faces grave problems that will affect many generations to come. The effort to meet these problems requires the support of all leaders and citizens of good will. You are among the most enlightened and eminent leaders of the country. We need your full support and counsel in our efforts. For my part, you can be sure that completely dedicating myself to the welfare of our people, I shall seek absolutely nothing for myself and my family but will consecrate all my energy, my lights, my all for nothing else but the well-being of our country and beloved people. But I cannot do the gruelling task alone. I need you, or better still, our people need you. As true as my faith in God, I have faith that you will not fail our people by discharging your own trust well, by playing your role with the magnificence of which you are fully capable, in this hour of trial and crisis that faces our Nation.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.