Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the opening ceremonies of the Summit Conference, Manila

[Delivered on July 30, 1963]

TOWARDS A COMMON DESTINY

IN THE NAME of the people and government of the Philippines, I would like to extend to you, Mr. President and Mr. Prime Minister, an exceptionally warm welcome. We embrace you as brothers and ask you to feel at home in this land which was part of the ancient homeland of our Malay forefathers.

I would also like to welcome the distinguished guests to these opening ceremonies of the Manila Summit.

President Sukarno and Tunku Abdul Rahman have asked me to make the only speech at this opening. They assured me that a more auspicious atmosphere would result from this procedure. They were good enough to add that since they have been doing most of the talking up to now, it is only fair to yield the floor to me this afternoon.

I hope this is a sign that by letting me speak for all three of us at this opening, we shall, by the time we hold the closing ceremonies on Saturday, be able to speak with one voice, for one purpose, one objective, one aspiration, namely, peace and unity among the Malay peoples.

This is a historic occasion in the truest sense of the phrase. It is the first time in history that the leaders of the three nations of Malay origin in Southeast Asia have come together to consider and consult about their common problems. They have come as heads of government, as leaders of sovereign states. Behind that simple fact lies a great deal of history; the history of colonialism in this part of the world; the history of Asia’s long struggle for independence waged through national revolutions; the ending of an age marked by inequality between nations and the exploitation and tutelage of peoples, and the dawn of a new era of freedom based on justice, equity and the rule of law.

My sense of the historic significance of this occasion is heightened by the presence here of President Sukarno of Indonesia. Bung Karno, as his people affectionately call him, is one of the great men of Asia and a leader of world stature. His lifetime of service to his country spans the period of their revolutionary struggle for independence, their struggle for national unity against attempts to divide and dismember Indonesia, their struggle for the recovery of their national territory and the rediscovery of their national identity. He is the architect of today’s Indonesia; a nation firmly united, 100,000,000 strong, inhabiting a vast and fertile territory, with all the natural resources and the human attributes required to make Indonesia a great power in Asia.

To have a fair idea of Bung Karno’s position in Indonesian history, we have to think in some ways of our own Jose Rizal, who inspired our national revolution, of Bonifacio and Aguinaldo who led the actual struggle for independence, of Mabini, the philosopher and “Brains of the Revolution,” and Magsaysay who confronted and mastered the end of the Hukbalahap insurgency. President Sukarno is all these to the Indonesian people.

He is also one of the chief architects of Asian-African solidarity, which found its noblest expression in the Bandung Conference of 1955. His role in the still unfinished struggle against colonialism cannot yet be fully assessed, but future historians are bound to find it a very large one. His statesmanship, his vision and his awareness and judgment of historical forces have been instrumental in enabling us to advance this far in forging the beginnings of a new sense of unity and common purpose among the nations of Malay origin in this part of the world.

To have freed a nation that is the fifth largest in the world, more populous than Africa below the Sahara, is an achievement that entitles Bung Karno to a distinguished place among the great liberators of mankind. But a new dimension of greatness yet awaits him. The maintenance of peace and security in our part of the world, the economic and social progress of our peoples, and their increasing-sense of understanding, cooperation and common destiny will depend in large measure upon the statesmanship of this great leader of the 100 million who love and support him.

With the candor that is expected of brothers, of Tunku Abdul Rahman I say that he is also a great leader who is of different mould and temper. His country, Malaya, is a promontory that juts out of the Asian continent into a most strategic portion of the chain of archipelagos dotting the littoral of the Western Pacific, It is a rich peninsula sitting astride the vital sea lane between the Pacific Ocean and the Indian Ocean, and its narrow isthmus is the land bridge between the continent and the glittering array of islands which have been the home of the Malay peoples from time in memorial.

The people of Malaya have won their freedom from colonial rule essentially by peaceful means. Without waging the long and bitter struggles against colonial rule that have been the lot of Indonesia and the Philippines, and without suffering from the lingering aftermath of those struggles, Malaya has forged a national identity and unity wholly unlike the pattern of fragmentation imposed upon other countries in Asia and other parts of the world.

Because Malaya also has abundant natural resources and a smaller population, and because it has been relatively immune from the penalties of the anti-colonial struggle, it enjoys a degree of prosperity and well-being rarely met in newly independent countries. Malaya has also solved the questions of inter-racial harmony and cooperation in a manner that could serve as an object lesson to a world that is sorely harassed by this most explosive of human problems. These have come about under the leadership of the Tunku from whom we have reason to expect the continued progress of Malaya which shall promote the overall well-being of this region.

Malaya is the smallest and the latest of the three States of Malay origin to come into its own. It has had a life sheltered for the most part from the harsh realities of colonial rule. But the significant and costly struggle which it waged against political subversion and military insurrection before attaining independence only serves to confirm the familiar saying that true and lasting freedom is never granted to a people; it must be won by them through work, sacrifice and struggle.

To my mind, Tunku Abdul Rahman, by coming to this conference, has thereby proclaimed anew his conviction that the enduring peace, stability and well-being of the peoples of Southeast Asia can best be insured by the close cooperation of the peoples themselves as they seek to tailor their own future according to the shape of their own best and highest interests. His presence here today provides the comforting assurance that he will remain at our side as we face the task of reconstructing on sounder and stronger foundations the common life and destiny of our peoples.

There is yet another aspect of this occasion that lends to it a historic character. I refer to the remarkable coincidence of our three countries entering a new stage in their respective developments at a time when a similar change is occurring in our region and in the world as a whole.

The ending of the insurgency within Indonesia has restored its national unity. The recovery of West Irian has completed the integration of Indonesian national territory within the Republic. With these two major tasks accomplished, Indonesia is now in a position to address itself to the attainment of a third great objective: the development of a prosperous society in a regime of freedom and social justice.

Malaya has likewise dealt successfully with internal threats to its national unity and survival. It has established a working democracy dedicated to social justice for all of its people. It is now on the point of embarking on a new federation called Malaysia.

Here in the Philippines, we are engaged in vigorously carrying on what I have described as our “Unfinished Revolution.” Three of its major aspects are particularly relevant to this occasion. The first is our program of economic and social development aimed at strengthening the basis of our democracy and enriching the lives of all our people. The second is the rediscovery of our own Philippine identity through the enlightened revival of the cultural values that have moulded our nation. The third is a deliberate reorientation of our foreign policy towards our Asian homeland.

If we are able today to exercise the initiatives and play the constructive role we are playing in international affairs, it is because the shape and the substance of our freedom have been rendered more meaningful. The Philippines has embarked upon a new stage in its development as an independent nation. Our neighbors sense and recognize this welcome change, and the best proof of it is that they are here with us, working with us in brotherly solidarity towards the attainment of our common aspiration of a free, secure and prosperous community of sovereign nations in Southeast Asia.

On the regional level, we are in the last stages of the liquidation in Southeast Asia of the remaining pockets of the “classic” type of colonialism. This has given rise to the opportunity for the independent countries in this area to begin to assume their rightful share of responsibility for the security and stability of this part of the world. It is the opportunity, or as some would prefer to call it, the challenge, that has brought Indonesia, Malaya and the Philippines together in the series of meetings and consultations of which the present Conference is the culmination.

The task confronting us is admittedly difficult. But we have the advantage of undertaking it at a favorable juncture in international affairs. Our efforts coincide with the agreement banning nuclear tests, a development which may herald the beginning of what could become a viable co-existence in place of the cold war among the Great Powers. This development provides a more hospitable political climate for regional efforts towards security and stability such as those we propose to undertake within Maphilindo.

Will this conference be a success? Our reply is that, by taking place at all, it has already achieved a measure of success.

The credit for this conference, which is an important milestone in the history of Southeast Asia, belongs to no one in particular. It is the result of developments that have been going on for a long time, the fruit of the interacting influence of race, geography and politics. The logic of history has produced it, and the leaders of Malaya, Indonesia and the Philippines, by agreeing to come together at this Summit, have served merely as the faithful servants of history and the instruments of its ineluctable purpose. Its final success will be a monument to the vision and genius of the Malay peoples.

I have referred to Malaysia and Maphilindo. Though I have mentioned these two words rather casually, this should give no one cause to think that we shall avoid these as though they were forbidden topics. Malaysia and Maphilindo represent, respectively, the short-term and the long-term implications of the problems that confront us. We shall discuss them freely, frankly and fully, in the manner of brothers and neighbors, and in this spirit we shall endeavor to solve the deeper issues of which these are the outward manifestations.

The world watches our meeting with extraordinary interest. This is in recognition of the fact that our very act in meeting to resolve by ourselves our vital common problems has historic significance to the future of our area. If, in addition to this historic nature of this meeting, we actually succeed in resolving these problems, then we shall have contributed in a constructive way to the future not only of our area but of the world as well. Beyond this, we shall have demonstrated for the world to witness and for history to record that the Malay nations individually and together are a factor to reckon with in shaping the destiny of mankind.

My friends: we ask your prayers in order that our hopes may come to pass.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.