Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines

[Delivered on August 18, 1962]

PROGRESS REPORT ON THE NATION’S ECONOMIC PROGRAM

ON September 9, 1960, I appeared before you as Vice-President and forthcoming presidential candidate of the Liberal Party. On that occasion, I expounded the economic program of our party which we expected to carry out in the event of victory. My speech on that occasion became the economic bible of the party during the campaign. Those of you who remember that speech will note that the economic program that I outlined to you has been adopted in the five-year socio-economic program which is now the economic policy of our Administration.

This fact should make clear that in our Administration, we say what we mean and mean what we say. When we say therefore that we shall not withdraw from the policy of decontrol and free enterprise during our term of office, we mean just that, so you can plan your business ventures on the basis that insofar as we are concerned, decontrol and free enterprise are in our country to stay and whatever the problems there is no turning back in this policy.

One of the tenets of the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines is economic nationalism. This calls for the ascendancy of Filipino businessmen in the Philippine economy. In the past, this was sought to be brought about by waving slogans which were applied only to suit particular and favored Filipinos. During the presidential campaign, we replied to those who waved these slogans that the ascendancy of Filipino businessmen in the economy cannot be attained by unimplemented slogans but by action without need for slogans. In our administration, we have not waved slogans but we have acted to increase the opportunities of Filipino businessmen for ascendancy: first, by formulation of a clear socio-economic program predominantly participated in by Filipinos; second, by increasing credit facilities for Filipinos, and third, by deporting and smashing the webs of corruption and unscrupulous business practices of undesirable aliens who block opportunities for Filipino businessmen and legitimate foreign businessmen. This is legitimate economic nationalism not by slogan but by action.

We must emphasize, however, that we welcome legitimate foreign investors who wish to help develop our economy in joint ventures with Filipinos and who do business with integrity and not through an unfair advantage of corrupting public officials and other fraudulent practices. Foreign businessmen now in the country who do not resort to corruption of officials and fraudulent manipulations, will be given full protection and assistance by the Administration. Our program envisages domestic investments amounting to 89 per cent of the requirements and foreign investments amounting to 11 per cent. Indeed, there is wide room for profitable foreign investments in the country and to all foreign investors, present and future, we guarantee against confiscation of their investments, freedom to repartriate profits, as well as capital, and equal protection of the laws.

A proper climate is a prerequisite for the successful implementation of our socio-economic program. In order to create this auspicious climate, the administration has taken action against some prominent businessmen. These businessmen may be classified into (1) those aliens who seek to advance in business through corruption of officials, like Stonehill and Peter Lim; (2) those former aliens who have resorted to venalities to do business like Cokeng and Ernesto Ting; (3) those former aliens who have resorted to profiteering which disturbs the healthy progress of an economic program; and (4) those aliens who participate in elections in open mockery of the Philippine laws, in an effort to influence public officials and unduly obtain business favors.

But it is not undesirable aliens or former aliens alone who pollute the atmosphere of free or private enterprise that the administration is committed to evolve. There are also Filipino Stonehills. Among them are so-called Filipino businessmen, who build and maintain business empires through political power, including the corruption of politicians and other public officials, and so-called businessmen who misuse their government positions to build fortunes in unfair competition with the legitimate businessmen. We shall also take action against these native Stonehills because in clearing the ground of obnoxious debris for a true and effective private enterprise system, we shall not discriminate, we will act against national or foreigner, against friend or foe, against all those who are obstructions to an economic system that affords equal and fair opportunity to all the citizens to advance economically not through malfeasance but through hard work, ability and integrity.

Another prerequisite to a proper climate for the success of our economic program is to keep politics out of its implementation. As we have taken action against those who constitute economic roadblocks to the success of the program, we are also prepared to contend with those who will become political roadblocks, those who will inject partisan politics in our measures taken to promote the Nation’s socio-economic program. The Administration is erecting an economic compound, as it were, wherein the business leaders and all legitimate businessmen, big and small, shall develop the resources and wealth of the land in a setting of integrity and freedom for the general economic wellbeing of all our people. At the gate of this compound of national economic endeavor based on free and private enterprise, I shall be the security guard to see that politics is kept off the unhampered implementation of the Nation’s economic program.

Having mentioned the necessity for a proper climate, we shall now expound on the progress we have achieved in the implementation of our Five-Year Socio-Economic Program and the work that lies ahead.

Review of Implementation

In my State of the Nation Message before Congress delivered last January 22nd, I stated that the principal tasks of our Administration in the economic field are twofold: first, to establish immediately a new, stable base for business valuation and planning to remove the uncertainties that pervaded the economic atmosphere in previous years; and second, to set clear directions for overall economic, monetary, fiscal and commercial policies and for government investment programs in order to generate a new dynamic for continued economic growth.

Decontrol

The first step we took to stabilize the business atmosphere was to remove exchange controls on January 21st this year. We anticipated even then that the first import of this action would be to create a flurry of speculation and to increase the prices particularly of those commodities which, up to the last stages of the previous decontrol program, continued to enjoy preferred rates of exchange. In order to temper the initial speculation that accompanied the restoration of a free market for exchange, particularly after over 12 years of controls, we established a stabilization fund of $300 million made up of loans negotiated with a number of U. S. commercial banks, the International Monetary Fund, the U. S. Agency for International Development, the Export-Import Bank of Washington, and the U. S. Treasury. We also imposed credit restriction measures knowing that in the face of speculation on the future course of the exchange rate there would be a demand for credit purely for the purpose of buying foreign exchange to hold abroad. The results of the decontrol have exceeded our most sanguine expectations. Speculation was shortlived. As you all know, the present level of the exchange rate has remained amazingly stable for the past three months at between P3.36 and P3.90 per U. S. dollar. The growing confidence that you businessmen have begun to show in the stability of this rate is now reflected in the fact that many people are no longer interested in paying high premiums for foreign exchange purchased for future delivery. As the rates stabilized we were able gradually to remove the special time deposits required for most importation.

Prices

Next we diverted our attention to alleviate the effect of the inevitable increases in the prices of commodities such as milk, canned fish, corned beef and life-saving drugs. As I explained repeatedly in my radio-television broadcasts, the increase in the prices of these commodities was inevitable because, among other factors, they must now be imported at the rate of P3.90 per dollar when up to January this year they had been imported at P2.00. Ultimately, the lasting solution to the temporary difficulties posed by these price adjustments must be the expansion of household incomes, the reduction of unemployment and the domestic production of these commodities at lower costs and in larger quantities. In the meantime, the government recognized the need for adopting some palliative measures to the end that the necessary burdens of adjustment should not unduly bear upon the masses of the people in our country. I am happy that in the pursuit of this end, the leaders of the Opposition Party chose to join ranks with us and a bi-partisan price committee has approved a temporary program of consumer subsidies to reduce somewhat the cost of these essential items to our consuming households.

Second Stage of Implementation

I am happy to report that we now redirecting our attention and our full energies to the implementation of our economic program. We are now poised to launch the second stage of implementation to define the clear directions and integrate overall economic monetary, fiscal, commercial, industrial and agricultural policies and to program systematically and scientifically the government’s own investments in order to provide maximum inducement for private capital formation. To assist the Administration in this task, I have added to my top economic staff one of the most brilliant young economists in our country today, who is also imbued with a sense of dedication and mission for our people, my new Assistant Executive Secretary for Economic Affairs, Sixto Roxas, III.

Rehabilitation

We are not unmindful of the difficulties which many of our existing new industrial ventures are facing because of the removal of exchange controls. We know that many of these firms established under the mantle of protection afforded by exchange controls are now facing serious problems of adjustment. The financial structures of these firms were designed to keep them viable only as long as the high profit margins existing during controls continued. With the increase in the exchange rate to the present level, profit margins have come down. Under this new situation, a large percentage of our industrial firms are now undercapitalized and heavily over-extended. I wish to assure you that the government recognizes its obligation to formulate programs of assistance for the orderly reorganization and readjustment of entire industries. We are now in the process of studying the specifics of these problems and I give you my assurance that before too long we shall launch a special program of assistance and rehabilitation.

Systematic Programming of Social Overhead

The task of exploiting the rich material and human resources of this country for the purpose of improving the welfare and livelihood of our people is necessarily a joint effort between government and the private sector. Committed as we are, furthermore, to a philosophy of private and free enterprise, in our Socio-Economic Program private investments occupy the major role in satisfying the increasing needs of the country for income and employment. But we recognize also that for development to proceed at a rapid pace government must provide every feasible facility, assistance and protection to private investments. To this end, the government is now in the process of reorganizing the whole basis and approach to the programming of its capital and operating funds. We have suspended temporarily the release of funds for all public works projects except those which are most urgently required, particularly because of calamities, or damages wrought by typhoons and floods. We have done this in order, first, to integrate the various project proposals into technologically consistent and economically integrated groups of projects that can be launched together with maximum efficiency and economy. This is a sharp departure from the past where public works projects were undertaken in response to political exigencies in small scattered isolated droplets with no permanent effects on production and distribution in the country. From hereon, road construction will be undertaken to establish complete networks chosen to establish necessary links between priority production areas and market centers and integrated with requisite harbor facilities. We shall no longer as in the past think in terms of isolated irrigation projects but of integrated water resource development combining flood control, irrigation with municipal waterworks and where feasible with hydro-electric power. In the programming of disbursements for these projects we shall be in constant consultation with private investors in order to coordinate the government’s own time-tables with the requirements of farmers, mining firms, logging and lumber concessionaires, manufacturers and traders.

Emergency Employment Funds

Some have expressed misgiving that the funds appropriated for the Emergency Employment Administration shall be used for political rather than economic purpose. I wish to assure you here and now that the capital programs on which these funds shall be disbursed will be for productive purposes and will be fully integrated with the overall public works development schedule and will be used to fill in essential gaps left by the absence of specific legal authorizations.

Mobilizing Financing

As the implementation of the program proceeds, tremendous resources must be mobilized to finance not only the government’s own capital and operating requirements but also the supplementary needs of private investment projects. The Department of Finance is now engaged in a vigorous campaign to improve the tax collection machinery of the government. In addition, we are working out the arrangements necessary to make full use of foreign loans now available to us and still unutilized such as the $50 million from the U. S. Agency for International Development, $30 million from the Export-Import Bank of Washington, $250 million from Japan. I am glad to state that the organization of the Private Development Corporation which is sponsored by the government and which will be financed by the A.I.D., the World Bank, private foreign investors and private Philippine investors is now nearing completion. This corporation will provide much needed financing in the form of capital contribution and long-term loans for new private ventures as well as for the modernization of established enterprise.

We are now also examining the existing investment policies of all the government financing institutions in order to determine how these policies may be revised to suit the requirements of industrial and agricultural expansion in the coming years.

Coordinated Policies and Procedures

Finally, we are aware that the establishment of a healthy climate for private investments, domestic as well as foreign, demands that conflicting government policies and administrative procedures that unduly place bottlenecks in production and distribution should be expeditiously removed. The members of my cabinet, my economic staff and myself are daily engaged in identifying and locating these bottlenecks and taking immediate measures to remove them.

Gentlemen of the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines, ever since my election to this high position I have become increasingly conscious of the serious and weighty responsibility that faces us in our generation. To eradicate poverty from the face of our country, to give to the growing mass of our population hope for a life of security and comfort, to give meaning and substance to the democratic platitudes of freedom and equality of opportunity—these are noble tasks in the performance of which we must spare no material or human resources. To these tasks, we have dedicated ourselves and our entire administration. Their successful accomplishment is the only success we seek. We shall tolerate no obstacles, we shall be relentless to the verge of success.

I find it fitting to reiterate what I told you on September 9, 1960:

“The program of prosperity through private enterprise is the opportunity of a lifetime for any entrepreneur, producer and businessman in any country in any period. In the light of the present state and pace of our development and other attendant circumstances, we are determined to make the profit motive the most powerful stimulus to the full and rapid growth of our economy because we cannot afford to wait any longer for our people to stagnate in their poverty. In the last decade, businessmen had been complaining with ample justification against inequities on the part of the government and its personnel. Under our program which we are resolved to carry out, you will have no further cause to complain because the development of the economy is now in your hands, while the government roots for you to succeed in your great task, ready to help you, by giving you credit which you need and deserve, information, guidance and any assistance that you may need to make honest money for yourselves and prosperity for our people. In the system of private enterprise into which we have embarked, the prosperity and destiny of our people shall rest mainly in your hands. May God bless you.”

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.