Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On Labor Day

[Released on May 1, 1963]

Peaceful Revolution for the Common Man

TODAY is Labor Day in many countries of the world. In the Philippines, this day is twice significant. For this year 1963 we mark the hundredth anniversary of the birth of Andres Bonifacio, the self-taught worker who founded Asia’s first social revolution in our soil seventy years ago.

There are few labor movements in the world that historically may claim so noble a lineage. When workers today speak of reforms, they must bear in mind that the greatest reform movement ever initiated by our workers was the Philippine Revolution of 1896.

The revolution of 1896 was to a large part inspired by the people’s agrarian grievances. Our own national hero, Dr. Jose Rizal, was our greatest land reformer who had the prescience to anticipate the two complementary solutions to the land question: abolish tenancy and open up new lands for cultivation. He fought for the titles of the Calamba sharecroppers and during his exile opened up new lands in Dapitan. When such reforms proved unavailing, the stage was ready to admit a more dynamic personality in Andres Bonifacio.

The Cry of Balintawak remains relevant to our own time. To the extent that the revolution sought to free the nation from foreign rules, Bonifacio and the Katipunan seems distant and secure in the vaults of history. To the extent that the revolution sought to emancipate the common man from poverty and social injustices, Bonifacio is still contemporary and alive, a source not of assurance but of inspiration.

The social goals of the Philippine revolution have not been fully accomplished. The encomienda system had taken other forms but the poverty and injustices that it bred are still with us. And so long as they prevail, the spirit of Bonifacio will refuse indeed to be consigned into oblivion, he will defy being reduced to cold stone as an object of veneration, he will continue to challenge us to keep going the revolution of 1896.

This Administration has taken up the challenge by launching a peaceful revolution for the common man. Our socio-economic development program is aimed at the liberation of the common man from poverty. That is why the “socio” precedes the “economic” in the naming of the program. The program is founded on the conviction that the most effective way of bringing about social progress for the underprivileged is through the rapid and widespread economic growth of the country that will extend its blessings to the poorest man in the land.

In the implementation of the program, this spirit of singular concern for the worker permeates. One of the three express major goals of the program is the alleviation of the plight of the common man.

In the implementation of the program, priority has been given to the abundant supply of rice and corn in order to assure the poor man of his food at prices within his reach. The qualitative and inexpensive “Pag-asa” clothes have been conceived to provide him with clothing. The housing agencies have been invigorated and the multi-storey tenement project has been launched to give him shelter.

The EEA has been established to give him acutely needed income. The NACIDA has been organized to supplement his meager earning. The NDC textile factory has been sold to the workers in order to usher the workers into the responsibility of proprietorship. As this adventure in proprietorship for the urban worker succeeds, we shall be prepared to help the worker to become a proprietor by selling to him other government enterprises.

As we seek to make the urban worker a proprietor, it is our duty to make the farm worker the owner of the land that he tills. Thus, we have accepted the challenge of redeeming workers in our farms from a life of misery. We have sent to our Congress a land reform program whose success will at long last complete the task of Rizal and Bonifacio.

By enabling more than a million tenant farmers to cultivate their own land, we shall solve a permanent crisis in our society which has served to divide Filipinos one from another; we shall heal the wounds of centuries; we shall score a positive triumph over Communism, which seeks to appropriate Bonifacio as its symbol and the grievances of the masses as its own platform against us.

Land reform will give us leverage to raise our economic productivity not only in agriculture but also in industry. The rural areas will cease to be a passive but a dynamic factor in our economic development. A new mass market for industrial goods will develop as production and income increase among the farmers. A wider market will call for greater production; greater production will induce greater investment; greater investment will generate employment opportunities. There will be more factories, more employment, higher living standards for all.

Productivity gives the measure of living standards. That is why there can be no substantial increase in the incomes and welfare of the workers outside of real gains in economic development.

The essential ingredients of economic development are labor, capital and natural resources. There is no argument on which of these elements is most vital—vital as a basic resource of the nation. Levels of production are determined largely by the skills of people, their energy, drive and resourcefulness, and the manner in which these are applied in productive activity. The wealth of a nation lies not alone in its natural resources; not alone in the availability of capital; but in the ability of men, in the productivity of labor, in the quality of leadership for combining and utilizing capital and material resources at maximum efficiency. Yet in our farms today human resources go to waste, dissipated in a life of inactivity, penury and destitution.

Tenancy has consigned the farm worker to the last rung of the social structure. Hard work is unavailing to help him rise to a better life. The social dice is loaded against him. His efforts can only change things within the inevitable frame of pernicious institutional practices. Of course, he cannot sink any further for he cannot be any poorer. In the face of hopelessness, apathy and lethargy set in. Tenancy has set the barriers to the development of initiative and sense of responsibility. People produce little because poverty has reduced their efficiency.

Could this be the reason why Filipino labor was called inefficient by opponents of the Minimum Wage Law twelve years ago? When as a member of Congress I led the enactment of a law setting a floor wage, critics of the bill immediately demanded to know why we were for importing American wage practices when there was no parity in productive efficiency between American and Filipino workers. They conveniently overlooked the relationship between labor and energy. The development of skills is a matter of opportunity; energy is a matter of health—both of which are dependent on income.

This is why I hold that the government’s land reform program is a matter of grave concern not only for us, in this Administration, but also for the trade unions.

For this program constitutes the most rational and feasible approach to the problem of increasing our productivity and, therefore, the real incomes of labor.

It is also the increase in productivity that will, more than any other expedient measure, effectively absorb undue fluctuations in prices and guarantee the consuming masses against the loss of purchasing power.

But far more important, higher income will mean wider opportunities for education, for self-improvement, for increasing one’s efficiency.

A corollary to land reform, therefore, is accelerated human capital formation. To this end we shall invest in the Filipino worker. We shall provide direction for our training activities in order to develop manpower consisting of the various skills that will fit in their proper proportion to the existing industrial pattern. With manpower data compiled and analyzed to determine labor requirements of industry, students can select educational fields that offer maximum opportunity.

Soon the Government shall establish a network of employment exchanges in all labor centers all over the country to facilitate mobility in the labor forces, occupationally and geographically. Through constant exchange of information, excess labor skills in surplus regions can be drawn to places of opportunity.

We shall encourage and assist management and supervisory development programs.

More rank-and-file workers will find employment as we improve leadership and managerial skills of our supervisory personnel because availability of competent professional managers attracts greater investment.

We shall establish practical training centers for the unemployed who desire to prepare themselves for jobs that are expected to come up in the course of our economic development; for those who desire to broaden their chances for employment by undergoing supplementary training; and for those forced into unemployment by technological changes and who want to acquire another skill.

Training programs shall be carried out in close cooperation with business and industry and with an eye on current and prospective manpower requirements.

Demonstrative of our determination to develop the skills of labor, we are establishing this year a University for Workers.

Thus labor will set the pace of our economic growth. And as we raise levels of production we shall give full government support to trade union action.

The Administration will work for a law that will bar the hiring of scabs during strikes.

Strikes fizzle out when strikers find themselves helpless in the face of professional scabs who break up picket lines and stir up violence. If action is not taken against them, unions will soon dwindle in number because membership in a union will just mean losing one’s job and exposing one’s self to physical injury.

There shall be stringent government measures against the formation of company-dominated unions.

The presence of a large number of company unions in the country has forced the dissolution of many independent unions and has placed unreasonable employers in a position to dictate terms of employment.

Appropriate legislation shall be secured to curb abuses in the issuance of writs of injunction in labor cases. The indiscriminate use of labor injunctions is an effective weapon in tying the hands of labor and placing strikes at the mercy of business firms.

We shall translate all these proposed measures into reality to secure the national welfare justly and equitably for all—from the poorest in the nation to the richest.

When critics say that I am opposed to the rich because I suffered poverty, they hint that my policies are inspired by bitterness. Bitterness arises from frustration, not from careers which through difficulties have matured into fulfillment.

Rather the experience of poverty has made me all the more aware of the frustrations of the poor. Believing in my oneness with humanity, I could not bear witness to the consequences of poverty without arousing my own impulses towards helping to eradicate it among my own people. I have sought the gift of public office so that I may dedicate myself to the task of redeeming our masses from bondage of poverty and misery.

We are embarked on an economic revolution, but to a large extent, it is also political in character. It is political in the sense that the issues surrounding this revolution are subject to popular debate and the popular verdict. Long-entrenched vested interests of tremendous power have grouped themselves in opposition to the peaceful, democratic revolution which has been initiated by us. I like to believe that the masses of Filipinos the legatees of Bonifacio’s ideals, will solidly stand behind this Administration in its determination to uproot the evils of centuries, the evils of feudalism, the curse of poverty, ignorance, disease, and unseasonable death.

This peaceful revolution shall be met with well-nigh insuperable obstacles. This fact should not deter us from waging it to its end. We cannot be less daring than Bonifacio who launched his revolution armed only with bolos although aware that he would be fought by the artillery and musketeers of the mightiest power in Europe. Insofar as I am concerned, I have long resolved that I shall not fail the spirit of Bonifacio, that even if the obstacles put on the path of reform by the defenders of the status quo were one thousand times more than what is in their power, I shall resist and fight all obstructionist forces until the peaceful revolution for the common man shall have ended in victory.

If the political ends of organized labor consist in advancing the cause of the common man, so that he may come to a fuller life, in an atmosphere of freedom, then I must say that our purpose coincides with yours. I must say that the ideals of your movement are the ideals that inspire us to go forward in our quest of a better life and dignity for the common man, and that these ideals should forge for us and among us a lasting bond of partnership and a deep sense of oneness.

Thus may we march together to that promised land seen by Rizal, a Philippine Republic which shines in virtue and in prosperity and where men are truly free.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.