Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the ceremony reserving Pier 14 for the exclusive use of fishing industry

[Delivered on December 14, 1962]

LAUNCHING FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

TODAY, December 14, 1962, we mark an event unique in the economic and social life of this country. For many years past, the fishing industry had been crying for attention and assistance. While millions were being poured into the industries of the farmers of the land, little was allowed to trickle down for the farmers of the waters of this country.

Today, let me express my deep abiding faith and confidence in the fisherman and in the fishing industry of this country and my deep concern for the fishing industry, which I know can respond to heights of accomplishment if adequately attended to, and properly encouraged.

The Philippines is about the only country without a fishing port. Tons of ice and oil, equipment and many men have to be brought to and from the fishing vessel as far as three kilometers from the shore. Your own fishing landing at Navotas, Rizal, does not have the minor facilities for docking.

Because of the dearth in the facilities for the preservation of fish, fish is thrown away or buried in the sand and fishing is not pursued sufficiently as the fish will only spoil. As a result, we have heretofore been able to develop virtually nothing more than the dried fish business.

Fifty kilograms of fish a hectare from a fresh water area, as we are getting now, is too little. Properly managed fresh water areas can produce, as in other countries, no less than 500 kilograms per hectare. The average yield of our salt water swamplands that have been developed into bangus fishponds is approximately 600 kilograms per hectare. This is way below the 2 tons yield in countries like Japan and Taiwan. There is, in this country, still much to be desired in this industry.

From today, you will see the rise of fishing ports to be constructed along the many shores of this country to better service the landing requirements of the fishing industry.

Adequate preservation facilities are part and parcel of the fishing industry. If this is true in countries as cold as Denmark or Canada, it is especially true in this country. We are adopting the initial step to set up refrigeration and ice plants all over the country to provide appropriate storage for the fish and meet the ice requirements of those engaged in fishing. Because of this, marketing will become simpler, the consumer becomes assured that his fish is fresh, and the fishing boat operators or the fisherman himself need not buy his ice at 5 pesos a block.

Seventy fish nurseries, fully equipped with laboratory equipment, will be established all over the country beginning today in order to supply the stocking needs of the more than 200 thousand hectares of freshwater areas and the more than 100 thousand hectares of salt water ponds. A comprehensive study will be undertaken on how to reduce the mortality rate of bangus fry and fingerlings from as high as 60% to nil, on how to fertilize the ponds to at least double production, and in order to pave the way for the controlled breeding of shrimps and prawns, and even bangus.

For a more useful exploitation of our shoals and flat bottom areas, a massive program of otoshi-ami fishing has been designed. This may well be the answer to those thousands of fishermen along the coasts where the bottoms are steep and flat. This will definitely open a new field not only in fish capture, but also in the manufacture of coconut coir fibers and ropes all over the islands.

The problem of dynamite fishing is still with us. It must be solved. Dynamite fishing must be stopped. Soon the coastal fishermen will be attended to by no less than 500 wardens and demonstrators who will not only enforce the fishery regulations, but will at the same time undertake a demonstration program on the more effective and legitimate way of coastal fishing.

This kickoff on the fisheries development program brings into full focus the desire of this administration to accomplish the following:

1. To provide the necessary facilities for fishing operation, fish marketing and distribution as well as fish preservation, as indispensable conditions toward the establishment of canneries and other fish processing plants;

2. To provide the facilities in making available to all engaged in fishing, the latest in fishing techniques for coastal as well as deep sea fishing, aware of the fact that improved fishing methods and better management are the answer to more fish and to a better fishing business;

3. To provide the necessary corps of dedicated men, who will police the coastlines and fishing areas of this country for effective conservation, and at the same time demonstrate better fishing equipment for profitable processing and marketing methods, particularly for the small fishermen;

4. To set the base for improved management of our lakes, dams, reservoirs and marshes which heretofore have either been unexploited or abused;

5. To set the pace necessary for an accelerated development in deep sea fishing, to attain not only self-sufficiency in fish, but also for exports receipts from fish and fish products;

6. To set the base for a continuing massive development of our fishing industry, which will provide tremendous employment opportunities arising from the rise and establishment of such corollary industries as boat building and repair, net making, fishing paraphernalia manufacturing, engine work, woodwork, copper and bronze works, iron works, refrigeration, ice-making, and sea transportation, canneries and fish processing plants and fishmeal plants and from the trade and commerce generated from the coastlines to the interior towns and cities.

This administration takes pride in announcing now its readiness to help you in the fishing industry with all means available. Under the administration’s socio-economic program, we can march together along,—we, giving you the basis and facilities for profitable fishing activities, and you, giving your energies and efforts not only towards a profitable fishing business, but also towards the more important goal of providing food for all our countrymen.

A vigorous program for fisheries development is therefore on. We have taken the initiative. To you, in the business, I throw the challenge of the day—more fish, and, therefore, more food for every one.

I therefore officially launch the Fisheries Development Program of this administration by declaring that this Pier 14 will hereafter be for the exclusive use of the fishing industry.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.