Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the state banquet given by President William Tubman

[Delivered at Monrovia’s Executive Mansion, December 8, 1963]

THE PHILIPPINES AND LIBERIA

I THANK you, Mr. President, for your generous and gracious words which I know have been addressed to my people as well as to myself. Your expressions of friendship and good will find ready response in us and in our countrymen, coming as they do from the leader of a nation and on behalf of a people whom we have long admired.

Liberia was among the first experiments in human liberation on the African continent just as the Philippines was the first in Asia. Your sturdy nation was set up as a free territory for the benefit of colored free men from America and as an example for all Africa to follow. As a colony struggling for independence and sovereignty, the Republic of the Philippines likewise became an inspiration for Asia, home of the overwhelming majority of the world’s colored races. In your heroic struggle to protect your nation from the encroachments of colonial powers on three sides and in our own series of revolutions against two of the most powerful colonizing powers of their time, we have between us made pioneering and significant efforts to the decolonization of a great portion of the world. As a consequence of our humble origins we are also among the developing nations of the world. Both our countries are engaged in an economic revolution to transform our largely agricultural economies into well-balanced agro-industrial economies.

In addition to the historical and economic affinities and similarities of our two nations, we are also linked by our common possession of Christianity as a religion and our common allegiance to democracy as a way of life. Africa has many religions, with Christianity in the small minority. An islet as it were in a sea of non-Christian faiths, we find ourselves in a similarly unique position, for Asia too is an ocean of non-Christian beliefs.

It is not an accident that in the governing body of the world organization, the Afro-Asian bloc has developed as a powerful force. This bloc has the three-pronged objective of abolishing all forms of race discrimination, liquidating colonization of all kinds and in every place in the world, and promoting universal peace.

In the attainment of this objective, which is essential to world security, the sister republics of Liberia and the Philippines are united, and work shoulder to shoulder.

We in the Philippines believe that for their common well-being, the nations of Africa and the nations of Asia should have contact with one another and know more of each other. Both have undergone colonization by the white man and have recovered their natural right to liberty in this century. Both are struggling to escape from the poverty of the masses in which centuries of colonization have kept them. Their problems are essentially the same—difficulties that spring from the common problem of poverty. Their struggles are essentially the same—the rapid development of their economic resources in order that their peoples might achieve a higher life in greater dignity. Their handicaps are essentially the same—their lack of technology and the gap that the centuries have created between their backward state and the highly advanced progress of their former masters plus the lingering prejudices that compound the striving of the colored man to advance to a level of equality with all men.

Against these handicaps and prejudices there can be an effective measure. Africa and Asia must know each other so that Africa and Asia can act in unity to help one another in their problems and to put up a united front to protect their right to human dignity and progress against any force that seeks to delay the universal enjoyment of the equality of all men in a life of prosperity.

Finally, I now take the liberty of taking this opportunity to pay well-merited tribute to the President of this great nation, William Tubman. Historians have credited this administration which began in 1944 with the emergence of Liberia into a modern and progressive nation. A former Supreme Court Justice, President Tubman’s first act was to align Liberia on the side of the democratic allies in World War II. Since then, his administration and Liberia have participated actively in practically all the common postwar efforts to bring about a new and united world.

In the words of one of your outstanding writers, Dr. Tubman has made of Liberia a modern forward-looking country.

As I have visited Liberia to convey to you the greetings of the more than 30 million Filipinos, I hereby extend to you, Mr. President and Madame Tubman, an invitation to visit the Philippines.

May I now ask you to rise and drink a toast to the great President of Liberia, Dr. Tubman, and to the prosperity and happiness of the people of Liberia.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.