Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On the 61st anniversary of the Philippine Constabulary

[Released on August 8, 1962]

THE ROLE OF THE CONSTABULARY TODAY

ON BEHALF of the Filipino people and on my own as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, I proudly salute the Philippine Constabulary on the occasion of its 61st anniversary.

I have deep personal reasons for regarding the Constabulary with affection and respect. It is because of my full recognition of the services of the man in uniform that I approved, among other things pertaining to the reinvigoration of our armed forces, the raise in pay of the enlisted man; and I am prepared to do more that is within the power of the administration to promote the welfare of the common man in uniform.

Sixty-one years of honorable soldiery in the cause of peace and order is a glory to any organization. But let us one and all reflect upon the thought that this imposes upon us the awe-some responsibility of keeping that record untarnished, and let us remember that this good name of the Constabulary had been purchased by generations of constables by their unquestioning devotion, their indefatigable toil, their sweat and even their blood. Let anyone in this organization at this moment who feels that he cannot keep up this glorious tradition feel the weight of the responsibility. Anyone who is cohorting with smugglers, anyone who is abetting corruption, anyone who has allowed himself to be the prey of vice which he had sworn to fight, anyone who would disgrace the name of the organization leave its ranks now, for the smallest speck of cancer in the body of the PC could very well foredoom the achievements purchased at so high a price in more than half a century of the glorious history of the Constabulary.

I trust that you all understand how I feel about the slightest tinge of dishonorable conduct in my administration. I have not spared my friends even in the cabinet from the strict requirement of official and personal conduct beyond suspicion. And I assure you that if there remains in my administration any public servant who besmirches that norm of honor, I would weed him out if that is the last thing I would do as President of the Philippines. This should give all of you in the Philippine Constabulary a definite idea of what your Commander-in-Chief would do to any constabularyman, whether private or general, who would act in a manner derogatory to the glorious traditions of the organization. The Constabulary is no place for weaklings, physical or moral. I have vowed to place our beloved country on the road to moral regeneration, and I expect that this organization whom I love so well, shall lead our people along that path to our national salvation. Any deviation from among you will be nothing short of treason.

It has been with great pleasure and pride that I have received continual reports of the achievements of the Constabulary in the administration’s determined campaign to wipe out smuggling, corruption and vice. These reports have been pouring from all corners of our country. The Constabulary can be sure that our people are receiving news of these achievements with jubilation for they serve to demonstrate the fact that our country has, indeed, entered into a new era of dedicated public service and moral regeneration. It recalls those good old days when our people looked with respect at the merest constabulary private, when this clean and strong and upright man in khaki and red was the hero worship of children, when any man in that uniform was the-object of envy of his civilian friends. Those were the good old days and I am very glad that they are coming back with us to inspire our people with new hope for the future of a nation that was almost ruined by the graft and corruption of politicians of the recent past.

I am impressed, too, by Constabulary reports naming corrupt officials and politicians as well as corrupting aliens as falling into the nationwide dragnet that has been scoring against smugglers and economic saboteurs. I want to tell each and every constabulary man that he has my full backing in this crusade, and that he can collar any man violating our laws regardless of whether he is a politician or he claims to be an influential man. Spare no man in this crusade. Every guilty one who falls will mean one scoundrel less in our struggle for our economic salvation.

We have already launched our five-year socio-economic program aimed at the upliftment and prosperity of our country and a good life for the common man. There is no turning back in this determined national effort which concerns the welfare of every man, woman, and child in our country and the just place of our Republic on the face of the earth. The Philippine Constabulary is already taking part in this effort and I have every reason to expect that it shall not fail.

Not everyone appreciates the fact that security is a prerequisite for progress. No plan of economic development can hope to be implemented successfully if it does not rest on the premise of individual freedom from fear and anxiety.

If the Constabulary is to satisfactorily fulfill its role in this program, it must condition itself even as an instrument must be honed.

The first step in the conditioning process is to divorce itself from political influences. Perverted politics destroys every agency it taints. When the very internal security agency of the State is tainted, the consequences may well be tragic. The Constabulary must never be made the private tool of any political individual or group, and I herewith pledge my office and all its powers as the buffer for any attempt to convert it into such from the lowest to the highest levels of command.

Indeed, there is too much politics in this country. Since assuming the presidency, I have sought to lay aside politics, consecrating myself to the gigantic task of economic growth, together with moral regeneration. Many so-called leaders, however, seem to persist in dissipating the nation’s time in endless politics that exults in irresponsible political intrigue and sensationalism at the expense of the Nation’s good. I must say emphatically that these quarters cannot succeed in diverting our efforts from the crucial task of seeking prosperity for our people. Together with dedicated agencies of our nation like the Constabulary, we shall proceed in the vigorous discharge of our duty, undeterred by those who would place politics above the true welfare of the country.

The second step in conditioning the Constabulary would be to impress upon everyone the importance of internal security. When a smuggler, or a Communist, or a grafter is caught, the significance of that event is not confined to the subsequent conviction or the tallying of another statistical entry. The true dimensions of its significance is that the country has eliminated one more compromising factor of progress and contentment. Acts of law violations of all magnitudes are like varying sizes of grains of sand which all threaten to stop the movement of the government’s machinery, if not shatter critical parts of the machinery. At this time of our development, when we have just started to recover from the retardation caused by government inefficiency, and when we have just started to lay the foundations of a dynamic stage of national history, we cannot afford the delay of even one moment.

The final step in the Constabulary’s conditioning should be the absorption by each and every Constable of this Republic’s concept of civil rights. The right to life, liberty, property, and the pursuit of happiness is the fundamental tenet of our way of life.

Every government agency is dedicated to the enchancement thereof. It may be said that it is almost the total concern of government. To help the preservation of this right, certain citizens have been delegated the authority to use force if necessary. This is one of the most powerful authorities which our people can delegate. It can also be the most treacherous. I enjoin you therefore to act in the discharge of your noble mission with such combined firmness and kindness that you shall not be shunned in fear by citizens but that your presence among our countryfolk will be welcomed because you symbolize the benign authority of law and order, protection and helpfulness as the embodiment of the finest qualities of the Constabulary—the friend and not the foe of the people.

The Philippine Constabulary marks its 61st anniversary at a time when justice is the byword of government; justice meaning full reward or full punishment to the deserving no matter what his place is in the social or political scheme of the State. The Constabulary, the glorious Khaki and Red, has long demonstrated its stern affinity with justice. On this significant occasion, every citizen voices the prayer that this reputation shall always endure.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.