Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Manila Overseas Press Club

[Delivered on August 21, 1963]

ABOLITION OF SHARE TENANCY AND MAPHILINDO: TWO MILESTONES IN PHILIPPINE HISTORY

I HAVE just come from the provinces where I made eight speeches a day for eight days. My speeches dealt mainly with domestic issues. Tonight I welcome the opportunity as guest of the Manila Overseas Press Club to make just one short non-political speech. We shall have a change of pace as well as a change of subject. I am going to speak to you on a matter concerning foreign affairs.

This alternating emphasis on domestic and foreign affairs corresponds to the two great concerns of government. It calls to mind the two major achievements which best symbolize the inspiration and program of this administration in its first eighteen months in office. In the domain of domestic affairs, we have accomplished the approval of the Land Reform Act which abolishes share tenancy. In the realm of foreign affairs, we have achieved the establishment of Maphilindo.

We are perhaps too close to these two events to assign to them their correct importance in the history of our country and our region. But time will enable us to measure in clearer perspective the overwhelming importance of these two milestones in Philippine history. In the case of the abolition of tenancy, there is no doubt that it will be recognized for generations to come as one of the most significant achievements of any government in the history of the Philippines. This law gives us the tool with which we may at last solve the problem of agrarian injustice that has plagued our country for many centuries. With this reform our benighted rural areas will move at last into the twentieth century. But the abolition of tenancy is only a key, and it will take courage and imagination to use it effectively not only to unlock the chains that have bound our people in poverty and ignorance but also to open the door to new incentives in productivity and abundance.

In this connection I wish to express gratification over the decision of the United States government to set aside $30 million out of the $73 million for additional war damage and to make it available for our land reform program. This is significant because it shows that while giving us the benefit of their tutelage in political democracy leading to our independence in 1946, the United States has at the same time continued to provide us assistance in strengthening our democratic system through economic progress and social justice. Our tutelage in democracy covers the political as well as the social and economic fields, and we acclaim the organic wholeness and compass of the benefits derived from the altruistic association between the American people and the Filipino people in whose behalf I express to the American government our abiding gratitude and appreciation.

The establishment of Maphilindo is an event of comparable importance in another field of our national endeavor. Indeed, the two events parallel each other in various ways. The abolition of tenancy will correct the long existing evil of class exploitation in our economic and social life. The establishment of Maphilindo will remove the barriers that have been built artificially to divide the peoples of the Malay race. These two developments, however, accomplish more than the rectification of what is unjust or unnatural. They look forward to something better, something brighter; in the case of the abolition of tenancy, to increased productivity in agriculture and a better life for our farmers; in the case of Maphilindo, to close fraternal relations between peoples related by race and culture in order that together they may cooperate in charting a brighter future and in building a better society for themselves and their children.

The decision to establish Maphilindo looks backward as well as forward. It looks to the past frustration and shame of the Malay peoples, their fragmented history and incoherent destiny. But it also looks forward to the reunion of brothers after their prolonged and tragic dispersal. It looks forward to the rebirth of a region which an aggressive and adventurous colonialism had long considered as its exclusive preserve but which today is re-emerging as the home of free peoples determined to recover and safeguard their patrimony and to develop it as a haven of peace, abundance, and security.

Maphilindo, however, was not born full-grown like Minerva out of the head of Jupiter. On the contrary, it was a long time developing in the womb of history, waiting only for the conjuncture of the exhaustion of the old imperialism and the emergence of a new imperialism to bring it to birth.

Maphilindo is neither new nor unprecedented. But it is the newest expression of the resurgent energy and genius of the Malay peoples who, aeons ago, came out of southeastern Asia and spread out over the vast oceans and archipelagoes strung between Madagascar in the west to the Pacific islands in the east, and between Japan in the north and Australia in the south.

Maphilindo belongs in the tradition of the empires of Sri-Visaya and Madjapahit—but with a difference. Far from being a restoration of those ancient empires that were held together by the rule of compulsive obedience, Maphilindo is a voluntary association of independent and sovereign states held together by their affinities of race and culture as well as by their recognition of common purpose and aspiration. Maphilindo is a union of free peoples dedicated to freedom and the dignity of man.

Maphilindo, of course, has a number of more recent antecedents. Its precursors include the Asian Relations Conference held in New Delhi in 1947, the Bandung Conference of 1955, the entity known as the Asian-African Group in the United Nations, and the Association of Southeast Asia or ASA. Its most proximate predecessor, however, was the Baguio Conference of 1950 which had been called by President Quirino and was attended by representatives of India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Indonesia, Thailand, Australia, and the Philippines.

In his opening speech to the conference, President Quirino said;

“Until the recent past most of us could not chart our own course and had to depend on alien guidance. Our loyalties were divided; we could not develop on our own initiative; we could not determine our growth as separate nations. Now that we are masters of our own destiny, and as we endeavor to pursue our systematic growth and development consistent each with our national genius, we believe that we can complement one another, relying on our common historic origin and traditional sympathy with each other as well as on our geographic propinquity to better promote our common interests by frank mutual consultations.”

These were the wise words of a great leader and statesman whose presidency looms more impressive and outstanding the farther it recedes into history. President Quirino possessed the vision and imagination, but he dreamt before his time and planned far ahead of his contemporaries. Most of the nations of South and Southeast Asia had only recently won their independence and needed time to consolidate their freedom and to put their house in order. Moreover, the western powers did not smile too kindly upon initiatives of this kind, and they could have been expected to discourage and obstruct this particular grouping because it might prove to be competitive with their own particular schemes.

But already, in that premature yet highly revealing and significant conference held in Baguio thirteen years ago, the living seeds of great ideas had been planted in the fertile minds of men. Two of these ideas which were embodied among the recommendations of the Baguio Conference, now form part of the cornerstone of Maphilindo. These were:

First: “The Conference firmly establishes the principle of joint action among the countries of the region for a specific purpose. It is obvious that the practice of consultation and joint action is bound to become, in time, a permanent fixture of the political life of the region.”

Second: “The Conference establishes the significant doctrine that the interests of the peoples of the region are to be the primary consideration in any attempt to solve their problems.”

The first principle foreshadowed the practice of Mushawarah , which has become the accepted form of Maphilindo consultations, while the second principle constituted the basis on which Malaya, the Philippines, and Indonesia endeavored to formulate a solution to the problems of Malaysia.

After showing what Maphilindo is on the basis of its ancient as well as more recent antecedents, I would now like to say a few words about what Maphilindo is not.

First of all, Maphilindo is not a racial or racialist grouping. That Malaya, the Philippines, and Indonesia are inhabited by peoples of predominantly Malay stock is, however, a fact that cannot be denied. That, furthermore, these peoples are drawn together by the magnetic forces of race, culture, history, and geography is to state the obvious. Nevertheless, Maphilindo is not inspired by any doctrine of racial exclusivism. It will keep its doors open and remain hospitable to all persons regardless of race, creed or color who pledge undivided allegiance to any of the three Malay states that compose it.

Secondly, Maphilindo is merely the nucleus of an expanding association of nations in the region which are prepared to subscribe to the aims and purposes which have inspired the three countries to come together. While the three countries have been brought together by the natural unifying force of racial affinity, other factors no less efficacious will bring into this association other countries that have the same ideals.

Thirdly, Maphilindo is not a Super-State and none of its common organs will exercise supra-governmental powers. The three countries that form it will retain unimpaired their independence and sovereignty.

Fourthly, while Maphilindo will endeavor to emphasize the similarities between the three countries and enlarge, if possible, their areas of joint action, they are bound to respect each other’s particular traditions and institutions. The Malay countries have the example of the Nordic countries which have been able to coordinate very closely their political, economic, social, and cultural activities while realistically recognizing their differences and respecting one another’s special ties and obligations, so that Denmark, Norway, and Iceland are members of the NATO, while Sweden and Finland are neutral.

Fifthly, Maphilindo has enabled us to gain new friends without losing old friends. It is safe and reasonable to say that our old friends will remain our friends because it is inconceivable that they should oppose a movement which can only serve to give to each country in the region its just share of the responsibility for the peace, security, and well-being of the area. On the contrary, it is in their own interest to encourage us to assume our share of this responsibility. Recent and current developments in Southeast Asia prove beyond doubt that the most modern military equipment and the most advanced military know-how will yield maximum results in the struggle against Communist subversion and attack only if the struggle enjoys the loyal and devoted support of the masses of the people.

While developing new strength in cooperation with our neighbors, we shall continue to welcome the assistance of friends we already have.

I would like to conclude this brief preliminary analysis of the nature and purposes of Maphilindo by re-stating that its central purpose is to capitalize upon the natural and unavoidable realities of geography and politics in our part of the world. Through their long night of subjection and through the long eclipse of their civilization, the Malay peoples have waited for this moment. If they fail to seize it, another opportunity may not come again during the lifetime of this generation. But if they seize the moment mightily with both hands, it can mark the beginning of a new golden age for the peoples of Malay stock. In Maphilindo and through Maphilindo, nourished constantly by their vision and enterprise, the Malay peoples shall be borne upon the true, the vast, the irresistible wave of the future.

It has been rightly said that when I was elected President in 1961 for a term expiring in 1965, there was constituted a four-year contract of service to our people. It will be noted that the abolition of share tenancy and the establishment of Maphilindo were accomplished within only one year and a half of our four-year tenure. Men of vision and imagination will readily realize the significance of the fact that the abolition of tenancy had been a crying demand for the past five hundred years while the Maphilindo was the dream of Dr. Jose Rizal, President Manuel L. Quezon, Claro M. Recto, Wenceslao Vinzons, and other Malayan statesmen now come true within less than half of our contracted period of service to our country. With confidence bolstered by our immaculate devotion to the lasting well-being and greatness of our people, we venture in candor to express the thought that if we were given the opportunity to employ the full period of our contract with the people without obstruction and with the constant support of good citizens and dedicated leaders, we could add a stone to the edifice of our nation that will merit the favorable judgment not only of this generation but of our posterity.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.