Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On Election Eve

PROGRAM OF THE LIBERAL PARTY

TOMORROW we go to the polls. We are to exercise our privilege and responsibility as citizens of our Republic. When we cast our ballots our one and only concern should be the welfare of our people.

I will therefore refer frankly to the issue on which the expression of our sovereign power is humbly solicited. It is but proper, in the national interest, that these issues be clarified.

I will also refer to the main criticisms that had been publicly made about the administration. It is in the democratic affirmation of the freedom of the press and of expression that those criticisms have been made. That they are deceptive and unsubstantiated; that they are made without the corollary exercise of responsibility provides us an occasion to answer them and show to our people the truth that had been concealed in their airing.

The Program of the Liberal Party

In the previous national elections, the Filipino people elected me to head the nation and to be the spokesman of the Liberal Party on the basis of our party’s program of government which the nation had accepted. In the months that the Liberal Party had been at the head of our government, we saw to it that this expression of trust of our people is protected and respected. Against the obstructionism of the Opposition, we endeavored to implement our program and carry out our plans and pursue our aims.

What is the guiding concept of the program of this Administration?

As I have sought to express on other occasions, we believe in the immediate necessity of continuing the Unfinished Revolution. This means that we intend to realize in our country what the Filipino people have in the centuries past been trying to achieve; what they had fought to establish within their own generation, and what they had previously tried to attain, to make as tangible realities for themselves and for their own children. Our people have always hungered for freedom; for greater opportunities; for equality; for a more meaningful term of their human dignity and a longer and richer context for their aspirations.

Unfortunately, these legitimate demands of life by the Filipino people had constantly been thwarted by historical circumstances. So that while the peoples of the rest of the world are already enjoying the benefits of their labors and struggles, our own people, through no fault of theirs, are still bonded in servitude.

The causes of this national misery and deplorable condition of the masses are various and complex; but they are traceable to certain conditions that still exist in our society which are the results of the perpetuated errors of past colonial regimes and the condonement that certain Filipinos themselves had given these errors in their effort to advance their own selfish interests to the detriment of the welfare of the masses. It was therefore with conviction and great concern that we decided to re-assert the rights of the greater number of the Filipino nation; the thwarted hopes of our historical struggles. It was for the national good that we must continue the Unfinished Revolution of our people. And it was in pursuance of these principles that the Administration was criticized. Let us consider these criticisms.

Let us first analyze the label of “dictator” that has been indiscriminately used in the current campaign. There is evident in such a charge a fundamental confusion involved in the concept of the Presidency. Specifically, we confuse a strong executive with a dictator. By operation of our Constitution, the chief executive is essentially vested with considerable powers. Our Constitution, in so many words, demands that the President must be a strong leader. We had such a leader in President Quezon, and the temper in Quezon’s time allowed charges of dictatorship also to be hurled at him. We understand this only too well today, now that President Quezon is no more and we think of him always with admiration and gratitude. The truth is that if the President does not exercise the powers vested in him by the Constitution, the country will have a weak President. A President faithful to the Constitution must of necessity be a strong President, a decisive and effective leader.

Conscious of my duties under the Constitution, I have exercised the powers that derive therefrom to the best of my ability. If we want a weak President for this country our recourse is quite simple: let us amend the Constitution. But I say that we have confused a strong executive with dictatorship, which is saying that my critics are confused in their concept of what my duties under the Constitution are. I hold the Constitution supreme, and I am bound by a solemn oath to defend it. I cannot, therefore, perform my duties other than in the manner the fundamental law of our land dictates.

This charge of dictatorship cannot hold. I would not be making every effort to work for the Party in these elections were I a dictator. I would not be interested in winning your support in these elections for a desirable panel of Liberal senators who will stand by to assist the programs that we have initiated if I were a dictator.

The administration constitutes merely the executive branch of our government. As such, its powers are defined by the Constitution of our Republic. While it is free to interpret its functions and act on what it deems within the sanctions of the Constitution, its actions can nevertheless still be submitted for review by the judiciary. This is implicit in the separation of powers which our Constitution provides.

It is indeed true that a few of the intentions of the Administration to implement its program needed by the situation and necessities in Philippine society have suffered certain checks from the judicial branch of our government the most recent one being the decision of the Supreme Court on the importation of rice.

But this decision, my fellow countrymen, has been upheld by the Administration itself. The Administration has abided by that decision, respected it, and made public its readiness to obey the interpretation of the Supreme Court. Where such a willingness to accept the reading of the law by the judicial branch of the government is publicly proclaimed, where the separation of powers provided by the Constitution is itself respected, there is therefore no attempt to override democratic institutions guaranteed by the law of the land.

Another issue with which the Administration is charged with dictatorial tendencies, is over the fact that some party members of the Opposition have decided to leave their own party in order to help the national cause by cooperating, rather than obstructing, the program of the Administration which the Filipino people have decided to adopt when they elected me President in the past national elections. Clever parliamentarians as the oppositionists claim to be, it never occurred to them that national collaboration, in trying to achieve general goals and prosperity, can only be shown as dictatorial by a twisted logic. Is it dictatorship if some members of the Opposition found their party itself bankrupt of any national concern and decided to deny personal and party interest in their patriotic commitment to help end the deplorable situation of the Filipino masses? Is dictatorship to be motivated by the unselfish aim of trying to effectuate for our people the enjoyment of basic things in life to which they had been so far denied?

The charge of dictatorship against the administration, therefore, is clearly without substance. It is mere rhetoric, being given in exchange for what actually is the concern of the administration to provide for the nation their basic necessity of bread and freedom.

Decontrol, High Prices, and the Peso

On January 28, 1963, in my state-of-the-nation message to the Second Session of the 5th Congress of the Philippines, I gave as the condition which has given rise to the problems impending the country’s economic growth the “lack of financial sustenance arising from an anemic and unproductive economy.” To change this economic situation in the country, I made it essential for the government to accomplish three objectives, namely: 1) immediately restoring economic stability; 2) alleviating the plight of the common man; and 3) establishing a dynamic basis for future growth.

Pursuant to the first objective, the Administration lifted foreign exchange controls. In reaction to this, the Opposition blamed the Administration for the high prices.

Here, again, the Opposition has not been truthful. High prices are not traceable to decontrol as prices in general depend on a complex of factors, among which are the rise of population and the fluctuations in the world markets of the supply of commodities. As everyone of us will recall, these prices in the past administration were sky-high. What the Opposition has deliberately concealed is the fact that full decontrol which the Administration effected resulted in the unprecedented leap of export receipts by $103 million over those of 1961, the import bill dropped by $72 million surplus, and the international reserves increased by $37 million; the incomes of the producers, farmers and exporters increased because of the higher peso value of their produce and exports.

Full decontrol paved the way for the establishment of a fixed par value for the peso and provided greater incentives to exports. This measure actually freed our peso currency from arbitrary assignments of its exchange value and allowed it to establish its own value in the free market. As a result, exporters of Philippine primary products have been favored by full decontrol in terms of increased profits and money windfalls, which likewise benefited their workers.

Unemployment

The Opposition has also made reference to the unemployment problem which I inherited from the past administration.

There is no effort to deny that unemployment really constitutes a critical problem for our people. The Administration is sincerely concerned over this and we have formulated several policies which could raise the level of economic activities of the nation and hasten economic growth and expansion through the Five-Year Integrated Socio-Economic Development Program. In the meantime, we have launched the EEA for immediate unemployment relief. The limited opportunities for our people are determined by the national economic status. The Administration is trying to overcome this, but the Opposition has constantly obstructed the adoption of policies that are aimed at enlarging the economic opportunities of the Filipino people.

My fellow countrymen, these are the main criticisms which the Opposition has raised against the Administration and I have clarified to you the truth of the issues involved. The other attacks are either too personal to merit my attention or too senseless to deserve a reply.

It is for us to consider, as against these criticisms, what has been achieved by the Administration, and what it is presently doing to advance economic welfare, enlarge the freedom of the Filipino masses, and provide the people bread and freedom. Let us go down to brass tacks.

The New Era and the National Reality

As I said, the Liberal Party was elected by the Filipino people on the basis of its program of reforms and on conviction that these reforms are valid; that they are addressed to the needs of the common people, as well as the demands of the nation in its confrontation with the larger issues and challenges of our times.

The Administration took responsibility of the government of the Republic at a time when the conditions of the national reality and the situation of the Filipino masses were most critical; the new position of Asia in world politics created revolutionary changes within the region, and as Asian nationalism sought to realize the aspirations and welfare of its various societies by continuing the Unfinished Revolution, our various nations were also faced with problems inherent in a status quo that has failed to benefit from the advances in science and technology, that had long remained inert, allowed to continue in a condition of complacency, neglect, and a seeming imperviousness to the plight of the masses and the mounting problems of a new society. The great discrepancy between classes had created a situation whereby the misery of the many became a necessary condition for the opulence of the very few. Government action, therefore, was imperative in both restoring economic stability and the alleviation of the plight of the common man. These two conditions are related and reciprocal.

The Agriculture Code of 1963

Corollary to decontrol, and in order to achieve the other aspect of the Five-Year Integrated Socio-Economic Development Program which has alleviated the plight of the common man, the Administration formulated the Land Tenure Code aimed at abolishing tenancy and intended to accelerate the growth of our production capacity at a rate faster than the growth of our population.

It has been said that the Land Tenure Code is a radical program. It is radical in the sense that it envisions a great change in our economic relations and is ultimately intended to free the Filipino masses from economic servitude. The Administration feels it imperative that Filipino tenants should not merely be given just compensation for their labor or greater incentive to produce more: they should also be given rights to the land they cultivate thus restoring to our dispossessed masses the right to own property. It is pointless to be talking of civil liberties and freedom if the Filipino people are kept in bondage to absentee landlords; if their right to own property is not guaranteed, if the national wealth is not equitably distributed. The Administration, therefore, is trying to provide the Filipino people not only to have three square meals a day but, concomitant to that, the restoration of their inherent right to possess property.

What we must not forget is that we have passed the mid-point in the 20th century, and this is a century which has seen more progress than it has in any age in which man has lived. In law and philosophy, we have ceased to consider reality in black and white, so that is not a matter of master and servant, of king and follower, nor of landlord and peon. In economics, the advances have been great and the thinking revolutionary. In everyday living, there are the infinite conflicts and subtleties of modern existence. All of these we see, because it is our birthright to enjoy the best that man’s thoughts and inventions can give. Life, therefore, in our century is a very complicated life indeed, and government will have to be a complicated affair. Your leadership for such a government demands sophistication and intellectual acumen of the highest quality. It cannot deal with trivial sentimentalism, with well-worn attitudes and outdated notions. It is this kind of leadership that we would like to give you—you who are the citizens of a free country, of a richly-endowed country.

Our Moral Regeneration Campaign

There are also two special considerations which you, as voters, will have to weigh when you fill in your ballots in the sanctity of the voting booth. You must elect the men who will strengthen and maintain our government by guaranteeing good administration. You must put into office such men as will keep your faith in government and through them improve our social order in such a way as to enable us to move towards the realization of our national destiny as a prosperous and peace-loving people.

To this end, early during my administration and with scarcely any help from Congress which, as I have mentioned, was hardly cooperative with your President, I thought immediately of launching another campaign—the moral regeneration campaign.

To achieve this faith in government, what precisely must our society see? Our citizenry must witness honesty in the exercise of public service. Secondly, the citizenry must be presented with manifestations that our country is well respected in the family of nations, and that the prestige of the nation is the prestige of each and every citizen.

Our Administration did not consider the decontrol measure as the only remedy to rampant graft and corruption as a curb to venalities of all kinds in public service, to selfishness and disloyalty in the line of duty. Decontrol was not designed as a cure-all. And so to instill honesty is one thing and to put it into effect is another one. I do not doubt this in the least. My administration was the natural inheritor of the decay and decadence which had accumulated in the Nacionalista years. I knew that it would be a massive task, and I know that to so much as to get started, every single unit of the service should be counted upon for cooperation. I knew that big names and small will be involved and that the big names, in particular, will do everything in their power to exchange blows in the course of the severity of the campaign with those that will be fighting them. I knew that some of the small fry will even then continue to be swallowed by some of the big fish, and there was every reason for the small fry to remain indifferent and unconcerned because in the past no one has ever stood out to champion them.

With these precepts in mind, and with experience as our guide, and idealism as our star, we mounted this massive effort to instill once and for all a new spirit of rectitude, honesty and fair play in the government service. These were goals long indicated in the government set-up; these were goals long recognized by my administration. Our interest in launching this campaign was, therefore, both historical and contemporary in character. I have long believed that for the government to succeed as a democracy, the public servant must be a person beyond reproach. We instructed the Civil Service, therefore, to look into the venalities and immoralities among its members. My own eyes and ears were trained to assess information that directly reached me at Malacañang. I threw the doors of the Palace open to the common man so that he could come to me and discuss his plight and feel confident that something will be done about it. This Administration, in short, fostered, besides moral uprightness, new faith in the government, new faith in the leadership, new faith in the Office of the President.

Maphilindo

The response of the people to this program if heartening enough, needed a counterpart in the form of response from our neighbors in Southeast Asia—neighbors who traditionally have been familiar with our uninspired foreign policy, neighbors who thought that our economy was in a critical shape, that our local politics was a gambling game of sorts. In short, we had to do something to give the world an idea that our leadership was one to be respected, that our views ought to be listened to in the councils of the world and that we were determined to participate in all discussions about our own responsibilities as a nation in this part of the world. Thus came about the concept of Maphilindo, which has been long in the dream stage because, since Rizal’s time, we knew that we had a role to play among our sister nations in this part of the world. The Manila Declaration is the product of the Summit Conference which transpired here a couple of months ago and which the world recognized as a diplomatic triumph of this country.

It is unfortunate that there are difficulties as yet to be resolved between our country and Malaysia in connection with the North Borneo question. What I want to emphasize at this point is that we have ascertained our position in this part of the world and our administration, in particular, has won the respect of the countries around us as well as those in the West. Heretofore, this was not possible and the reasons were various. I need not go into that in detail. Today, we have entered into a new era—an era of which every citizen should be proud because we have come into our own as a voice and as a personality in the family of nations, and particularly, in our own Asian neighborhood.

National Construction: The Politics of Change

The program of the administration is committed to the actuality of national construction, in terms of economic and integrity we enunciated a moral regeneration program, development, creation of greater opportunities for the Filipino people and the fulfillment of national responsibility in increased participation in the general activities in the Southeast Asian region. The stress, of course, is on the dignity of the common man as well as on a better livelihood for him.

Now, to achieve this concrete task of national reconstruction, what is needed is indeed a program of reforms. A Revolutionary Era such as ours in Asia at the present time demands not merely palliatives or measures which are aimed merely at temporary resolutions of critical conditions, but a truly continuing program that will no longer make possible the reversion of social conditions to the status quo.

The evils in the economic system and in the social fact in our country will continue to remain with us, if we do not adopt a bold and dynamic program of action with regards to those obvious errors in our politics, economy, and society. Living as we are in a Revolutionary Era, we shall be misinterpreting the signs of our own times if we remain in the attitude of complacency or if we continue to regard national problems not with the end in view of their complete solution, but with the intention of offering temporary and brief conditions of relief. Not only must we welcome change in our country, but we must also be prepared to modify or wholly alter the structures of politics, society, and our economy if these are found to be the causes of the general misery of our people and the continued underdevelopment of our nation. Only such a well-intentioned program of government action can we logically pursue the ideals of our Unfinished Revolution.

And on this note we end our campaign, confident that we will merit your support. We therefore ask you to vote for the Liberal candidates.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.