Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Manila Lions Club

[Delivered on May 8, 1962]

TOWARDS PROSPERITY THRU FREE ENTERPRISE

IT IS BOTH a pleasure and a distinct honor for me to speak before this time-honored body whose many public projects in the past stand as eloquent testimonials of the civic consciousness of its members and officers. Judging from your numerous public service accomplishments, I can say without hesitation that the Manila Lions Club has grown in stature and influence and has acquired a prestige as a service organization in this country that is difficult to equal.

I would like to review and outline today the efforts so far dedicated by the present Administration in achieving the desired goals I set forth in my inaugural address, namely—

1. To solve the problem of corruption;

2. To attain self-sufficiency in rice and corn;

3. To create conditions that will provide more income for our people;

4. To establish practices that will strengthen the moral fiber of the Nation and introduce those values that would invigorate our democracy; and

5. To launch a well-formulated socio-economic program that will meet the needs and requirements of our people.

In pursuance of this five-fold mission, we have implemented the following:

1. Lifted controls on foreign exchange transactions last January 21st;

2. Officially launched a 5-year integrated socio-economic development program;

3. Formally launched and sponsored a moral regeneration movement; and

4. Submitted to the Congress of the Philippines, to support the economic program and achieve the goals of the Administration, a complement of measures urgent in nature and far-reaching in their implications.

To implement the Administration’s moral regeneration movement, a suitable bill was submitted to Congress creating a Moral Commission.

For the immediate alleviation of the plight of the common man, we have prepared and recommended for congressional action the following urgent measures:

1. A bill creating the Rice and Corn Administration with functions to implement a program that would achieve self-sufficiency in rice and corn at prices within the reach of the masses;

2. Enactment of suitable legislation to assist private enterprise in creating more opportunities for employment;

3. Appropriation of funds for the construction of apartment houses for displaced squatters and persons belonging to the lowest income groups;

4. Increase of salaries of government employees;

5. Recommended greater outlays for the improvement and expansion of essential public services.

To support the decontrol program, to restore economic stability and establish dynamic basis for future economic growth, we have also recommended the following measures:

1. The further revision of the Tariff Code;

2. The passage of a foreign investments law with certain declared objectives;

3. To eliminate the 20% dollar retention being made by the Central Bank on export receipts and thereby effect full decontrol, the enactment of an appropriate law imposing a selective export tax on certain protective exports and on raw materials that can be processed locally;

4. The repeal of the margin levy on foreign exchange;

5. The repeal of the barter law;

6. The re-examination and amendment of the Basic Industries Law, as well as the present tax structure of the country with the view to ascertaining the impact of the present tax rates on industry and living costs; and

7. The creation of an anti-smuggling office to eradicate smuggling activities that seriously impair the national economy.

In addition, through administrative action, 50% of the investible funds of the Government Service Insurance System and the Social Security System have been channeled to the Development Bank of the Philippines to expand the authority of the latter in granting long-term and investment loans for productive enterprises.

In launching the decontrol program, I announced that for a stabilization fund we have secured commitments from the United States government, from private banking institutions and from international financial organizations no less than $300 million, excluding approximately $94 million worth of commodity accommodations under U. S. Public Law 480. Doubts have been cast about the existence of this fund. Such a doubt is an insult not only to my credibility but also to my sensibility. I assure you that these commitments exist but we have not considered it timely to use them. It will be also noted that we have not yet tapped financial support from European countries which have proferred financial assistance to the Philippine Government in its effort to achieve economic growth and stability.

The end-objectives of the concrete measures which we have so far taken are aimed to bring the benefits of economic development to the people, provide the wherewithals for a better life for the common man and set forth the guidelines that would develop a climate highly favorably to business enterprise in the Philippines. With the lifting of controls on foreign exchange transactions, our entrepreneurs and citizens, businessmen and traders, importers and exporters, producers and processors, now move in an atmosphere of freedom in formulating their business and financial policies. We have substantially reduced corrupt practices and eliminated, to a large extent, the activities of ten percenters and influence peddlers.

I do not mean to say that our job is completed and that our goals have been achieved. The magnitude of our tasks in this respect is enormous. I have to admit that transitional difficulties still exist in shifting abruptly from a controlled economy—the evil that had chained us for almost twelve years—to that of a free enterprise system. The lifting of controls, as you all know, was a fulfillment of an electoral pledge as well as an act of compliance with a statutory provision that requires removal of controls, by 1963. If I did not wait for 1963 before removing controls, it was because of my firm conviction that the facts of the economic situation at the time we assumed office were such that nothing short of drastic measures had to be taken to save the economy from total collapse.

I would like to observe that through decontrol, we deal the monster of corruption a mortal blow. Although controls were a source of enormous economic and political power, knowing that they were likewise a source of corruption, I swiftly removed controls in accordance with the pledge of the two parties in the campaign because I am determined to fight corruption relentlessly until it is crushed and we Filipinos can once again raise our forehead in integrity, dignity and honor.

In our total effort to bring about desirable conditions to accelerate the rate of economic development in this country, we have not in the least forgotten to provide equality of opportunities to our own nationals. In the 5-year integrated program for socio-economic development which we are now implementing, we have so provided that the principal responsibility for development belongs to Filipino citizens who must be the principal determinants as well as the chief beneficiaries of economic progress in this country. Insofar as the role of government in business is concerned, we have adopted the basic principle that the task of economic development belongs principally to private enterprise and not to government. I repeat here and now that the government was not established to go into business and that the role of the government create a favorable environment for and to assist private business in the performance of its rightful task of developing the country and its resources, to provide guidance and inducements, to protect nationals in their legitimate aspirations at the same time to insure the just treatment of foreigners who come to our shores to provide assistance in the establishment and operation of business ventures in this country.

I consider it a primary function of government to be a stabilizing influence on business activity. Consequently, government plans, programs and policies, on the basis of which business must plan its operations, must be clear-cut and stable and must not be subject to untimely, drastic and precipitous changes. The public administration machinery of the government will be overhauled with the view to instituting efficient, economical and prompt service to the business community.

Administrative reforms will be instituted in every government service that exercise authority and discretion on the part of public servants, principally the bureaus of internal revenue and customs, so that the root source of corruption in the government will be eliminated and so that we shall be able to establish the respect and confidence of the people in the government.

Our country is blessed with bountiful natural resources, capable of sustaining the livelihood of a population twice or three times as much as we have today. The natural resources need to be developed and economically exploited if we are to achieve real progress in providing our people with the basic requisites for decent living, adequate opportunities for the attainment of material and spiritual fulfillment under an atmosphere of dignity and freedom. To be able to accomplish this, tremendous and prodigious efforts must be mobilized and applied wisely and judiciously.

The program of economic development that we have launched is the answer to this challenge. This program outlines the target and the means necessary for a total national effort to improve the economic welfare of the nation, distribute the burdens and benefits of economic development more equitably and lay the solid foundations of an economic super-structure that would provide for stable, continuing and unrelenting growth of the economy’s productive capacity.

Under the program we propose to achieve the following goals:

1. A six per cent average annual rate of increase in the gross domestic product of the Philippines, through the expansion of the agricultural and industrial sectors.

2. To create job opportunities for a Philippine labor force growing at the rate of about 300,000 annually. Our goal is 11.6 million jobs by 1967.

3. To accelerate development of economically-depressed regions within the Philippines, in order to equitably distribute income on a regional basis.

These goals are feasible on the basis that:

1. An amount equal to about 16 per cent of the annual Philippines’ gross domestic product is channeled into gross domestic investments during the next five years.

2. Gross domestic savings in the Philippines reach 13 per cent of gross domestic product by next year and 16 per cent by the fifth year. Now, domestic savings are about 12 per cent of gross domestic product.

3. However, since domestic savings will not be adequate for all our needs, although capital accumulation will depend mostly on the domestic effort, the Philippines needs an inflow of new foreign capital of about $175 million average yearly over the next five years.

There has been some misunderstanding insofar as the c of action we have taken to bring about economic grow e stability are concerned. Economic development cannot be attained overnight. It is a painful process and its attainment, as I said in the State-of-the-Nation message, will depend mainly upon public support and a sympathetic understanding of our objectives. A series of ancillary problems will be confronted and have to be effectively handled. Just now we are grappling with such subsidiary problems as the search for an equilibrium rate for the dollar and the effective enforcement of customs laws. But we are confident that these and similar problems can be handled through an exercise of desirable national discipline, as well as authorities, serious and concerted efforts both on the part of the government authorities, the businessmen and the citizens

We welcome constructive criticisms and counsel. To this end, I have frequently consulted with representatives of the business community of the problems that they face and to bring to our attention such problems for appropriate solutions. In more than one occasion I have also stressed the fact that the ultimate objectives we seek to achieve involve sacrifice of the highest magnitude. It is only through the spirit of common effort that we can be assured of future progress and prosperity.

For the success of the Administration’s socio-economic program which aims at prosperity for all and a better life for the common man, the cooperation of all is necessary. It is a mistake to think that it is only the Administration who should carry the burden and responsibility of promoting economic and social progress. This is the joint responsibility of all. I must be frank in saying that we can only succeed with the cooperation of the Nacionalistas and of the people themselves.

It is the duty and responsibility of political leaders, even of the Nacionalista leaders not to destroy public confidence in the Administration and its efforts at this time because such confidence is essential to the success of our tremendous socio-economic effort. Any Nacionalista leader who for partisan reasons excites lack of confidence in the Administration’s effort not only withholds his own assistance which it is his duty to give but opens himself to the valid charge of committing an unpardonable offense against the people’s welfare because he seeks to bring about the failure of the national effort which will result in hardships for the people whose interest he professes to be concerned about.

The same is true with certain segments of our population. Businessmen and economic groups who act in a manner as to adversely affect the economy in an effort to gain a special advantage for themselves are acting against the people. Exporters who attempt to salt dollar proceeds to evade the 20% retention regulation of the Central Bank, thereby denying to the economy the full dollar earnings from their commodities, are guilty of obstructing the economic expansion program. Wholesalers and retailers who raise their prices to increase profits contribute to the hardships of their countrymen and even their own by prolonging if not preventing the restoration and invigoration of the economic health which will bring good to everyone. Businessmen and others who engage in manipulation to raise the peso value of the dollar in order that it would be easier for them to liquidate their bank loans are economic saboteurs. It shall be in vain for operators to endeavor to manipulate the value of the dollar for undue profit or other ignoble motives because the government has sufficient dollars in reserve to foil any degree of manipulation and the law enforcement machinery of the State will be utilized without mercy against these enemies of the people.

I therefore appeal to all to do their part in this national and gigantic effort for socio-economic progress. Those who are identified with the Administration should help in the formulation, coordination and proper implementation of policies and decisions. Those who are not, it is their duty to cooperate whenever they are called upon to do so and should at least not undermine public confidence at this particular time in the Administration’s effort. All should comply with the laws and should absolutely avoid bribery of officials. Persons with capital should invest it in the many opportunities for profitable enterprise which are now available without restrictions. Exporters should export their goods as soon as these are ready for exportation under their usual schedule in the past without speculating on changes of the exchange rate. Importers should not transgress the customs laws. Market vendors should not unduly raise their prices and, if necessary, should be satisfied for the time being with less profit to maintain prices at more or less the prevailing levels. Customers should not pay for unduly high prices and should habituate themselves to buying substitutes which are available at lower prices. Everyone is duty-bound to act in a manner as to contribute to the success of the Nation’s program for economic recovery and expansion under the new system of decontrol and free enterprise.

Indeed, the task of ensuring the national welfare is a joint responsibility of the Executive Department and the Legislative Branch of our government, with appropriate support from the Judicial Department. I can say with frankness and sincerity that I have solicited the cooperation of the Legislative Department of our government in the enactment of those laws which safeguard national welfare. As the session draws to a close, I appeal to the Nacionalista leaders in Congress to rise above partisanship and approve the Administration measures thereby placing the welfare of the country above the interest of the party. Insofar as the Executive Department is concerned, I assure you with all the competence under my command, that all agencies under my jurisdiction will be mobilized towards the coordinated and effective implementation of the 5-year socio-economic development program. I shall hold myself responsible and accountable for this commitment for the sake of our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.