Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the Commencement Exercises of the University of the Philippines

[Delivered in Quezon City, April 15, 1962]

CALL TO NATIONAL DISCIPLINE

TOGETHER, at this moment, we find ourselves in this traditional ritual of commencement: you at the beginning of your individual lives of work and struggle, and I at the beginning of my term of service to the nation. I am privileged to share for a little while the spotlight that is rightly yours upon this stage. It is a moment that calls for words with which we shall try to give each other hope, as well as for mutual assurances with which we may sustain each other’s faith.

As President of the Republic, I have set two major goals for my Administration. One is to push our country forward on the road towards accelerated economic and social progress, and the other, to help bring about the moral regeneration of our people. I would like to confine myself today to a discussion of the second objective, with particular emphasis on the importance of national order and discipline as a vital factor in its achievement.

The war and occupation, which inflicted such a grievous injury on the spirit and character of our people, has been over now for fifteen years. We must therefore stop blaming the war and occupation for the continuing moral sickness of our Nation. To continue to do so would be to indulge in shameless malingering. For many centuries our people have undergone repeated invasions and humiliations. Yet the strength and resiliency of the Nation’s moral fiber has enabled us to rise triumphant each time from such shattering experiences

As President of the Republic and leader of this Nation, I consider it my duty to issue a clarion call to all elements of our population so that they may rise de profundis to new heights of moral sanity, integrity and power. I call upon them resolutely to turn their backs on this rotten heritage of shame. I call upon them to lay down, once and for all, this hardened indifference to moral values. I call upon them to foreswear the smug rationalizations and ingenious tricks of conscience that have enabled so many to close their eyes to the glaring evils of our public and private life.

I cannot accept as an explanation or justification for these evils the statement that they are the inevitable result of the sharpening struggle for existence in our society. No society anywhere, regardless of tradition or ideology, is exempt from such struggle in one form or another. Actually, the element of competitive struggle is inherent in life itself and brings out both the best and the worst in human beings—the best out of the strong ones and the worst out of the weak.

That evil exists is a fact of life. That there is evil in the heart of man we can deduce from the Ten Commandments. What we must regard as intolerable is the callous indifference to evil, nay, the cynical condoning of it, the extraordinary competition in malefaction which may be described as “keeping up with the Joneses” in the matter of wrongdoing.

From the cynical attitude proceeds the entire macabre parade of impropriety, indecency, vice, crime and immorality in our society—from the simple malice of the teen-age offender to the highly sophisticated operations of the dishonest officeholder; in short, every conceivable infraction of both the moral and the legal codes. Here lies before us the whole tissue of evil in our place and time: the prevalence of rudeness, the lack of discipline, the contempt for order, the defiance of authority, as well as the grosser manifestations that come under the all-too-familiar headings of bribery, graft and corruption.

And now I want to say to you that our Nation has come to the end of this road of shame. We must now resolve to turn around and retrace our steps to the point where we abandoned our priceless heritage of decency and honor, dignity and responsibility, and accepted in their stead the tinsel substitutes of dishonesty and greed, cunning and get-rich-quick. We must return to the time-honored decencies and recapture the sense of incorruptible dignity that has long been the hallmark of our national tradition and the proudest ornament of our race. What we have been once, we can be again.

The essence of this tradition is integrity, hard work, honest reward, simple living, and if need be, dignified poverty. I speak of these rules of our traditional way of life from my own personal experiences as reflecting qualities of the mind and spirit that are as real as they are attainable. These rules are not solely for saints or heroes, but for the governance of the daily life of every man. And when I speak of dignified poverty, let no one believe that I wish thereby to consecrate poverty as a virtue in itself. Poverty and its gloomy sisters, ignorance and diseases, are the primordial enemies of man and society, and we must labor constantly to reduce their scope. But contentment with what one has is not incompatible with a normal ambition for self-improvement, and the true moral problem for everyone is to maintain a proper balance between the two.

There are those who would remind us that the prevailing moral climate in any given society is the direct consequence of the economic and social conditions obtaining therein. This is true, yet no more true than the reverse doctrine that the moral values held by a people dictate the economic and social relations that obtain among them. The objective truth is perhaps that these two elements interact upon each other endlessly, back and forth. Therefore, to change one is to alter the other also.

This is the reason why I have set as the twin goals of my Administration the economic development of the country and the moral regeneration of our people. I believe that a two-pronged attack against economic backwardness and moral decadence is the surest and most speedy way to effect a balanced over-all improvement in the life of our people.

Fortunately, our country is rich in natural resources. If we develop these resources and husband them with care, the new wealth thus created would be reflected at once in the higher standards of living of the people. But both the capacity to develop our country’s resources in the national interest and the proper enjoyment of a better life presuppose a set of moral, intellectual and cultural values that is hospitable to the achievement of these purposes.

Side by side, therefore, with our plans for an accelerated program of agricultural productivity and industrial expansion, we must push vigorously a program for the transmutation of the moral values held by our people. The two cardinal elements in this process of transmutation are the principle of order and the sense of discipline.

Ours is a democracy, and a democracy our country must forever remain. Our freedom-loving people would never accept or tolerate any substitute. I have repeatedly said that I would prefer democracy with all its shortcomings and freedom with all its abuses to the glossy and deceptive perfection of a regimented society.

However, this is not to say that a democratic society is exempt from the obligation to look at itself in the mirror, so that, by this salutary exercise in candor, it may recognize its own weaknesses and errors, and apply the appropriate remedies.

This is not to say that democracy is incapable of national order and discipline and a leadership that can inspire and bring about such condition of harmony and stability. Such leadership need not be dictatorship. Call it democratic leadership or whatever you will but there must be leadership in a democracy that can fuse its centrifugal freedom into a centripetal order and discipline for the national well-being.

The basic difference between such a leadership in a democratic society and dictatorship in a totalitarian state is that democratic leadership bases its strength upon virtue while dictatorship predicates its power upon force. In the end, virtue is stronger than brute force. Virtue derives might from its innate qualities of wisdom and firmness. Through this virtuous leadership, the liberties in a free society, which untamed will lead to license and chaos, should be harnessed and synchronized into national discipline and order upon and through which the democratic society shall move to undertake its constructive tasks for the general welfare.

The moral, political and economic state in which our Nation finds itself today poses a challenge for the assertion of leadership in our democratic system without which the system collapses from suicidal wranglings that circle around aimlessly in a vicious stalemate. We have set the sights of the Nation on twin goals. We have asked for combined action to move together towards those goals. Because our democratic society shall fail otherwise and with it we shall fail in our responsibility which the sovereign will of our people reposed in us, we say with grim resolve that should our bid for cooperative effort not be responded, we shall display the strength of leadership that derives its might from virtue to fight against any man or any group, no matter how seemingly powerful they may be, in order to achieve the economic well-being of our people in a setting of national order and discipline which is a desirable and realizable attitude of democracy in times of necessity.

I have deliberately chosen this solemn and memorable occasion of the commencement exercises of the University of the Philippines to perform the necessary act of conscience, the candid act of national self-criticism. For here I would like to affirm with all the force at my command that the most massive programs of economic development shall profit us nothing, and nothing shall be added unto our Nation, unless by a change of heart and by the transformation of our spirit we are able, once again, to accept individual discipline, the norms of order of society, and respect for authority as the fundamental principles by which we live. All the economic gains we achieve would be annulled by the prevailing moral chaos in our national life. This anarchy of conscience could, in turn, open the door to political insecurity and collapse.

I have chosen to address this earnest injunction to you, members of Class 1962, because you are the intelligent citizens of a free republic of learning, within the democratic Republic of the Philippines. You are the fair hope of the Fatherland. Nourished in liberty, may you go forth from these halls convinced that individual discipline is not incompatible with liberty. Cherishing freedom, may you go out of this campus believing that order is not incompatible with freedom. Devoted to human rights, may you go into the world persuaded that respect for duly constituted authority is not incompatible with human rights.

More than twenty years ago, an earlier generation of Filipino youth heard in the old U.P. campus on Calle Padre Faura these moving and prophetic words of President Quezon:

“I want the Filipino youth to grow like the molave erect on the hillside, strong in its fibre to withstand the wind and the storm.”

Not many months later, thousands among the young students who heard President Quezon marched to Bataan and Corregidor and to a hundred other battlefields to give abundant testimony of their kinship with the molave.

From here, you of this generation shall be called upon to march, not to another Bataan or Corregidor, but to a hundred other equally heroic battlefields to meet in deadly combat the mortal enemies of our national conscience. May you, too, grow like the molave, strong in its fibre to withstand the wind and the storm.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.