Statement of President Diosdado Macapagal: At the Summit Conference in Manila

[Released on August 5, 1963]

ASIAN DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE

AT the opening ceremonies of this Conference last Tuesday, I was the only speaker. This morning there are three speakers. But although you listen to three voices, these voices speak as one, they speak in harmony, they speak in unison to carry a message of unity and hope to their peoples and to their region.

It seldom happens that one can feel entitled to say that he has participated, even in a modest role, in the making of history. This is one of those rare occasions. With the successful conclusion of this first Summit Conference of the Heads of Government of the Republic of Indonesia, the Federation of Malaya and the Republic of the Philippines, I feel that we have in a very real sense written a new chapter in the history of Asia.

The accomplishments of this Conference are embodied in the three historic documents we have just signed, namely, the Manila Declaration, the Manila Accord, and the Joint Statement, in which are embodied the agreements happily reached by the three sister states, both on the immediate problem of Malaysia and on the long-range project of Maphilindo.

Through the agreements on Malaysia, we have averted a possible catastrophe for the peoples of this area. By launching Maphilindo we have opened up a new road towards a brighter future for our three nations and for Asia as a whole.

In the vital matter of regional security, the Summit Conference took a decision of historic significance. We agreed that foreign bases, which we consider to be temporary in nature, should not be used directly or indirectly to subvert the national independence of any of our three countries. Furthermore, in accordance with the principle enunciated in the Bandung Declaration, we agreed that our three countries will abstain from the use of arrangements of collective defense to serve the particular interests of any of the big powers. These are the new guarantees of our common security based upon the conviction that we shall not any more allow outside influences to divide us.

This Summit Conference is a chapter of profound import for the peoples of Indonesia, Malaya, and the Philippines and, we trust, for their neighbors as well. The Manila Declaration, which President Soekarno, Prime Minister Abdul Rahman, and I have just signed, is more than an enumeration of principles and aspirations. It marks the beginning of an important new stage in the development of our three countries as independent states.

The attainment of political independence, of freedom from colonial rule, was the culmination of the first stage of that development. The peoples of Indonesia, Malaya, and the Philippines had first of all to become masters again of their respective countries before progress could be made in other fields of national life. This was the prime objective of their revolutionary struggles against colonialism, the crowning political goal which was achieved in the case of Malaya essentially through peaceful means and in the case of Indonesia and the Philippines through a combination of armed revolution and political struggle.

Having achieved political independence, our three countries are now engaged in the no less revolutionary task of giving it substance through economic and social progress based on social justice. I say this task is revolutionary because it involves the transformation of economies and societies which for centuries had been forced to develop within the stifling and unnatural confines of colonialism. It requires not only a massive re-orientation of national values but also the establishment of a new basis for national growth. The aim is to develop each country’s material and spiritual resources for the benefit of its own people in order that they may enrich their own lives and at the same time be capable of making their full contribution to the well-being of mankind in consonance with their native genius and national identity.

The third stage of our development as independent States follows logically from the other two. As Sovereign Nations conscious of their duties to themselves and to the world, the peoples of Indonesia, Malaya, and the Philippines, represented at this Summit Conference by their respective Heads of Government, have now agreed jointly to assume their rightful share of responsibility for the security, stability, and welfare of the region in which they live.

In this sense the Manila Declaration is a declaration of independence.

It expresses the determination of our three countries to safeguard this area from subversion in any form or manifestation. It contains their solemn pledge to combine their efforts in the common struggle against colonialism and imperialism in all their forms and manifestations.

At the same time, the Manila Declaration is inspired by the spirit of Asian-African solidarity forged in the Bandung Conference of 1955. It embodies the agreement of our three countries to strengthen fraternal cooperation among our peoples in all fields and to intensify their efforts to help build a peaceful new world dedicated to freedom and justice.

These are the inspiration and the aims of the Manila Declaration. The chosen instrument for their realization is Maphilindo, towards the establishment of which Ave are taking the initial steps by means of frequent and regular consultations at all levels, including Summit Conferences like the present one.

This Conference is in fact the first exercise in mushawarah or brotherly consultation by the three Maphilindo countries. In this first attempt by the Heads of Government of Indonesia, Malaya, and the Philippines to solve their common problems and forge a united approach in discharging their joint responsibility towards their region, the merits of Maphilindo have been severely tested. The difficulties we have encountered and overcome as well as the successes we have achieved constitute Maphilindo’s initiation.

For us in the Philippines, and doubtless also for our brothers in Indonesia and Malaya, Maphilindo is an old dream come true. Our national hero, Dr. Jose Rizal, envisaged at the turn of the century a design for bringing together, free from colonial rule, the peoples of Malay origin in Borneo, Indonesia, Malaya, and the Philippines. President Manuel Quezon, an ardent nationalist, nurtured the same dream. The youth of the Philippines led by the patriot Wenceslao Vinzons, under whose leadership I had the privilege as a student to be among the organizers of the Young Philippines in the 1930’s, also envisioned Maphilindo under our rallying cry, Malaya Irrendenta. President Elpidio Quirino drew inspiration from the same vision when he convened the Baguio Conference of Asian countries in 1950.

The dream of the unity of the Malay peoples was essentially sound. But the historical conditions for its realization did not mature until our own time. Now the vision has assumed shape and substance in the form of Maphilindo, thanks in large measure to the perception, good will, and wisdom of our two distinguished guests and collaborators at the Summit, President Soekarno of Indonesia and Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman of Malaya.

I must point out that we are making only the most modest, of beginnings for Maphilindo. This is a decision deliberately and wisely taken. It has its basis in that surest and most dependable of foundations, reality. Considering the varying historical experiences of our respective countries, our differing traditions and political institutions, and our distinctive approaches to many international problems, we are well advised indeed to start as we are starting in Maphilindo: with frequent and regular consultations at all levels in the brotherly spirit of mushawarah, with mutual increase of knowledge and broadening of understanding of one another. This is the most solid and lasting support we can devise for Maphilindo.

We look forward, of course, to its steady growth and development. We are beginning with consultations, at all levels, from national secretariats to Summit meetings. But we envisage in due time the formation of common organs of cooperation in the economic, social, and cultural fields as well as in the all-important field of regional security.

Accordingly, we have agreed to make joint studies of appropriate machinery for Maphilindo which will facilitate and enhance the effectiveness of such cooperation.

May I conclude this brief address with an earnest appeal to our neighbors in Asia and to the world at large to understand Maphilindo and to welcome it as a new and constructive force for good in this troubled age. Maphilindo does not represent great power in the material sense. But it does represent a vibrant ideal sustained by a large and important segment of mankind. It is dedicated to peace, security, and prosperity not only for its associated nations but for all humanity. Born of the logic of events it now forms part of the mainstream of the history of our times.

At this solemn moment of Maphilindo’s birth, I would therefore express the fervent hope that it may be allowed to develop in peace, without obstruction from anyone, in order that it may fulfill the great promise of its conception, realize its full potential for creative growth, and make its unique contribution to the building of a peaceful and prosperous Asia serving as one of the main pillars of that better world which we are all striving to build under the aegis of the United Nations.

Mr. President, Mr. Prime Minister: As you leave our country to return to your own, I would like to point out a matter of personal cherishment. You have come not on a formal State Visit but to a working conference of major political significance. And yet you could not have missed the spontaneous overflow of admiration and affection for both of you which has welled out of the hearts of our people from the mere consciousness of your presence amongst them, for you have honored us greatly with your presence and given us immeasurable joy. In you as our guests, we have upon our soil two of the greatest sons of the Malay race. We shall treasure forever the memory of this unprecedented fraternal confrontation.

I am deeply moved by the opportunity which has been given to us to share together the heart-warming joy of this reunion of our triplet-nations. Together we have labored hard to bring about the reconciliation of brothers long separated and estranged from one another. From here our peoples can move together to build in peace and concord a common destiny that shall be a blessing to themselves and a boon to mankind.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.