Extemporaneous Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines To officers and men of the Armed Forces

[Held at Camp Murphy, January 2, 1962]

ACCEPTANCE OF LOYALTY PLEDGE

IT IS A REAL SOURCE of gratification, and even inspiring, to see the officers and men of our Armed Forces, now under my supreme command, on my first working day as the President of this Republic. Our Armed Forces has a splendid record and tradition behind it. You have thus far successfully safeguarded our national security from without and from within. You and your comrades in arms have demonstrated many a time acts of valor and sublime patriotism in the field of combat.

Our people have very much to be proud of you. That is why as your Commander-in-Chief, I shall take it unto myself to exert the utmost effort in order that the fine phases of your record and tradition shall be enhanced, and whatever weakness of your organization may be reduced or eliminated, to the end that, after I myself shall have concluded my tour of duty with you, I shall leave the Armed Forces of the Philippines a finer, greater and better organization to which every officer and soldier will truly be proud to belong.

As the first step in our objective, I had appointed as secretary of national defense, one of the most brilliant soldiers in the last world war who has since led a civilian life distinguishing himself in the service of our country, a man in whom I have the highest and fullest confidence, Secretary Macario Peralta. And yesterday, I swore into office my new chief of staff to take over because the time of retirement of the former chief of staff, General Cabal, had come, in the person of former vice chief of staff, and now chief of staff, General Pelagio Cruz.

In witnessing the change of command which had become my unexpected but cherished privilege to witness, I congratulate General Cabal for a work well done and extend the very best wishes to General Cruz for the task ahead of him. I have chosen General Cruz as the new chief of staff because to me he is one of the best officers in our military organization, and also, because in appointing him I wanted to serve notice that under my command the appointment and the promotion of officers in the Armed Forces of the Philippines shall be based upon seniority, merit and justice. In restoring and utilizing the basis or the criteria of seniority, merit and justice in the promotion and appointment of officers, I am also particularly interested in the living conditions and the welfare of the Filipino soldier or the enlisted man.

After my election and before my assumption of office, I visited and surveyed the premises in which our enlisted men live in the various services of our Armed Forces in various camps in the country, in an effort to determine in what ways I can help in improving the living conditions and the lot of the Filipino soldier. I shall continue to do that.

Indeed, I have geared the efforts of my Administration towards the promotion of better living conditions and a better life for the common people to whom I myself belong. And, if I thus have made it my prime concern to promote the lot of the common man in this country, it stands to reason that I should be more concerned with promoting the lot of the common man who is ready to give his life to his country and that is the enlisted man.

I therefore conceive it as our common and essential course of action to hold on to each other because we now belong to one organization which, although composed of various services, is still one organization. We must hold on together, officers and men, in our one and single organization, because we have a patriotic duty to discharge to our beloved country.

We must maintain endless vigilance to safeguard the security and the freedom of our Republic and our democracy and our people. Outside our country, a foreign ideology engaged in an adventure of world domination steadily extends its menacing hand towards our shores, and within our country, there is lack of peace and order in substantial areas, particularly in those areas where the advance units of the foreign ideology are striking fear and terror among peaceful and freedom-loving countrymen.

It is the mission of our organization to restore law, peace and order in those areas because unless they can restore law, peace and order in those pockets of lawlessness, there shall not only be a marked deficiency in the performance of their task or mission but it shall impede development of the national economy through which alone we can permanently achieve higher standards of living for the common man- Therefore, I say, it behooves us all, who are part of this great organization, the Armed Forces of the Philippines, to work more vigorously and more dedicatedly in order that we may discharge this patriotic mission for our people.

We must locate the causes of failure, if any, and we must bring the remedies for the causes of those failures. We must succeed in this mission of our Armed Forces. We must not fail for the sake of our country, and in order that we may succeed in this task, I am ready to utilize the prerogatives and facilities of my position in order that we may successfully discharge our duty of safeguarding peace, security and the liberties of our people.

Officers and men, I am proud of you. I know our people are proud of you. I shall not speak longer because this is no time for words. This is an era of action. I thank you, together with Mrs. Macapagal, for the honor that you have given me this morning and in thanking you and taking leave of you, I bid you to remember, I am not only your Commander-in-Chief, I am your friend. Thank you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.