Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the Business Writers Association of the Philippines

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, March 22, 1962]

THE NEW ECONOMIC FLAVOR

UPON OUR ARRIVAL this evening, President Castañeda of the business writers remarked to me that we arrived at exactly 8 o’clock. We were not late, he said. I told him that my not being late is an indication that in the unfolding New Era we shall not also be late in helping to the best of our ability the businessmen in their problems in our country today.

Indeed, Mrs. Macapagal and I are profoundly honored to be with you on this occasion which I hope is reflective of and guided by a new spirit, that is, the concentration of the national attention on the problems of economic program or the problems of the business community.

I heard President Castañeda speak of the situation where it requires nine lives to survive in business. I hope it is realized that he is not speaking of present conditions but of past conditions. As a matter of fact even our top awardee, Don Carlos Fernandez, stated that 1961 was the worst year in business. So, as the head of the new Administration, I should like to say that it is our supreme ambition that before our task is over it shall not take nine lives, it shall take one life of businessmen to survive; and 1965, our last year, will be the best year in business in our country.

It is perhaps because of the dismay expressed both by the president of the business writers and the top awardee that I noticed that the business writers, in choosing the top business stories in 1961, selected as among the top best stories the following: “Clamor for a Change in Economic Policies as Manifested in the Results of the Last Elections.” And so it is with a sense of gratification that in response to this clamor recognized by the writers as one of the most important events of the past year, that within the first 21 days of our Administration, I launched the system of decontrol in order that businessmen will succeed, not on the basis of whom they know but on the basis of their talents, know-how, industry and integrity.

That is what I would like to point out. This feature of concentrating on the sound and speedy growth of our economy is what makes this New Era acquire a new flavor in our country, in our national effort. Our top awardee spoke of nine economic programs in the past but which were futile. Why? Because not a single one of those nine economic programs was adopted by the authorities in the government, namely, the President and Congress.

I noticed, for instance, that the last program formulated by the National Economic Council, very well formulated to my mind, under the leadership of Dr. Jose Locsin, is a three-year program but was not even acted upon by the highest executive official of the country, not to say Congress itself. And so, realizing this unsatisfactory condition in our national effort to promote economic growth, one of the first things I did was to formulate with the best economic advisers then available, a five-year integrated socio-economic program which I not only approved as the program of the Administration but which I submitted to Congress in order to emphasize to our law-making body and to our Nation at large, the necessity of veering the attention of this Nation towards a clear program upon which we will concentrate our efforts.

So, I say that the distinctive feature of the New Era of which our friend spoke of is this concentration on economic effort as distinguished from concentration on political efforts in the past. There has been too much politics in our country. In the past, the politician was the dominant figure in the national scene. Under the New Era which we hope shall be truly ushered in effectively, we intend to change this; we intend to concentrate not on political effort but on economic effort, on building this Nation upon the full utilization of our economic resources in the speediest time humanly possible.

If in the past the politician was the dominant figure in our national effort, today it is going to be the businessman who shall be the dominant figure and the true builder of this country.

And so, it is not only a routinary participation that I have this evening on this memorable occasion. It is a participation which is not only a big honor to me but one which I would like to be cherished as a profound symbolism of our efforts in this Administration. It is with this sense of honor that I congratulate our awardees led by Don Carlos Fernandez. I congratulate him as well as the other awardees of the BWAP in the past. I should like to say in congratulating all the business leaders who have received awards from the business writers that I salute them; I salute you, Don Carlos Fernandez, and your fellow business leaders in the community. I do this not only on my behalf but on behalf of the people because under the new dispensation you, the business leaders, are the heroes of the country; you—I repeat—are the true builders of our Nation.

In order to be sure that the significance of this occasion is not lost as is normally the case in many gatherings, and to perpetuate the symbolism of this memorable, and to me, historic occasion, I have asked Don Carlos Fernandez to represent all awardees here by being one of my steady economic advisers in order to help me.

Of course, with affection, I congratulate the business writers not only for this memorable occasion but for their insight and foresight in launching a movement towards recognition of our business leaders. I would like to add in congratulating our business writers that the spirit of the New Era has affected the journalistic standing of the writers or reporters or newspapermen. In the past, the political writers were the dominant figures in the journalistic field in this country, but as far as the present Administration is concerned, it is the business writers who shall be the dominant figures upon whom we shall draw attention and guidance in our Administration.

May I, before I say anything further, avail of this class of thought to make reference here to my Press Secretary who is here because we speak of journalism and writers and reporters. I was even criticized by reporters and newspapermen for selecting as my Press Secretary one who was not a professional newspaperman, although he was an editor of the Philippine Collegian and has been writing not in a professional but in a sporadic way.

This is the first opportunity for me to inform my friends in the newspaper field why I chose as my Press Secretary to project to the Nation the efforts of this Administration, a man who although not a professional newspaperman, is one who has a fair knowledge and grasp of business and economic matters. It is a choice integrated into the pattern of concentrating on economic development. I felt that in pursuance of the thinking of our Administration, even our spokesman must be one who is not only a good reporter or newspaperman professionally but one who understands business.

That is the reason why, in spite of criticisms, and I hope the newspapermen will excuse me for seeming to disregard attacks and criticisms against Secretary Hechanova, I have stood by Secretary Hechanova because he is a Press Secretary who understands business, who knows economic matters.

As a matter of fact, I am happy to state before you that, again, in pursuance of the thought and orientation of the new Administration to emphasize on business and economic matters, beginning Monday Press Secretary Hechanova will be acting Secretary of Commerce and Industry in the absence of Secretary Balmaceda, until Secretary Lim comes over.

In line with our preoccupation—almost obsession—in channeling the thoughts and efforts of this Nation towards economic pursuits, may I impose upon your patience to express to you tonight our plans and our thoughts that may perhaps be denominated as guidelines for businessmen.

The Administration has provided a framework for development in the Five-Year Integrated Program which was outlined in my State-of-the-Nation Message last January. However, the major share of the responsibility for translating goals into achievements lies not wholly with the Government, but primarily with the private sector. Without your cooperation, without the response of businessmen and industrialists to the stimuli which the Government shall provide, the New Era, the better life which we all desire, cannot materialize.

In the broad directions indicated in the Administration program lies the orientation of the activities of private enterprse. I shall not presume to suggest how your job should be done. You are the best judges of that. So, tonight I shall endeavor briefly to review this economic situation, the prospects, and the probable policy directions of the Government which may serve as guidelines to businessmen.

It has been barely three months since we adopted real decontrol last January and I am highly gratified to note here that there is sufficient degree of satisfaction at the progress of our decontrol program. As a matter of fact, from the standpoint of the Administration, we feel that it has been more satisfactory than our highest expectations.

The rate of our peso vis-a-vis foreign currencies has not fluctuated beyond P4 to $1 nor have prices of prime commodities soared, nor has there been undue speculation. We have exercised restraints on private as well as public spending, which move constitutes one of the prime factors in the effective functioning of this delicate program. On the other hand, production efforts have continued to receive the support of the financial institutions. Only recently, the Central Bank eliminated the special time deposits on about 76 per cent of imports to facilitate replenishments of the domestic supply of raw material and essential goods.

The continuous visits and inquiries by foreign bankers and prospective investors from abroad attest to a growing recognition of the attractive investment prospects here and confidence in the basic strengthening of the Philippine economy. More than the tangible effects which cannot be immediately reflected in quantitative statistics, is the wholesome change in moral attitudes and the refreshing breeze of freedom. While it is still premature to crow about recent developments, our Administration has been encouraged to push its plans and work more fervently for a prosperous Philippines.

It is not enough that there is freedom of economic activity or that the exchange rates are stabilized. It is more important that the economy be developed to provide conditions for prosperity for the greatest number of our, people and a better life to the common man, or in the words of our chief awardee, to attack the problem of poverty. My Administration is pledged towards the achievement of this objective. Towards the attainment of this end, we are alert in watching the attendant problems and to meet them promptly and, we trust, effectively.

An instance of these attendant problems is one which affects the manufacturing sector, the continued growth of which is one of the mainstay of our development program. I refer to the fact that while practically everyone welcomed the lifting of controls last January twenty-first, now certain sectors, particularly the manufacturers, point to its probable impact on profits and production costs.

The Administration realizes this problem which, in fact, was anticipated. Decontrol necessarily foisted upon domestic industries a readjustment in business operations to a higher exchange cost. In the long-run, such a readjustment will be for the economy’s own good since it will conduce to the development of a healthier and more competitive breed of enterprise. However, there is of course an inherent danger in the problem: that this process of readjustment will not only be an extremely difficult one for small businessmen but may drag out and lead to a slow-down in our rate of economic growth. It is clear that in view of our rapidly growing population and the high incidence of unemployment, this slow-down cannot be allowed to occur. Should the economy be gripped with inertia, superhuman efforts might be required to extricate it and get it moving once again.

Foreseeing the possible emergence of such an undesirable situation, the Administration has worked out a series of measures and dovetailed them into the integrated socio-economic program. Some of these measures have already been implemented, while others are in the process of promulgation and implementation. Congressional action will be called for in some instances, but should such action not be forthcoming, substitutes have been planned so that the most necessary objectives of the economy may be achieved.

In this connection, I cannot but express regret at the stalemate and stagnation that has developed between the Administration which has, with all its soul, so to speak, concentrated its efforts towards the growth and development of our economy, and Congress. As the head of the Administration I have anxiously desired, and will always desire cooperation between the Administration and other sectors of leadership in this country because that is essential in order that we may succeed in this difficult effort.

I plead again for cooperation because we are for preserving the prerogative of this Administration in the responsibility of guiding the economic development of this country. We are fighting to let us enjoy the prerogative and responsibility of guiding the economic destiny of this country and we plead for cooperation from the other sectors of national leadership. But if that cooperation is denied and there is an impasse in those prerogatives and responsibility of promoting the economic development of this country we are ready to fight in order to serve the development of our economy and the best interest of our country.

First, let us consider the problems of adjustment faced by the producers. Manufacturers whose material requirements have a high import content are faced with higher production cost. In the short-run, they may react in two possible ways: either to absorb the incremental costs themselves, or pass these costs on to consumers who buy their products by raising their prices which, if other alternatives are feasible, ought to be avoided in the general interest. In either case, their profits will tend to contract, due to the higher costs, or to lower sales volume in the face of consumer resistance. For those engaged in the purely importing business, the impact will be hardest, because of the higher exchange rate and the cash deposit requirements against some imports. For them, it would be logical to expect difficulties in transferring the higher import costs to the consumers and to anticipate a tight financial situation.

The period of adjustment for manufacturers will entail economizing on processing costs and utilizing local raw materials to the maximum. In this regard, there is an imperative need for exploring the possibilities for processing intermediate raw materials for industry from purely domestic sources. Industrial integration must be exploited wherever possible, boosted by the significant gains accumulated during the last decade in the ways of management and financial experience, technological skills, and physical plant facilities. Integration could lead to the release of the economic wealth locked up in our natural resources, through their actual exploitation and use. In the process of integration, movement both ways is possible, downwards from the most refined finishing stages of production down through intermediate stages to the raw material sources, or upwards from the basic raw material to the marketable end-product.

It is assuring to realize that we have reached a stage where it is not only possible but feasible for us to commence developing our basic industries such as iron and steel smelting, which demand massive capital outlays as well as specialized skills.

The development of our industries has, as it were, spilled over from the industrial sector, and this is a good thing. They have created an impulse towards the generation of new lines in the agricultural sector, which has long been steeped in traditional pursuits. This trend must be encouraged and intensified inasmuch as it would not only insure greater sufficiency in industrial raw materials, but very possibly also in food.

The examples are many and varied. The textile industry has boosted the growing of cotton. The tire manufacturers have introduced the raising of rubber. The canning and food processing firms have triggered the planting of coffee, citrus, cacao, as well as the establishment of budding livestock and dairy industries. Promising prospects lie ahead. Pharmaceutical manufacturing, which we now possess, should be a natural market for basic chemicals and medicinal herbs suitable for local cultivation. To some extent, the truck and car assembly plants are leading to the manufacture of vehicle parts and other accessories by domestic metal-working plants, which in their turn would be a market for basic smelting industries.

Since decontrol has favored exports with a better exchange rate, we may expect an accelerated effort to boost export production. Decontrol not only provides a basic incentive towards export expansion, but highlights a new significance for agriculture, which in our rush to industrialize was pushed into the background for many years. Opportunities are delineated not only in the traditional lines, but in the fields of new export crops and in the fields of raw and intermediate materials for industry.

In addition to the traditional crops, the possibilities of exporting manufactured commodities to our Asian neighbors offers a promising future. Many of our neighbors have not yet reached the stage of development we have achieved. At present, while our industries operate primarily for the home market, it is reasonably certain that our products would be salable abroad if proper contacts were made and cultivated. The different trade missions which have returned from those areas have invariably reported substantial demand for commodities such as toiletries, processed foods and beverages, and other consumer products which we produce in our country. At the new exchange rates we are now able to price our products at levels competitive with the rest of the world. In this field, the Administration has launched and will follow through a more vigorous foreign economic policy than in the past.

The Government has prepared a coordinated socio-economic program to steer the economy’s readjustment efforts along sound lines, this time not through controls but through the more positive methods of incentive and assistance. The program has been geared to strengthen the economy at its base, for a fresh leap towards development. It clearly spells the directions of overall economic, monetary, fiscal and commercial policies, as well as projects along lines most conducive to dynamic growth.

The program seeks to establish a consistency of policies which would make unnecessary the time-consuming efforts which businessmen have had to pursue in the past for the clarification or amendment of conflicting policies and rulings. It recognizes the equity of turning over public corporations to qualified private enterprisers, and thus abolishing the anomaly of a government openly competing with its constituents in a purely business venture.

In this connection, I would like to emphasize this phase of the Administration program where, in order to make a shift from a system of government control to private enterprise, we not only have taken positive steps to transfer existing business corporations of the government to private hands but have even explored the possibilities of transferring to private hands such ventures as the Manila Port Service and the telephone business of the Bureau of Telecommunications. I have directed the administrator of the Office of Economic Coordination to proceed with the restoration to private enterprise of the Manila Port Service which was already in the hands of private business before but which the previous Administration returned to the government enterprise.

All these will indicate to you that we are determined in our Administration not only to redeem the development of the economy from controls but to transfer the burden of economic growth from the government to you, the businessmen, so that it is up to you to develop this country and we shall be ready to help you in that enterprise.

Within the framework of the program, the Government also plans to intensify its social overhead projects to make available cheaper transportation facilities, communications, power and water. With lower rates for the use of such essential facilities, manufacturers would be able to offset part of the higher exchange costs brought on by decontrol.

The industrial and agricultural sector can expect an extra boost through the stepping up of the road-building program, essential social and extension services, and rural credit facilities by the Government. Government sponsorship shall also insure increased exposure of farmers to scientific agricultural methods, greater use of irrigation and fertilizers, and the benefits of crop diversification.

Aside from the official program which could guide the manufacturers in their readjustment program, there will be established in the very near future an Institute for Industrial Research. It will be the function of this institute to open up horizons for new private investments by researching into ventures that would develop and exploit indigenous resources of the country.

Together with this institute, our Administration also plans to establish an industrial promotions agency which shall assist promoters of industrial ventures to prepare the project studies and proposals that need to be presented to local investors, local banks and financing companies as well as to prospective foreign investors and creditors for the purpose of raising the necessary capital.

In the past, most of the long-term financial needs of our manufacturing and industrial firms were supplied by commercial banks. We do not believe this support could be relied upon in the future as commercial banks will find it more advantageous to concentrate on short-term credits. So, we are prepared to fill the gap for long-term capital funds.

Ways and means are now being explored to channel more of the investible funds of the GSIS and the SSS to the DBP for industrial finance to projects that are of high priority in the development scheme of the country. I am aware of some objections to this course, but the matter has not yet been finalized.

In any event, I would like to inform you that I have directed the chairman of the Development Bank of the Philippines as well as the heads of the GSIS and the SSS that the granting of credit preference should be given to Filipino businessmen in order to help them assume their proper role in the national economy.

More important in the near future will be the setting up of a private investment institution, along the line of operations of the DBP, but in the hand of private management and drawing larger resources from abroad to service the import requirements of industries. In this connection, I would like to say that the role the Government will play in this institution would be merely that of assisting in its establishment through a low-cost loan which will not form part of its equity. The World Bank and other foreign financial institutions have expressed willingness to support such an institution in the form of an equity holding. The commercial banks could then transfer their long-term loans to such an institution, thereby making available to the manufacturers more capital funds for operations. Furthermore, studies are now being conducted to widen the capital markets of the country by adopting measures designed to divert some sources from luxury real estate to industrial investment.

Aside from this direct transfer of capital in the form of available loans, the Administration is making an extensive study of incentive taxes either in the form of subsidies, exemptions or direct taxes so as to make these readjustments faster and of greater value to economic growth.

My friends, these are but some of the salient measures the executive branch of the Government is planning to adopt to smoothen out the readjustments on the part of the local industries.

Monetary and credit policies are also designed to ease these adjustments by reducing inflation to a minimum. Inflationary pressures may set off, as you know, fluctuations in the exchange rates, thus making it difficult for producers to program. This is the reason why credit measures have to be tightened during the early days of the program. However, to the degree that people adjusted themselves to the new rates, we have relaxed credit. Special time deposits for essential items for instance have been removed and government securities were made eligible for reserve requirements.

In my State-of-the-Nation and Budget Message to Congress, I recommend complementary safeguard measures to our decontrol program, calling for legislative action. Among these are 1) Revision of the Tariff and Customs Code, and 2) Passage of an Investment Law.

The revision of the tariff must be carried out to transform tariff rates into more effective instruments of economic policy. While the Administration has implemented some tariff revisions under the authority vested by the “Flexible Tariff Clause”, it is up to Congress when it can work, to expand and improve upon the executive action. This is particularly important since the selective restraints on imports which have been accomplished through controls will largely fall upon the tariff system under a free economy. In such revision, tariff rates on prime commodities and raw materials should be generally made lower than those on finished commodities in line with our desire to encourage domestic industries. Also, the imposition of prohibitively high tariff on luxury goods may be a strong deterrent to the conspicuous consumption which has been an economically wasteful and socially disturbing practice in the past. Last but not least, the tariff should be potent enough to protect domestic industries from such harmful competitive operations as dumping, through the provision of adequate countervailing duties.

Pending congressional action, the Administration has made use of the special time deposits. These are required on opening letters of credit in percentages that vary with the essentiality and category of imports. Primarily intended as a protection measure, these special time deposits are intended to restrict non-essential imports.

The value of foreign investments and technological skills in economic development has long been recognized in this country. However, we have not succeeded in attracting a substantial share of the new foreign capital flowing into Asia, which would provide us with additional foreign exchange income and boost domestic capital formation. The creation of a proper climate for foreign investments, including the passage of a long-overdue Investment Law, is urgently called for.

It is apparent, as has been said by our friend tonight, that the country stands at the threshold of a challenging new era. Through the integrated socio-economic program, your Government seeks to develop an active partnership with the people in the conquest of the problems which beset us as a Nation. The Government stands ready to correct whatever deficiency should manifest itself in the actual performance of the program. May I make this appeal to you today, and through you to all the businessmen and industrialists of this country, for your valued understanding and cooperation, for your dynamic participation and support of the program which is designed to bring about a life of abundance in freedom for all our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.