Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines

[Delivered on November 23, 1963]

ONE TASK AHEAD FOR ALL

BEFORE I proceed with my scheduled speech on the last elections, I would like to state that “the Filipino people join the world in mourning the death of President John F. Kennedy.” President Kennedy’s assassination is an incalculable loss to the United States and a blow to Democracy. He gave new firmness in the struggle against Communism and in the advance of freedom and equality as a way of life for all mankind. The hand that snuffed out his life struck not at him alone but at the vitals of Democracy itself because it was the hand of intolerance.

In his death, John F. Kennedy was a martyr to the cause of human liberty and equality. His labors and martyrdom should invigorate the resolve of all fighters for and lovers of Democracy everywhere to carry on the global crusade to attain freedom, equality, and a dignified life for all men.

The conduct and outcome of our recent elections did justice to the reputation of our Filipino nation as a vibrant democracy here in Asia. It was conducted peacefully as a whole, and more than ever before under the prime authority and responsibility of the Commission on Elections with the cooperation of all officials.

The Philippine Constabulary discarded its previous poll activities such as the unofficial canvassing of returns and confined itself to such duties as the Comelec deputized it to do and to the maintenance of peace and order. The campaign was generally conducted by both parties and the candidates at less cost than previous polls. These are salutary trends in the conduct of our national elections.

On the result, four of the eight senatorial seats went to the Liberal Party; forty-two of the elected fifty-six governors were Liberals; eighteen of the thirty-one city mayors pertained to the LP; and an even more overwhelming LP majority was registered among municipal mayors, vice-mayors and councilors.

Some quarters have interpreted the election result, particularly the four-to-four senatorial outcome, to mean that the people have withheld their judgment on the LP administration. We beg to differ.

We submit that these results indicate an endorsement by the people of the administration’s moral, economic and social programs and the electorate’s conformity to give the Administration the institutional means to carry out its program.

The crucial issue in the last election was control of the Senate. Upon my election in 1961, I was the first President in our history to be handicapped by opposition control of both the Senate and the House of Representatives. After vainly working for a nonpartisan approach to the nation’s problems, I was constrained to seek Liberal Party control over the two chambers. These efforts succeeded in the House but failed in the Senate.

This was the situation obtaining when the 1963 elections were held. The Liberal Party went into the polls to win party control of the Senate while the NP fought to retain its control over that august body.

It will be recalled that both parties aimed at a six to eight result in their favor. The NP aimed at a minimum of six because this was the minimum victory that would give them an NP control of the Senate, which was the crucial issue and goal of their campaign. Although the election of four LP senators constituted a victory, the LP aimed at a minimum of six because of the understandable desire of any party to strive for the maximum success possible.

At the time of election, the NP had five outgoing senators and the LP had three outgoing senators. To maintain the status quo in political strength in the Senate or bring about “a tie,” the NP were called upon to elect five senators and the LP to elect three senators to replace their outgoing members in the Senate. In electing only four instead of five senators, the NP lost and diminished in strength while by electing four instead of only three, the LP won and gained in strength in the Senate.

An objective and prestigious observer, Quijano de Manila, in the Philippines Free Press of November 23, 1963, has expressed the popular verdict succinctly in the following words:

“If this year’s elections are regarded as a national contest between the President and the Opposition, which is how the campaign projected the fight, then the most that can be said, if the score stays at 4-4, is that the NPs did not win it. Their basic argument was that the people should not, for their own good, give the President a majority in the Senate. It is, therefore, immaterial whether the LPs win by a sweep or by 5-3 or only end up in a tie. As long as the LPs get a Senate majority, even if only by one vote, then the NPs have lost, because the people will have given the President what he asked for and rejected the arguments of the Opposition.

“Since all the other issues, from high prices to rice queues, got tied up with this question of whether or not it was safe to give Macapagal a Senate majority, the people, if they give it to him, can be said to have rejected all the other issues too, by giving the President a vote of confidence. For though 4-4 is hardly an impressive score, it must still be regarded as a vote of confidence, since it will mean that the people do not believe that an LP Senate, which they decree with a 4-4 score, will bring on the death of democracy, the horrors of dictatorship, harder times, higher prices, more rice queues and more ax murders.”

It will be recalled that after the Liberal presidential victory in 1949, the opposition Nacionalista Party won all the eight senatorial seats in the 1951 election. That the opposition Nacionalista won only four of the eight seats in the 1963 poll after the Liberal presidential victory in 1961 is both a clear LP victory and demonstration of maintained and adequate popular support for the LP Administration.

A detail in the senatorial election that we cannot resist taking note of is the defeat of NP candidates who assumed a general anti-administration posture.

On the other hand, the NP senatorial victors, Tolentino, Diokno, Puyat and Ganzon, are administration critics who have not assumed a general anti-administration posture but have attacked the Administration on specific matters. This would indicate that our people prefer concrete criticism against the Administration rather than general animosity and the name-calling hurled at the Administration.

Another thing worth mentioning is that the LP senatorial winners were those who noticeably upheld the Administration against opposition attacks. Roxas maintained that the Administration was correctly concentrating on the economic problems of the people like rice and prices. Padilla’s thesis was that there would be no dictatorship under the LP administration. Liwag’s position was that the LP Administration protected the country’s interest in the Stonehill-Peter Lim affairs. Ziga maintained that the Administration had done excellently in promoting the social welfare of the people. Their election may be taken as reflecting satisfaction of our people over the Administration’s efforts for their welfare.

In the 1961 elections, the LP won the national elections but lost in the congressional elections. The LP won the presidency, the vice-presidency and six Senate seats on the national level but the NP won seventy-five per cent of the congressional or local seats. It is significant that in the 1963 polls, the LP won the election both on the national and local level.

It will be recalled that in the 1959 local elections, the opposition Liberal Party dislodged Administration Nacionalista governors from power in eighteen provinces, thereby indicating a pro-opposition trend on the part of the people. In the recent 1963 polls, it was the Administration Liberal Party which dislodged oppositionist Nacionalista governors in thirteen provinces, thereby indicating a pro-administration trend on the part of the people. The thirteen provinces in which Nacionalista governors were dislodged by Administration candidates are Pangasinan, Bulacan, Mountain Province, Ilocos Sur, Cebu, Leyte, Samar, Iloilo, Zamboanga del Sur, Surigao del Sur, Masbate, Marinduque and Batanes.

On the local level, the most significant was the victory of the LP local candidates in major East Visayan provinces. The East Visayan region has been traditionally the bailiwick of the Nacionalista Party. With the election of LP governors in Cebu, Leyte and Samar, the major provinces of East Visayas, the opposition is now confronted with a political problem that defies solution.

On our part, we feel a sense of personal satisfaction that with the destruction of the long-entrenched NP machines in Pangasinan and Bulacan, our Central Luzon bailiwick consisting of Pangasinan, Tarlac, Nueva Ecija, Pampanga, Bulacan, Zambales and Bataan has for the first time become a solid LP phalanx.

Indeed, in terms of personal political support, the 1963 poll results which brought an LP landslide in the local level indicate a more favorable support than the 1961 results. This is a valid conclusion despite the fact that in 1961 six LP senators were elected while in 1963 only four LP senators were elected. The difference is that in 1961 we were a candidate while in 1963 we were not a candidate, considering that in our political career whenever we were a candidate our personal showing was always higher than that of the rest of our party. When we ran for the first time in 1949 for Congress our majority was the biggest uncontested majority in the country. When we ran for reelection in 1953 against the Magsaysay-NP national landslide and the other LP candidates lost in our province, we won in all towns in our district except in the town of our opponent. When we ran for the Senate in 1955, we topped all LP candidates, including four incumbent senators. When we ran for Vice-President in 1957, we won despite the defeat of our presidential, six senatorial and seventy-two congressional candidates, and we obtained more votes than the winning president. When we ran for president in 1961, we won and obtained the largest number of votes among all candidates, with our vice-presidential and six senatorial candidates despite the defeat of seventy-five of our congressional candidates.

We are gratified at the election results because frankly, we were prepared for an unfavorable outcome. Why? Because we knowingly adopted policies that were good for the people, although not politically popular. Our criterion was to do not what was popular but what was good for the people. From the inception of our Administration, we made this norm of action clear.

Thus, in my inaugural address, I said:

“The beneficent effects of some of the concrete steps that we take may not be immediately evident; what may, in fact, be instantly visible will be adverse but transitory repercussions that in time will clear the way for the final favorable outcome. In the interludes of anxiety, we shall need the trust and confidence of our people.”

In my first state-of-the-nation message to Congress on January 22, 1962, I also said:

“Our people must be ready to undergo sacrifices. The prospect of better times are not likely to be realized without the imposition of self-discipline and the assumption of certain social responsibilities.”

In my second state-of-the-nation message to Congress on January 28, 1963, I likewise said:

“To push through to advantage the gains made in the Nation’s economic effort, we are called upon to adopt implementory measures that are unprecedented in magnitude. Half-measures will not now suffice. Half-measures will only endanger the success of the critical endeavor to attain an adequate degree of economic and social progress which our people urgently need and which, if we act courageously and patriotically, is now within their reach.

“It is a supreme challenge to our courage and patriotism because some of these measures may not be momentarily palatable to the very people whom we seek to serve. The remedies are of the nature of medicine which is not instantly agreeable to the patient but which he must take for his good. They are measures which, heretofore, being politically disadvantageous, we should not even consider. So this is the time of test which will show who among us are sheer politicians and who are sincere public servants and statesmen. The test will be whether one will refrain or will courageously support those measures needed for the success of our economic program and for the good of the economy and the country but which may not be instantly popular with segments of the people. For those who are faithful to the country and those who are sterling leaders of the people and statesmen, there can be no choice except to support what is needed for the attainment of our goal of rapid economic growth and social progress despite momentary disapproval from the public. To the true public servant and the statesman, there is only one duty—to do with courage not what is popular but what is good for the people.”

Among the sound but politically unpopular policies that we adopted was decontrol which contributed to the rise of prices. It was to be expected that the people would take the rise of prices against the Administration. The opposition shrewdly had a field day capitalizing on this although in the end our people did not allow themselves to be swayed by this rather unfair issue.

Another was the moral regeneration program which did not spare the big fishes in our society. This provoked the enmity against the Administration of powerful figures who count with a large political following in the country.

Still another was the passage, close to the election, of the land reform law abolishing tenancy. While it will take time for tenants to appreciate the value and benefits of this measure for them, it immediately provoked the opposition of powerful landowners who exert influence and considerable measure of control over politics and politicians in some sectors of the country.

It was with the knowledge that the Administration had adopted measures good for the people though politically unpopular with the people that I took active part in the campaign myself. Apart from helping the LP senatorial and local candidates, part of our effort was to assure the masses of our people that everything was going to be alright. In the face of the opposition onslaughts which capitalized on every conceivable issue, true or false, in order to arouse disillusionment and even hatred among the people towards the Administration, the election results show that we succeeded in the endeavor to reassure the people that this Administration is truly concerned with their welfare.

In bringing their case to the people for a strong opposition, the opposition party attempted to foist the outrageous line that I was planning to be president for life. This is ridiculous. No man can be president for life in our country because we are all lovers of freedom. Any person who would seek to be president for life would be stopped immediately and effectively the moment he or his supporters make such fantastic proposal.

While giving the LP control of the Senate in accordance with our plea in the campaign, in voting for some NP senators, the people showed an understanding of the needs of a healthy democracy which shuns an overwhelming concentration of political strength in one of the two parties.

In accordance with the people’s apparent inclination, we shall assist in giving emphasis to the ways of freedom in the pursuit of the reforms that we hold to be desirable for the well-being of our people. We share the faith in a virile democracy and, in harmony with the successful discharge of our responsibility to our people under the Constitution and the rule of law, we can be counted upon to act in concert with other leaders in insuring the maintenance of democracy in our land.

Indeed, it was in the interest of democracy that we have done nothing about the strong criticisms against us and our administration except to answer them. While hoping for more accuracy and sobriety in criticism, we do not believe in suppressing criticism. In time, the intensification of a sense of sobriety and fairness will improve the quality of criticism. For all its inaccuracies and even malice, it is preferable that criticisms be uttered than withheld or suppressed. Wrong and malicious criticism can be overcome by answering it and exposing its inaccuracy and malice. Withheld or suppressed criticism denies to the leaders of the nation the full opportunity to assess the thinking, feeling and temper of the various sectors of the nation, thereby detracting from the wise handling of the people’s affairs and from the merits and efficacy of democracy.

Having achieved our operational goal of an LP Senate in the 1963 poll by the will of the people which we sought since the start of our administration, we are now ready to set aside politics and tackle the nation’s problems on the basis of the widest solidarity.

Our people have spoken. They have encouraged the administration to proceed with its program and given it the institutional means for the prosecution of the program, with ample fiscalization from the opposition. Thus we are guided by the clear and refreshing voice of our people. Let us proceed to work together on the constructive task of building the moral, economic and social progress of the country, with a minimum of politics and a maximum of non-partisan dedication to the welfare of the nation. Let us set aside politics and wrangling. There will be time for this according to the schedule prescribed for the expression of our people’s judgment on the acts of the nation’s leaders and officials. Until then, let us all join hands in formulating and implementing the proper and effective solutions to the problems and difficulties of our people.

From the sentiment and will manifested by the people in the election, the task to which in unity we should consecrate ourselves should include, firstly, the enactment of measures to implement vigorously the five-year socio economic program and secondly, in the course of the implementation of the program, to adopt effective measures to prevent further rise in the prices of prime commodities. In the forthcoming congressional session, the House and the new Senate should be prepared to undertake this vital task. We are prepared to do our part.

In conclusion, we thank our people for giving us victory and their continued confidence. With God’s guidance, we are resolved not to fail them in their faith.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.