Radio-TV Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On the program, “The President Speaks to the Masses”

THE FIRST YEAR

ONE year has passed since the change of administration as ordained by the people. It has been an eventful year. The performance of the Administration in its first year must be assessed in the light of the conditions at the time it assumed office, that it was a year of transition, and that the Administration’s efforts were continuously hampered by prognostications of doom on the part of oppositionist critics who instinctively and psychologically foresaw things in the light of their own experience and standards.

When the Administration took over, the government and the country were in an appalling condition.

In the government, graft and corruption were rampant. In some offices, public service was openly allotted to the highest bribe-bidder. Financially, the government was bankrupt. In the first six months of the fiscal year 1961–62, there was a deficit of P200 million. The P13 million calamity fund had been spent. Of the P120 thousand outlay for Malacañang expenses, only P36 was left. In the Central Bank, the dollar reserves had sunk to as low as $103 million while the Central Bank had incurred obligations of $340 million at the preferred rates of from P2.00 to P3.20.

In the country, there was cynicism among the people. They no longer believed in the honesty of public officials. They were buying in 1961 their rice at as high as P2.00 or even P3.00 a ganta. From 1957, the rate of economic growth had steadily declined from over six per cent to 4.8 per cent in 1960.There was no hope in sight for progress that could cope with the needs of the population which was increasing at the rate of 3.2 per cent annually.

The situation called for bold, well-nigh superhuman, effort. It was a plight of filth and shambles reminiscent of the legendary stinking Aegean stables which confronted Hercules.

Hoping against hope, the people had given a mandate for a change. That mandate had to be carried out.

The people had to be served and a hope in their future restored even if the national situation was aggravated by the predicament of Malacañang being under the Liberal Party while Congress was under the Nacionalistas.

Aware of this complex and formidable problem and resolved to find the solution for the sake of the people, we rolled up our sleeves and prepared for hard work and sacrifice immediately after we took our oath of office at high noon on Rizal Day of 1961.

After one year of devoted effort and relentless pursuit of lofty objectives and devotion to the people’s welfare, we pause briefly to give thanks to God, to the people whose faith and support have been so magnificently demonstrated and to all those who contributed their share in these endeavors, thus enabling our Administration to accomplish the following:

In the moral field:

1. The people have regained their confidence in the government and have acquired a feeling of hope for better times.

2. Graft and corruption have been contained.

3. The moral drive has been extended to prominent and hitherto untouchable figures in business, alien circles, politics and labor.

In the socio-economic field:

4. Exchange controls have been successfully removed.

5. A five-year socio-economic development program has been formulated and officially adopted and its implementation has been started.

6. The Philippines has become an attractive field for investments.

7. Job opportunities have increased.

8. The rice problem has been solved and an effective solution to the fish problem has been launched.

9. The prices of other prime commodities like milk, canned food and drugs have been kept within easy reach of the people.

10. The dollar reserves have increased.

11. The balance of payments has become favorable.

12. The income of the people, particularly the exporters, farmers and producers, has increased.

13. The Philippines has become a better tourist attraction.

14. There has been generated more interest in economic problems.

15. Programs involving housing for the poorest and clothing for the masses have been launched.

In the field of foreign affairs:

16. The prestige of the Republic abroad has been raised.

17. The Philippine claim to North Borneo has been officially filed and is being pressed.

18. The $73 million additional war damage bill has been approved.

19. The Philippine sugar quota to the U.S. has been increased.

20. Other governments, particularly the U.S., China and Japan, have become more cooperative with Philippine needs and problems.

In the administrative field:

21. Respect for law has been enhanced.

22. More coordination among government offices has been effected.

23. The Bureau of Internal Revenue has raised its efficiency and prestige and increased collection of taxes.

24. The House of Representatives, despite initial partisan roadblocks, has given full support to the administration.

Contemplating all these we have a justifiable feeling that in the aforesaid performance, we have been favored by Divine Providence to exceed the five goals upon which we set our sights in our inaugural address:

“First, the solution to the problem of corruption.

“Second, the attainment of self-sufficiency in the staple food of our people, namely, rice and corn.

“Third, the creation of conditions that will provide more income to our people—income for those who have none; more income for those whose earnings are inadequate for their elemental needs.

“Fourth, the launching of practices that will strengthen the moral fiber of our nation and reintroduce those values that would invigorate our democracy, and

“Fifth, the launching of a bold but well-formulated socio-economic development program that shall place the country on the road to prosperity for all our people.”

I shall comment briefly on our performance relative to these five goals. On the first of these five goals, we submit that graft and corruption, in its big scale and worsening extension under the past administration, has been stopped. The tong system in which businessmen made regular payments to high officials or their intermediaries has ceased. While virtually terminated at the higher echelon, graft continues to recede and likewise has been minimized in the lower levels of the government. It shall be our sustained endeavor in the coming years to press the administration’s drive against venalities to the lowest levels so as to free the jeepney driver from being fleeced by the policemen or the citizen from being annoyed for a tip by a government clerk for the simplest public service.

I appeal to all officials and employees of the Government, both national and local, from the humblest to the highest, to support the drive for moral regeneration. Let us give a chance to our people to have a good government and to enjoy thereby a better life by serving them honestly, unselfishly and well. Let us bequeath to our children honor and a good name they can be proud of. Let it be enough that we have a position which gives us dignity and a means of modest livelihood. Let us remember that life on earth has to end, the ill-gotten sums that may be acquired through abuse of our public trust will avail us naught at the hour of our death and instead, we shall on that account carry to the grave a sense of guilt that we have not led honest lives. If we need additional income, let us seek it through legitimate investments and honest ways but not through misuse of our position or official influence. By doing this, we shall help to develop a prosperous country and a noble and happy race.

On the second goal, our task of solving the rice and corn problem was miraculously accomplished in the first year of our administration. This is a problem that had plagued the country since pre-war years. The chronic character and gravity of the problem was exemplified by the conditions in 1961. To solve this problem, the Garcia administration imported rice in 1961 at a loss of P60 million. Despite this, there was scarcity in the lean months of August to October when people formed queues in Manila, as during the Japanese time, to buy one ganta of rice, the price of which had soared as high as P3.00 a ganta.

Under the new administration, we gave priority to the perennial rice and corn problem because of its paramount importance especially to the masses of our people. We abolished the inept NARIC and in its place established the Rice and Corn Administration under former Congressman Jose Y. Feliciano, a man known for his integrity, leadership and expert knowledge of the problems of rice both in theory and application, being himself a successful rice grower. Indicating the conscientious manner by which the Administration selects its men to handle vital tasks, I had to persuade Mr. Feliciano to abandon his blissful life of retirement and his prosperous rice and sugar cane plantations in order to help us solve the difficult rice problem. Realizing finally the challenge of service to our people, he accepted the responsibility and has put his soul into the task. As a result, by his skillful and devoted handling of the RCA, despite the fact that the Administration did not import rice, there was an abundant supply throughout the lean months of August–October, retailing to the consumers at prices from P.85 to P.95 a ganta. At the same time, the RCA has assured a good margin of profit to rice growers by buying their produce at P11.50 a cavan of 45 kilos. In contrast with the loss of P60 million in its futile handling of the rice problem in 1961 by the past administration, Mr. Feliciano and the RCA solved the problem at a subsidy loss of P1.5 million.

The success of the Administration in tackling effectively the rice and corn problem in its first year augurs well for the attainment, at last, of self-sufficiency in these cereals to meet the growing needs of our population. Secretary Benjamin Gozon of Agriculture and Natural Resources declared on December 1, 1962 that there is an expected surplus of palay next year amounting to 8.2 million sacks of 44 kilos.

Many people, of course, have helped the Administration and the RCA in solving the rice problem. Among these are the devoted RCA personnel, the managements of the proper government credit institutions, and the Department of National Defense whose transport facilities were placed. At the disposal of the RCA for efficient distribution of the RCA rice to trading centers. Acknowledgment is especially merited by some Nacionalista leaders in Congress, notably Senate President Eulogio Rodriguez and former Speaker Daniel Romualdez, who gave full backing to the Administration’s efforts to lick the stubborn rice problem.

Having happily solved the rice problem in our first year, we proceeded to launch a massive project to help the fishing industry, in order to provide both the rice and fish which constitute the meal of the common people. We declared Pier 14 as a fishermen’s port, the first of twelve such ports to be established throughout the country. We likewise put into motion a program to provide housing to the poorest by laying the cornerstone of the first multi-storey tenement in Tondo, Manila. Finally, we launched a clothes-for-the masses program, which will bring within the reach of the poorest, initially through the Namarco, good clothing in various shades at low cost. All these projects, which we shall prosecute vigorously under our Administration, are in implementation of our pledge in our inaugural address that the first things we must provide are “the elemental needs of every people—food, clothing and shelter.”

Regarding our third goal, we have frontally attacked the problem of unemployment and underemployment, on a long-range program, through the five-year integrated socioeconomic development program, and, on an immediate basis, through the Emergency Employment Administration. In three months, the EEA has given jobs to 100,000 unemployed. The Central Bank report for 1962 shows that 392 large firms have increased hirings by 54 per cent. A total of P93 million was added to the money stream to increase the salaries and wages of workers itemized as follows: P28.5 million for increase in salaries of government employees, P34 million for increase in base pay of enlisted men in the armed forces and P30 million for salaries and wages under the EEA. This does not include the increase of wages in private enterprise which has kept pace with the government’s move.

As to our fourth goal we have endeavored to enhance with heartening success the traits of integrity and honesty, respect for law, equality before the law, simple living, punctuality, courtesy, devotion to the people in public trust, frugality, discouragement of expensive gifts, discontinuing big official retinues, patronage of native apparel, cleanliness and the like. Among specific measures that we took, in this connection, may be mentioned the following:

1. The President and his family set the tone and personal example in integrity and honesty.

2. We abolished the control of foreign exchange, which was one of the main sources of corruption.

3. We took action against big and hitherto untouchable big men who had typified venalities in the corruption of officials, alien circles, politics, tax evasion, profiteering, and labor.

4. The President and his cabinet published their assets and liabilities, altho this is not required by law.

5. In the selection of cabinet members and other key officials, I gave primary consideration to integrity and honesty.

6. I kept close watch over the activities of my appointees and all key officials and took immediate remedial steps whenever necessary.

7. Mrs. Macapagal and I honored at breakfast humble citizens who had displayed acts of honesty.

We have achieved our fifth goal, the launching of a bold but well-formulated socio-economic development program that shall place the country on the road to prosperity for all our people.

Our achievement on this fifth goal is two-fold, first, the successful execution of decontrol which would shift the pattern of the economy from the twelve-year-old system of controls to a new system of free private enterprise; and second, the official adoption of a five-year socio-economic development program which experts, local and foreign, have pronounced as sound and which, according to economic indicators, has been successfully launched and is being effectively implemented.

It was easy for anyone to advocate decontrol. It was difficult to carry it out. Yet we did the difficult on January 21, 1962, twenty-one days after we took over the administration.

We followed through our decontrol operation with a five-year integrated socio-economic development program which I officially submitted to Congress on January 22, 1962, to complete the new economic setting of free enterprise. The program was subsequently adopted officially by the House of Representatives and by the National Economic Council, in which the Senate is represented. The program has, therefore, become the official socioeconomic program of the Government.

Our decontrol operation has been described by experts from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund as “extraordinarily” successful. The following facts and figures contained in the Central Bank report for 1962 support this conclusion:

1. Gross national product for the first half of 1962 increased by P357 million, representing an attainment of the 6 per cent rate of economic growth sought in our socio-economic program.

2. Whereas at the time of decontrol, the black market price of the dollar had reached P4.50, from May to date the price of the dollar has been stable from P3.87 to P3.92. Forward exchange transactions expanded from $0.26 million in February to $50.41 in November.

3. Whereas there was an unfavorable balance of payments of $77 million in 1961, we have achieved a surplus in the balance of payments in 1962 amounting to $29 million.

4. As against dollar reserves of $103 million in December of 1961 with obligations at preferred rates of $340 million, the dollar reserves rose to $145 million at the end of December after paying $227 million of the 1961 preferred obligations.

5. While there was a budgetary deficit of P148 million in the first eleven months of 1961, there was a budgetary surplus of P76 million during the first eleven months of 1962, after paying P40 million of the past administration’s indebtedness to the Central Bank.

6. In eleven months of 1962, revenues increased by P269 million over those of 1961.

7. Agricultural production increased by 5.5 per cent in palay, 7.1 per cent in other food crops and 10 per cent in export crops; industrial production increased by 7.3 per cent.

8. Prices of mass consumer items had an average upward change of seven per cent in 1962 in Manila and outside Manila, by 4.6 per cent.

With reference to prices, we must state anew in the face of persistent deception by critics that during the presidential campaign, our pledge was to stop the rise of prices, and not to lower prices, as it is being repeatedly misrepresented now. The public will recall all our posters throughout the country, as well as our radio slogans, as follows: “Stop corruption and rising prices!” and “Stop corruption! Stop rising prices!” Despite the fact that our pledge was to stop rising prices, we succeeded in one year to lower the price of rice and corn and the prices of prime commodities like milk, canned fish, canned meat, and life-saving drugs and medicines within easy reach of the masses. We have substantially succeeded in stopping the inordinate rise of prices, as evidenced by the fact that the rise of prices for mass consumption items after decontrol in 1962 was restrained to 7% in Manila and to only 4.6 per cent outside Manila. In other countries which undertook a similar decontrol, the prices increased 102 per cent in Argentina, 12 per cent in Mexico, 30 per cent in Indonesia, 15 per cent in Thailand and 9 per cent in Greece. In fact, a recent Associated Press survey of world prices showed that the Philippines has the next lowest prices in the world. In this survey, it was found that the highest prices are in France, Italy and the US while the lowest prices are in The Netherlands, the Philippines and Egypt. Considering that our socio-economic program has started to increase the income of the people, as the people’s income increases, with the prices being stabilized, the prices altho arithmetically higher will be in real terms lower.

The soundness of our socio-economic program and its implementation is attested to by knowledgeable experts, both local and foreign. The eight-man U.S. Trade Mission, ending its month-long series of conferences with Philippine businessmen recently, “expressed optimism over the prospects of development in the Philippines.” ( Evening News , Nov. 8, 1962.) From the U.S., Bernardino Ronquillo reported that “bankers in this thriving city of the west coast (San Francisco) are enthusiastic over the monetary and administrative reforms effected by the administration of President Macapagal and are certain there will be an increasing flow of American investment into the Philippines in the next several months with completion of the decontrol program.” ( Manila Daily Bulletin , Dec. 17, 1962)

The Associated Press reported that “the US Commerce Department, finding that ‘free enterprise is now moving dramatically forward in the Philippines,’ has urged American exporters and manufacturers to ‘invest in the Philippines, or cooperate with American and Filipino investors in order to share in the business to be developed in putting the resources of the Philippines to work under the 5-year socio-economic plan.’ ” ( Manila Times , Dec.17, 1962)

US Assistant Secretary of State Averell Harriman said in an exclusive interview that “President Macapagal is giving new leadership. He has eliminated some of the abuses and malpractices which had existed in the Philippines before and we are very hopeful that under his administration there is no reason why the Philippines cannot become one of the prosperous countries of Asia.” ( Manila Times , December 28, 1962)

That these favorable estimates of the Philippine economy under the present Administration have become translated into action is shown by the report of Sec. Rufino Hechanova of Commerce and Industry that a total of P1.029 billion of new capital is now being invested in the country in the following ventures:

Firm Name

Products

Total

The fact that there was more buying this Christmas than last year, contrary to dire predictions, is significant It was an indication that the people had started to have more income and have acquired a feeling of hope for the future, which induced them to spend. One observer noted that “Christmas has come to a feverish tempo.” ( Manila Chronicle , Dec. 13, 1962.)

Another observed that “surveys showed that despite the much-ballyhooed tight money situation prevailing in the country, there were more shoppers this year than last.” (Gene Macatuno, Manila Daily Bulletin , Dec. 13, 1962). Still another observed: “A quick glance at downtown stores will show that this is going to be a festive and stylish Christmas. Any shopkeeper in town will say that business isn’t what he has expected.” (Jose Umali, Philippines Herald , Dec. 23, 1962.) An observer summed up the situation after Christmas on Dec. 27, 1962 as follows:

“A crazy-quilt pattern of holiday spending still has Manila businessmen bug-eyed in examining their gross receipts and economic prophets of doom hastily reviewing their dire pronouncements of sackcloth and vinegar . . . Next year’s Christmas should be better still,” he said. (Mario P. Chanco, Manila Daily Bulletin , Dec. 27, 1962.)

It was not only the phenomenon of a surprisingly prosperous Christmas which indicated the improvement of the economy. Indeed, only the politicians in the opposition party deny the improvement in the economic situation. Impartial and competent observers attest to the improvement of the economy, as follows:

“O dire were the warnings of the prophets that panic after panic should have ensued; but either the people were deaf or not as unhappy as they were told they were . . . The prices, yes the prices, oh the prices, alas the prices. We were all being engulfed; we were all drowning in misery; we were all going to go hungry Well, for the first time in a long time, rice sells at 85 centavos a ganta, and the happy word from the provinces is that, at last, the farmers have come up with surplus harvests of rice and corn.” Quijano de Manila , Philippines Free Press , Dec. 29, 1962.)

“Decontrol Marks New Era of Hope—Immediately after the announcement of decontrol, there were fears from certain quarters that the peso value, freed from its shackles, would go down to unprecendented levels. This, fortunately, did not happen.” ( The Manila Times , Dec. 27, 1962.)

“Towards the end of the year, the country has the consolation of knowing that its economic balance sheet suffered no substantial ill-effects as earlier feared.” ( Mirror Magazine , Dec. 29, 1962.)

“H. R. Reyes, President of the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines, said: ‘I believe 1963 will definitely be a better business and prosperous year than 1962 because businessmen are facing the future with optimism and enthusiasm amidst a healthy atmosphere for business provided by the present administration.’ “

“Sharing Reyes’ optimism for a favorable business outlook in the years ahead, Hilarion Henares, Jr., president of the Philippine Chamber of Industries said: If 1961 is the night before, 1962 the morning after, 1963 may turn out to be the bright tomorrow.” ( Philippines Herald , Dec. 28, 1962.)

“1962 is a year of great change. President Macapagal, in office but a few days, abolished the system of controls which had governed the economy for a decade and put the country back to free enterprise. A number of key businessmen agree. Their forecast for 1963: ‘bright.'” ( The Philippines Herald Magazine , Dec. 29, 1962.)

“The Philippine economy has fared relatively well during this year . . . I believe we can be optimistic about the prospects in the New Year.” (Miguel Cuaderno, Manila Daily Bulletin , Dec. 31, 1962.)

The foregoing is a summary of the facts embodying the performance of the Administration in its first year. Our critics—and these are unavoidable in a democracy—have assailed us and will continue to do so. Their criticisms, no matter how cleverly worded, cannot go against the facts. As the editorial of a morning paper today said “there is an air of confidence and optimism that cannot be denied.” ( Manila Daily Bulletin editorial, Dec. 31 1962.)

On our part, we place the judgment in the hands of our people, as to whether our Administration is an improvement on the past Administration or not. Whatever accomplishments we achieved we owe mostly to the support and faith of our people.

To our cabinet members and other key colleagues in the Administration, we express our gratitude for their integrity, hard work and devotion to duty, which they generally manifested in accordance with our expectations. We also wish to alert them for even harder work than they put forth last year for the greater challenges and bigger tasks that face us in the coming year.

It remains to express our resolve in the coming New Year, indeed, in all the years of our Administration. It is this:

Having attained the highest aspiration of life, particularly for one of our humble origin, we shall hereafter have no more interest but the interest of our people whom we love to the core of our heart and soul. We shall promote the political fortune of colleagues only as they deserve it for the welfare of the people. We shall resist any politician who goes out of bounds to make pretenses of fidelity to the people’s welfare which are not justified by his past actuations or by his authentic merits. Indeed, we shall contend with anyone who acts against the welfare of the people. We shall resist pressures from any source that go against the people’s interest for we shall not sacrifice a lifetime of hardships and a career of devotion for a better life for the people in favor of the selfish interest of anyone or of anything. On the other hand, we shall boost those who are disposed to consecrate their lives and careers selflessly for the welfare of our country. In one word, our sole interest shall be that of our country and this shall be the unshakeable criterion for our actions and decisions.

A magnificent moment has arrived in our history as a people. The stage is set for a decisive leap to a more rapid rate of economic growth that will at last, after generations, set loose the mass of our people from the chains of misery. This great thrust forward to epoch-making progress cannot be done by only one man. It is the joint task of all patriotic Filipinos, irrespective of party, religion or social orientation. To all, therefore, we cast the challenge to participate in a collective and historic act of greatness—a push by the entire nation for the success of the integrated five-year socio-economic blueprint which, after centuries of bondage to poverty, shall open the gates of a richer life to all our countrymen.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.