Radio-TV Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines In the program, “President Macapagal Speaks to the Masses”

**ON STATE VISITS AND PRICES**

Ang mga pagbisita ng Estado ay mahalagang bahagi ng diplomasya, nagbibigay-daan sa mga pinuno ng bansa na magtatag ng personal na relasyon at talakayin ang mga isyu ng mutual na interes nang direkta.  These visits are carefully planned and involve significant logistical arrangements and expenses.

Ang gastos para sa mga pagbisita ng Estado ay kinabibilangan ng transportasyon, akomodasyon, seguridad, at mga seremonyal na kaganapan.  These costs are typically borne by the host country, as a gesture of hospitality and to ensure the smooth conduct of the visit.  Mahalaga na ang paggastos ay makatwiran at naaayon sa mga umiiral na regulasyon at patakaran ng gobyerno.

May mga pagkakataon na nagkakaroon ng kontrobersya tungkol sa gastos ng mga pagbisita ng Estado, lalo na kung may mga ulat ng labis-labis na paggastos o hindi makatwirang paggamit ng pondo ng publiko.  Transparency and accountability are crucial in addressing these concerns.  Dapat tiyakin na ang lahat ng gastos ay dokumentado at napapailalim sa pagsusuri.

Ang pagtatakda ng presyo para sa mga produkto at serbisyo ay isang mahalagang aspeto ng ekonomiya.  Price controls, while sometimes implemented to protect consumers, can also lead to unintended consequences such as shortages and black markets.  Ang malayang pamilihan, kung saan ang mga presyo ay tinutukoy ng supply at demand, ay karaniwang itinuturing na mas mahusay na paraan upang maglaan ng mga mapagkukunan.

Gayunpaman, may mga sitwasyon kung saan maaaring kailanganin ang interbensyon ng gobyerno sa pagtatakda ng presyo, tulad ng sa panahon ng mga kalamidad o kapag may monopolyo.  The government must carefully weigh the benefits and drawbacks of price controls before implementing them.  Mahalaga na ang anumang regulasyon sa presyo ay pansamantala lamang at nakabatay sa malinaw na katwiran.

TOMORROW, I shall leave on state visits to Madrid, Rome and Pakistan. These were scheduled together with my postponed state visit to the United States. With the deferment of my trip to America, it was necessary to continue with the state visits to the three other countries, otherwise an erroneous impression might be created that the latter were subordinated to the American trip, which should be avoided because all nations are equal in sovereignty and dignity.

It serves the national interest to cultivate our historic ties with Spain, our former mother country from whom we declared our independence on June 12, 1898 after over three hundred years of colonial relationship, during which Spain gave us the Christian religion. We have close spiritual ties with Rome, being the only Christian nation in Asia. A trip to Pakistan supports the national policy of promoting closer relations with Asian countries. Moreover, as the incumbent President of Pakistan has a reputation of having solved the problem of graft and corruption in that country, first hand observations of conditions there could be of value to our own efforts to bring about moral regeneration.

Any suggestion that we are making these visits to obtain pointers from dictators is both absurd and irresponsible. In state visits, the esteem and cordiality are not extended to the rulers but to the people. Italy is not a dictatorship. Pakistan has recently approved a constitution and elected its officials in a constitutional government.

In these state visits, I am accompanied by the smallest entourage to accompany a Philippine president. This is because whether traveling at home or abroad I do not believe in large entourages which bespeak wastefulness and lack of prudence in the handling of the people’s money. While my group in this trip is the smallest, I have seen to it that there shall be no sacrifice of efficiency in the proper undertaking of the visits and in the protection of the national interest and dignity.

In contemplating this trip, we must consider that a nation, like an individual, has relations and responsibilities with others. State visits are a practice by heads of state in the discharge of the responsibilities of the country in its relation with other states which should not be neglected even as attention is given to internal or domestic responsibilities.

In going out of the country for eighteen days,* I have taken steps that public affairs will be handled with virtually the same efficacy and competence as if the President were in the country. In accordance with the established practice since President Quezon and the practice in all countries, during my absence, administrative matters shall be handled in my behalf by the Executive Secretary and ceremonial functions by the Vice-President. Only my predecessor deviated from this practice by withholding from me as then Vice-President the handling of ceremonial functions. The affairs under the various departments will continue to be handled properly because it has been the Administration’s policy and practice to give discretion and authority to the department heads in the exercise of their prerogatives. Likewise, all executive officials who are charged with key responsibilities in the vital effort of prosecuting the Administration’s socio-economic program have been welded into a cooperative team who have performed in harmony and cooperation among themselves without need of constant presidential direction.

High Prices

Sa harap ng patuloy na pagtaas ng presyo ng mga bilihin, kinakailangan ang agarang pagtugon ng pamahalaan upang maprotektahan ang kapakanan ng mga Pilipino. Ang pagtaas ng presyo ng langis, pagkain, at iba pang pangunahing pangangailangan ay nagdudulot ng matinding hirap sa mga pamilyang Pilipino, lalo na sa mga mahihirap. 

Kailangan ng komprehensibong programa na magbibigay ng direktang tulong sa mga apektadong sektor, tulad ng mga subsidy, discount, at iba pang uri ng financial assistance. Dapat ding tutukan ang pagpapalakas ng lokal na produksyon upang mabawasan ang ating pagdepende sa imported na produkto. 

Mahalaga rin ang pagbabantay at pagkontrol sa presyo ng mga bilihin upang maiwasan ang profiteering at hoarding. Dapat magkaroon ng malinaw na mekanismo para sa pag-uulat at pagresolba ng mga reklamo tungkol sa overpricing. Kailangan din ng transparency sa presyo ng mga produkto at serbisyo upang malaman ng mga konsyumer kung sila ay nabibigyan ng tamang halaga. 

Ang paglutas sa problema ng mataas na presyo ay nangangailangan ng sama-samang pagkilos ng pamahalaan, pribadong sektor, at mga mamamayan. Kailangan ang isang holistic approach na isinasaalang-alang ang lahat ng mga salik na nakakaapekto sa presyo ng mga bilihin. We must work together to ensure food security and affordability for all Filipinos.

In view of the continuing importance of the problem of prices, may I now dwell on this subject.

Let me state first that our decontrol and socio-economic program is moving auspiciously and successfully. From the standpoint of the long-range benefits, it has fared well. We have been able also to cope with the ancillary problems that have arisen, such as a widely fluctuating dollar rate and the initially tight credit restrictions that the businessmen complained of. Now the fluctuation of the peso value of the dollar is slight; and in a short time, the Central Bank shall proceed to fix and support a stable rate. As to credit restrictions, these have been steadily relaxed, thereby releasing more funds to the business community. Now, the prime hindrance to more credit is the statutory limitation to banks at their present capitalization to furnish more credit. This, too, will be remedied as soon as Congress meets in session in order to provide more and desirable credit for business and economic expansion.

This morning, I had a breakfast conference with the Administration’s advisers from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, Messrs. Dragoslav Avramovic and Albert Mattera, respectively, in the presence of my economic assistants and business leaders. All were agreed that our program is proving to be the correct and sound one and what is more, that it has done admirably. I am gratified by the view of Mr. Mattera that due largely to the determined economic leadership provided by the Administration, conditions have been created which now make the Philippines one of the best investment fields in the world, as well as by the view of Mr. Avramovic that the Administration is on the unfailing road to success in its basic economic policy of not being satisfied with dividing a small cake but of enlarging the cake to be able to distribute enough to the Filipino people. It was gratifying that Mr. Avramovic’s view coincided with my own that because we have taken a sound basic policy, the subsidiary problem of high prices for a certain period is well within solution that should not prove difficult.

The outstanding ancillary problem of the Administration’s program is that of the continued high prices in some commodity items, particularly the tendency of some traders to unduly raise prices without concern for the hardships of the consumers, as well as an undue alarm being sounded by parties who either do not know the real situation, current and potential, or seek to undermine confidence in the Administration. In any event, we shall tackle this problem of high prices energetically. I am confident that we shall be able to cope with the problem successfully. We will do everything necessary. I have not failed in difficult tasks before. God willing, the Administration is not going to fail our people in this problem of prices.

The problem of high prices during the transition period was anticipated when the Administration instituted decontrol There are two modes of approaching this problem: the emergency one and the permanent kind. The difference between the two is that the emergency solution, while immediately effective in suppressing the rise of prices, would be a mere palliative which would adversely affect the outcome of the lasting solution to the Nation’s economic problems, whereas the permanent solution will in the end bring both prosperity and stable prices within easier reach of the people, altho entailing a transitional period of higher prices, especially of the commodities with a high imported component.

Because it is the one that will serve the true well-being of the people, the Administration has adopted the permanent solution, while at the same time applying measures to abbreviate the difficult period of transition. Among these measures are a vigorous rice and corn program, prudent consumer items, relaxation of special time deposits on essential imports and the price stabilization operations of the NAMARCO. Our people can rest assured that prices will not be allowed to rise to undue heights because the Administration is ever alert, in case of necessity, to step in and throw the full weight of its resources and authority to foil any exorbitant rise of prices.

Last night, I met with the economic leaders of the opposition party in Congress, including Senators Gil Puyat and Jose Roy, Congressmen Aguedo Agbayani and Juan Triviño, on the problem of prices, which proved to be helpful. Right now, I am glad to report to the Nation that prior to my departure for abroad, I have taken steps to solve the immediate problem of prices of prime commodities effectively. I have taken decisive steps to keep the prices of prime commodities within the reach of the common people to pay, as follows:

On the price of rice, I checked the situation with the Rice and Corn Administration under former Congressman Jose Felicias and I am satisfied with the assurance that there will be no problem on the price of rice and corn, much less a crisis.

On sugar, the sugar quota administrator has been assured by dealers headed by Francisco Gamboa and Antonio Roxas Chua that there is adequate supply of domestic sugar which will prevent a price increase.

On gasoline, the executives of the companies concerned, in an act of cooperation with the Administration and the people, have desisted from their plan to hike the price of gasoline next month.

On milk, the NAMARCO, which has heretofore supplied a maximum of 70% of the demand, has allocated funds to supply the total national demand at landed cost. In addition, the tax exemption for milk which expired this month has been extended. In the exercise of the presidential tariff powers, I have also today reduced tariff on milk in liquid and semi-finished form from 10% to 5% and on milk in solid form, which I reduced on January 21, 1962 from 15% to 10%, by a further reduction of from 10% to 8%. Towards a lasting solution to the problem of a low price for milk, I have likewise directed the Development Bank of the Philippines to allocate P10 million to provide credit for the immediate establishment of whole milk factories that will start production within the year.

In addition to these measures, I shall ask Congress in its forthcoming session, if there should be necessity, to pass legislation to provide a provisional peso subsidy in order to insure to our masses the supply of prime commodities at the lowest possible prices.

While thus taking all possible necessary steps, I must state, however, that in solving the problem of high prices, the cooperation of all concerned to our economic program is necessary. All should comply with the laws and should absolutely avoid bribery of officials. Persons with capital should now invest in the many opportunities for profitable enterprise which are available without restrictions, particularly since the possible stable dollar rate may now be safely estimated. Exporters should export their goods as soon as these are ready for exportation under their usual schedule in the past without speculating on changes in the exchange rate. Importers should not transgress the customs laws. Manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers should not unduly raise their prices and, if necessary, should be satisfied for the time being with less profits to maintain prices at more or less the prevailing levels. Customers should not pay unduly high prices for goods and should habituate themselves to buying substitutes which are available at lower prices. Everyone must act in a manner as to contribute to the success of the nation’s program for economic recovery and expansion under the new system of decontrol and free enterprise.

I redouble the plea for cooperation particularly to those who would speculate in and manipulate the prices of commodities to make undue profits irrespective of the consequent hardship of the people.

Let me remind this group and others that the Government of the Philippines, under its Constitution, has more than enough powers to protect the welfare of the people in any situation. If some of this reserve authority is not often utilized, it is because the proper safekeeping of the vast powers of the State calls for their exercise only to the extent necessary to accomplish the functions of government and considering that the severity of the law and justice is tempered by humane considerations. But when the welfare of the people is assaulted and therefore requires it, it is a recreant government and a disloyal leader who will not use the authority of the State to the utmost extent necessary against those who abuse their privileges as citizens or as foreign guests in order to demonstrate the adequacy and efficacy of the Constitution in promoting the welfare and happiness of the Filipino people.

I must state clearly now that if any offender pertaining to this group is a citizen, the full severity of the law will be employed against him for his wanton disregard of the well-being of the countrymen; and should he not be a native citizen, steps will be taken to divest him of Filipino citizenship which he has desecrated. If the offender should be a foreigner, in addition to the application of the full severity of the law against him, he shall be forthwith deported under the presidential plenary power of deportation, in which event neither his prominence nor the refusal of his home country to receive him will be allowed to frustrate the protection of the Philippine State against the menace of undesirable foreigners of his breed. I have made these statements clearly in order that there will neither be misunderstanding nor mistake. To avoid misunderstanding, I must state that it will be a mistake for anyone to take these statements lightly.

In the final analysis, the solution of the problem of high prices lies in the hands of the people themselves. Decontrol and free enterprise are based on the assumption that the people are the best judge of their common interests and will act accordingly. The free enterprise system is an implementation of faith in the Filipino. Since it places in the hands of the people the power to shape his economic life and future, it calls upon him the exercise of a sense of responsibility not to abuse that power but to use it to receive a fair share of its blessings, prevent harm to others and promote the common benefit. The system will be valid and will be justified to continue only to the extent that the components of the community are willing to discharge their appropriate responsibilities in exchange for their freedom and power under the system, to pursue their well-being.

In this connection, it is worthwhile to reproduce an excerpt from an article in yesterday’s issue of the Weekly Graphic , entitled “High Prices Are Your Problems”:

“In a free-enterprising economy, the emphasis is on local production, while importation is cut down to the absolute minimum. This means that ‘Filipino First’ ceases to be a mere administrative slogan and becomes a way of life for every Filipino, man, woman, and child. Everybody must eat Filipino, dress Filipino, ride Filipino—he must work to produce more of the things that he uses.

“Instead of buying canned sardines, dig a pond in your backyard and grow tilapia. Forget about imported bacon, and raise your own pigs. Never mind about imported butter until our dairy industry gets on its feet but raise chickens and eat chickens and eggs.

“Free enterprise? We asked for it. Now that we are free of controls, let us show that we have the enterprise to go with the situation. Prices are not the problem of the administration alone. They are your problem.”

Finally, I wish to say this to our people: I watch over what is happening to the economy and to the country during all my working hours day and night. I have no concern in my job as President except only the well-being of our people, especially the common masses. I believe that I know the remedies to the people’s problems, both permanent and palliative, and that there are adequate remedies for any given situation. I have given preference, to long-range and permanent remedies which require a temporary period of trials and hardships, but I will not allow those trials and hardships to be unduly prolonged. The Administration will move decisively to prevent such prolongation of hardships, especially if caused by persons who take advantage of the situation, seeking only their benefit without regard to the plight of others. I am resolved that being convinced of both the availability of adequate remedies to the people’s problems and of the authority to enforce those remedies, the Administration will apply effective remedies as conditions arise in order to minimize and shorten the period of temporary hardships without giving up the long-range benefits of our program for a better life for all our people.

In the discharge of the external obligations of our Republic, I shall be out of the country for eighteen days. I shall keep in touch with the country through my competent assistants and the wondrous means of communications in the world today. I shall employ to the full my experience in the foreign service in order that the countries visited shall enhance their esteem for the dignity, prestige and sovereignty of our Nation. My person shall be away but my heart and mind, my anxieties and my affection shall remain with our people.

I trust that in this brief period of my absence, all will heed my constant plea: Let us do our part as good citizens and inhabitants not to seek our welfare alone but to promote the success of the country’s program which is for the enduring well-being of all those who were born or have chosen to live in our land.

* The President and his party arrived late in the afternoon of July 17, 1962.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.