Radio-TV Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines

REASON FOR CAMPAIGN

Tomorrow I shall resume my campaign for the Liberal Party senatorial candidates. I have been campaigning for the Liberal Party candidates because of the conviction that numerical control of the Senate by the opposition makes it extremely difficult not to say impossible, to implement properly and successfully the five-year economic program which the Administration has launched to bring about a better life for our people. I hold to the view that placing the Senate in the control and under the responsibility of the Liberal Party is virtually a part of the program itself, hence it has been necessary for me to ask our people to elect the Liberal senatorial candidates, lest our program of economic and social progress for the people result in failure, to the detriment of the national welfare.

If the Liberal Party had a majority in the Senate, I would not have considered it necessary to take active part in this campaign. Because of the need of insuring the success of the Administration’s program for the people, however, I have borne the ordeal of actively participating in the campaign in accordance with my resolve to undergo every necessary labor, every sacrifice, and every hardship to succeed because the failure of our administration would bring back the graft and corruption and the hopeless difficulties that our people suffered under the Nacionalista regime.

SIX TO EIGHT LP WINNERS

As the current campaign approaches the homestretch, I am gratified that despite the irresponsible attacks of the opposition, our people have maintained their confidence in the administration, so that the best estimates show that six to eight of the Liberal Party candidates are likely to win in the senatorial election.

The issues raised by the opposition have largely been ineffective because they were not founded on facts and were grossly exaggerated. Thus, the opposition has failed to refute the fact that the Administration deserves the continued support of the people in their own welfare. This is as it should be, for, considering that only one year and nine months of its four-year tenure have elapsed and despite the gravity of the problems left by an eight-year Nacionalista regime and despite the obstruction of an NP-numerically controlled Senate, the Administration has established a record of performance that favorably vies with the eight-year performance of the previous NP administration.

THE RICE PROBLEM

There is one matter which I would like to take up as a matter of importance to our people, irrespective of whether it is involved in the current election or not. This is the matter of providing the basic food of our people; namely, rice and corn.

In my inaugural address, I pledged that in my administration, “the urgent emphasis shall be on our people’s need for staple food. . . . We shall bring about sufficiency in the production of rice and corn and make them available at prices within the reach of the masses.”

In view of the satisfactory corn situation, I will dwell on the rice problem.

The opposition has levelled many criticisms against the Administration on rice. They have criticized the importation of rice, to the extent of asking the courts to stop rice importations. Whatever may be their arguments, we ask this question: Will this criticism and attitude help the people? Will this criticism and attitude of the opposition provide the people with the rice that they need?

I submit that this is the difference between the Liberal Party and the Nacionalista Party. The Liberal Party believes in decisive action done in good faith and within the purview of the law in order to provide for the needs of the people. On the other hand, the Nacionalista Party believes in criticizing and fault-finding, without offering concrete courses of action to help the people. The Liberal Party stands on the proposition that we cannot provide for the needs of the people by engaging in criticism and fault-finding but that we can better help the people by acting positively to meet the needs of the people. If the opposition had been sincere, they would have offered solutions and an alternative program for rice—instead of criticizing the Administration continuously on this matter.

The following facts about the rice situation are now known. Last July, August, and September, this year, as in previous years, our people had difficulty buying the rice they needed because the prices were high. This was also true in previous years during the same period of non-harvest or lean months. This year, the prices were high in spite of the fact that the supply of available rice was increased by an importation amounting to 250,000 tons which the Administration, through its proper departments, procured from foreign governments at bargain prices. If our people during those past three months of July to September encountered difficulty in having their rice, even with the importations, their difficulties and hardships would have critically increased if rice had not been imported. Many of our poor people would have gone hungry because they would not have been able to afford the much higher increase in prices that would have occurred. But because the Administration imported rice, the people were saved from hunger.

The rice problem is a difficult one as shown by the fact that it has been with us since the time of President Quezon. With the information and observations gained in the past year and nine months, however, we feel confident that we will find the effective solution. To do this requires ample leeway of action in enacting the necessary legislative measures and in the form that is required. This cannot be done with the Senate numerically controlled by Nacionalistas who are more interested in causing the failure of the Liberal administration than in finding solutions to the problems of the people which they failed to solve during their eight-year administration. This is one important reason for our appeal to the people to place the Senate under the Liberal Party by electing the Liberal senatorial candidates in order to enable the Administration to enact the necessary measures as conceived by us and not as determined by the Nacionalista majority in the Senate.

In a nutshell, the rice picture is as follows: In 1961, the supply for the whole year was enough for the annual demand or over-all needs of the people but the distribution of supply was not adequate during the non-harvest months of July, August, and September.

The answer to the problem, therefore, is to improve the channels of distribution and to increase the production to have enough reserve during the harvest months beginning October in order that the excess production during the harvest months could be stockpiled for and distributed during the months of July to September.

With this end in view, the Administration in 1962 created the Presidential Rice and Corn Committee and later the RCA and bought palay at P11.50 and P12.50 a cavan whereas in the previous year palay was bought at P6.50 and P7.00 a cavan in order to induce an increase of production. At the same time, to help the masses during the lean months, RCA sold its rice at P0.95 a ganta. With this approach, the situation in 1962 proved to be successful, raising hopes that the success in 1962 would continue in 1963 and subsequent years.

During the early part of 1963, however, new factors tended to affect the situation adversely. Distribution encountered new problems with the transfer of trade from Chinese to Filipino hands. A mild drought reduced the harvest from what was originally anticipated. The virtually doubled profits from sugar and copra because of decontrol induced some rice planters to shift their crop from rice to sugar and coconut.

Taking note of these trends, despite the fact that the annual rice production in 1963 was, as in previous years, enough for the annual demand and therefore, in a sense, there was no shortage, I approved a request of the Department of National Defense to stockpile supplies, including rice, as a precautionary measure in the light of the security situation in Southeast Asia, after being convinced that DND stockpiling was within the purview of the law. In addition, I was convinced that a continuous stockpile of rice hereafter was necessary to help our people during the non-harvest months until the local rice production becomes abundant enough to make rice continuously available to the people, through improved distribution, in quantities that would prevent a rise in price during the months of July to September.

While serving the need for a stockpile for the Department of National Defense, it was also deemed advisable that the DND rice would be swapped with RCA palay during the lean months as an assistance to the people during the period when the supply of rice is not enough because, although palay is abundant, it cannot be converted into rice owing to limited milling capacity in the country. And come the harvest period, the RCA would be able to replace fully the DND rice with its abundant stocks of palay. For this reason, I also approved the rice-palay swapping arrangement between the DND and the RCA, as it would help to tide over our people during the lean months without prejudicing the stockpiling requirements of the DND.

PRODUCTIVITY, NOT MERE PRODUCTION

Pending the enactment of necessary measures by a Liberal-controlled Senate and House of Representatives to solve effectively the rice problem, the Administrationhas taken steps as far as practicable to cope with the problem. We have created a Rice and Corn Authority under Secretary Sixto Roxas to implement our long-range program to achieve self-sufficiency in rice by achieving the necessary productivity as distinguished from production at an unsatisfactory productivity. The Rice and Corn Authority has started the initial implementory project in Angat, Bulacan, in which the highest rice productivity, through the use of scientific farming, will be demonstrated in a large scale. Until such time as when we shall have reached our goals for productivity and production, the Philippine Government has entered into agreements with the Governments of Thailand, Burma, and Vietnam with a view to the continuous and indefinite importation of rice to keep our people from hunger during the lean months of July to September.

These importations will not prejudice the local rice growers because the RCA will buy their produce at prices that would be profitable for them so as to encourage them to increase their production. At the same time, the Rice and Corn Authority will undertake a program, for effectively increasing productivity in rice growing, thereby reducing the cost of production of the rice growers and increasing their profit.

In brief, the Administration has one firm resolve, namely, that within the reasonable purview of the law, we will exhaust all necessary efforts to provide rice to our people at all times of the year at prices within their reach. Our policy is and shall be more and more rice at less cost to more and more people.

In simple words, the Liberal Party Administration has imported rice in order to save the common people from hunger. If the Nacionalista Party had their way and no importation had been made, the Nacionalista approach would have precipitated hunger among the people.

The Liberal Party, however, cares about the hunger of our people. We are prepared to do everything that is reasonably permissible under the law to keep our people from going hungry. Conscious of my responsibility to our people, I shall not allow our people to go hungry. If there are two reasonable sides to the law, I for one will take that side which will save our people from hunger.

If we fail to take adequate steps to provide the food needed by our people, all those responsible for the decisions may jeopardize the existence of our democratic institutions of government which were intended to promote the welfare and not to cause the hunger of the people. We recall, in this connection, the admonition of President Franklin Roosevelt in the following words: “The millions who are in want will not stand by silently while the things to satisfy their needs are within their easy reach.”

FAULT-FINDING

The purpose of government and of participation therein is to render service to the people, provide for their needs and help them out in their difficulties. This is the difficult part of public service. It is difficult to serve; it is easier to criticize and find fault.

Indeed, the easiests thing to do in the world is to find fault. However, from my observation, it has been noted that those who are fond of fault-finding are themselves failures in the handling of important responsibilities.

I will give one illustration. I wish to refer to the Vice-President. In his entire career, he has specialized in the easiest thing to do, that is to find fault. First elected as a Liberal in 1949, instead of contributing to the constructive effort of the administration of which he was a part, he engaged in fault-finding and later joined the other party. Having joined the Nacionalista Party, he was given one specific task to do after the election of 1953, which was to negotiate a revised bases agreement with the United States. It is a matter of record that nothing came out of it. President Magsaysay was so disgusted with his performance that relations between the President and him became strained. Later he went back to his favorite activity of finding fault with the administration of which he was a part until he was expelled by the Nacionalista Party. Running for reelection as senator in 1959 as a critic of the administration, he was repudiated by the people.

In 1961, his old party, the Liberal Party, picked him up from his defeat by making him Vice-President, hoping that time, age, and experience would have mellowed him enough to enable him to engage in constructive activity since there was so much to do for our afflicted nation. The Liberal Party had hoped that he would have outgrown his flair for simply fault-finding and that he would do something concrete and constructive.

As Vice-President and secretary of foreign affairs, he was assigned to handle five specific matters, namely:

1. To handle the 1962 Muslim pilgrimage to Messa;

2. To handle the solution to the problems of the 2.700 overtaying Chinese aliens;

3. To handle the stabilization of Philippine-Japanese relations, with specific reference to the pending treaty of Navigation and Commerce;

4. To handle the preparations to meet the termination of the Laurel-Langley trade agreement with the United States by 1974; and

5. To handle the Philippine claim to Sabah (North Borneo) and the related Greater Malayan Confederation project.

Of these five matters entrusted to his hands, the first was a complete fiasco. On the second, he did nothing. On the third, he accomplished nothing. On the fourth, he did nothing. On the fifth, he was so evasive that the Administration had to ask Undersecretary Lopez to file the claim to Sabah with the British and when the decisive summit meeting of the three Malay States was to be held, he evaded the responsibility and quit his job unceremoniously.

Elected by the people in 1961 to help the Liberal Administration in solving the problems of the country, he ran away from this mandate of the people and returned to his habitual activity of fault-finding.

The Vice-President, indeed, is a classical example of a public official who is adept at fault-finding but who shies away from important responsibilities. In this connection, it should be mentioned that he is such an expert at fault-finding that he painted in September as black the same administration which in July he described as white.

The Vice-President, while adept at fault-finding, has himself unwittingly confessed to a lack of the basic quality required for dependable and constructive action. In his speech in Plaza Miranda, he asked for support of the administration and for the eight Liberal senatorial candidates. Now he claims that he made a mistake in that speech and asks the people to vote for the eight Nacionalista candidates. Recently, he said in another speech that he made a mistake in running for Vice-President with me in 1961. Now, how can the people depend on one who makes so many serious mistakes?

Since the opposition Nacionalista Party seems to have adopted the Vice-President as their leader, the opposition party thereby shows that they, too, have nothing constructive to offer to the country and that they pin their political future on the Vice-President’s mastery at fault-finding.

In this situation, I submit that if the people wish to have their problems solved and their lives improved, they must necessarily support the Liberal administration which has a concrete and constructive program and which it is implementing with steadily beneficial results.

ACTION VERSUS FAULT-FINDING

This election involves a choice between making the country move forward through decisive actions or allowing the nation to stand still. In this connection, we recall the time when President Theodore Roosevelt took decisive action to have the Panama Canal built and completed for the United States. Asked about the bitter criticisms that were being levelled against him by the opposition in the United States Congress, President Roosevelt answered: “It is a choice between action and criticism. If I heed the criticism, this canal will not be built in fifty years.” If criticism had prevailed over action, the canal would not have been built, and this might have been fatal to the security of the United States in the last two world wars.”

What is important for the people who are saddled with difficulties inherited from years past is performance rather than criticism and fault-finding. Realizing this, we are happy to face our people and say that although only one year and nine months have passed out of our four-year term and despite the obstruction of the Nacionalista-controlled Senate, our Administration has worked so hard and so faithfully that our performance has benefited our people and has accordingly elicited the commendation of non-political sources here and abroad.

ADMINISTRATION RECORD

Here, we quote the recent statement of Dr. Carlos P. Romulo, president of the University of the Philippines, on the performance of the Administration as follows:

“In introducing you, Mr. President, to our constituency, I would like to cite five important facts:

“First, you abolished controls in the face of predictions that such a step would be disastrous to the country. That your decision was a wise one is shown by the fact that today the peso is stable, a factor which is crucial in the soundness of our economy.

“Second, very early in your administration you launched the socio-economic program long needed by the country, and, today, we see the program contributing directly to the amelioration of the lot of all our people.

“Thirdly, you launched a moral regeneration campaign, striking hard at graft and corruption, and running tirelessly after the big fish and the small.

“Fourthly, you demonstrated exemplary diplomacy in bringing about the recent Summit Meeting and the emergence of Maphilindo. This summit conference will go clown in history as one of the greatest diplomatic triumphs of our Republic.

“Fifthly, it was your persistence and determination that made possible the enactment of the Land Reform Act, a milestone in the evolution of our common man from the slavery of tenancy to the freedom and security of a land-owning farmer, thus ensuring the stability and permanence of our democracy.

“These five achievements in the long tomorrow will be recorded by posterity to your everlasting credit.” ( The Manila Times , October 11, 1963.) Abroad, we quote the most recent of a series of commendations which have been written about the performance of our Administration in the economic field as follows:

“NEW YORK, October 8—(AP)—International Trade Review, a leading American magazine on foreign commerce, says that in the Philippines has been found an ‘overall picture that is exciting bankers and businessmen from many parts of the world.’

“The publication, one of the United States’ recognized experts on finance, said that this year Manila’s heavy influx of business visitors “is strictly for business.’ “

” ‘Although North American business visitors dominate the statistics, the Europeans, other Asians, and even some from South America are arriving in increasingly large numbers,’ it said, adding:

“ ‘That ingredient is the story of dynamic progress and it is dramatically visible wherever you go. . . .

” ‘It all began in early 1962 when President Macapagal unshackled the economy by dropping the burdensome controls on all phases of business . . . the government skillfully handled the transition from a stultified economy to an era of free enterprise.’ ” (The Manila Times , October 9, 1963.)

Now these are assessments by competent authorities. We ask our people to judge us not on the criticisms of the opposition and other disgruntled sources but also on the assessments of competent and authoritative observers of our national life.

NEED FOR LIBERAL SENATE

It is my conviction that the success of the Administration’s socio-economic development program requires that the Administration party should have a majority in the Senate and in the House of Representatives. This is a requirement in a representative democracy like ours. It is required for the country that the Administration should have a majority in both houses because it is the one responsible for the conduct of the people’s affairs subject to fiscalization by the opposition party. Fiscalization by the opposition party does not mean numerical control by the opposition party in either or both chambers, otherwise what will result is neither fiscalization nor check-and-balance but deadlock. The opposition party should be in the minority in both chambers so that after legislative measures are debated upon, with the majority taking into account the fiscalizing arguments and maneuvers of the opposition, the majority party will decide upon the enactment of the measures and their final contents commensurate with its responsibility as the one charged with the conduct of the people’s affairs.

A Liberal Senate does not mean that the dominant Liberal senators will just do the bidding of the President. The high quality of the Liberal senators and candidates assures against such figment of the imagination. What a Liberal Senate means is that with fiscalization on the part of the Nacionalista minority, the Liberal majority senators will assume responsibility for the administration to our people for the enactment of needed legislation recommended by the President in the form desired by the Liberals and not by the Nacionalistas. In this manner, the Liberal administration can be held fully responsible to the people for what it can accomplish and what it can not accomplish in accordance with our party system of government, because the Liberals would then have the authority corresponding to their responsibility. If the Liberal senators do not cooperate enough with the President, which can happen, the consequent failure of the administration will remain as a responsibility of the Liberal Party administration. With a Senate controlled numerically by the Nacionalistas, however, the Liberal administration not only has the slimmest chance of succeeding but the Liberal administration would still be asked to assume responsibility although the authority would be exercised by the Nacionalista majority in the Senate. This is the height of inequity and a misconception of the nature and usefulness of representative government.

Even in advanced democracies like the United States, numerical control by the opposition in either or both chambers of the lawmaking body is regarded as not conducive to the national welfare. It should be more so in the Philippines where politicians are more rabidly partisan in their outlook than in the United States. It is an anachronism in government to expect responsibility from the Administration for the conduct of the people’s affairs when the opposition by its superior number in the Senate can tie the hands of the Administration by withholding approval to measures desired by the Administration or by imposing provisions that would render ineffectual or unsuccessful the attainment of the purposes of the legislative measures.

We have seen these actually happen in the two congressional sessions in 1962 and 1963. Vital measures were not enacted such as the investment incentives law, a law to enable the President to guarantee foreign loans to private individuals as a means of raising much-needed capital and a law increasing the appropriations of the NAMARCO in order to reduce the prices of prime commodities. On the other hand, vital laws which were passed were loaded with provisions that rendered them ineffectual to attain successfully the objectives of the law. This is best shown in the RCA law which prohibits the importation of rice by the RCA even if the people should go hungry.

The problems of our people which we are called upon to solve under our administration are no less difficult than those confronted by previous regimes. Yet in all previous administrations, the administration party had a majority in both houses of Congress. Under President Quezon, a Nacionalista, the Navionalista Party had a majority in both houses of Congress. Under President Osmeña, a Nacionalista, the Nacionalista Party had a majority in both houses. Under President Roxas, a Liberal, the Liberal Party had a majority in both houses. Under President Quirino, a Liberal, the Liberal Party had a majority in both houses. Under President Magsaysay, a Liberal turned Nacionalista, the Nacionalista Party had a majority in both houses of Congress. Under President Garcia, a Nacionalista, the Nacionalista Party had a majority in both houses.

If in spite of the majority that their party had in both House of Congress, these previous administrations encountered difficulties in solving the problems of our people, it would amount to a deliberate disregard of the people’s welfare to deny to the present administration the same facility of having a majority in both Houses of Congress in meeting the grave problems in our day which must be effectively solved in order to give a chance to all the people to attain a better and happier life.

Under the administration of President Magsaysay although there were only four opposition men in the Senate as against eighteen Nacionalistas, in the senatorial elections of 1955, President Magsaysay successfully sought the election of seven more NP senators as against one opposition senator in order to help him further in his administration. In the election of 1959, in spite of the fact that there were twenty-one Nacionalista senators as against three opposition senators, President Garcia successfully sought five out of eight new senators in order to help him better in his administration.

With these precedents, to deny the appeal of President Macapagal for the election of the Liberal senatorial candidates in this election which will enable the Administration to have a majority in the Senate like all previous administrations, would mean singling out President Macapagal as the only President to be saddled by a Senate numerically controlled by the opposition, which would be contrary to the interest of the country and the welfare of the people.

For the good of the country, I therefore appeal to all good citizens in our people’s interest to elect the well-qualified Liberal senatorial candidates as follows:

1. Senator Eulogio Balao, retired general of the Armed Forces. Bataan hero, conqueror of General Yamashita, fighter for the rights of veterans, their widows, and orphans;

2. Senator Ambrosio Padilla, fighter for public morality and for the Constitution to insure against the rise of dictatorship in our land;

3. Senator Rogelio de la Rosa, man and champion of the masses;

4. Rep. Gerardo Roxas, economist, son of President Manuel Roxas;

5. Juan Liwag, secretary of justice in my Cabinet, fighter against graft and corruption who, on my order, deported alien corrupters of public officials, the American Harry Stonehill and the Chinese Peter Lim;

6. Dr. Manuel Cuenco, administrator of economic coordination in my Cabinet, a physician fighting for the health of the people, particularly the children and women;

7. Tecla Ziga, social welfare administrator in my Cabinet, fighter for women’s rights and the well-being of the unfortunate;

8. Cesar Climaco, administrator of economic coordination in my Cabinet, fighter for good government against all crooks in all parties.

With the election of these Liberal senatorial candidates, the Administration will have a majority in the Senate. Being thereby able to work with a majority in both houses of Congress like the other presidents before us, our people can count on us in discharging our responsibilities not only to push through our moral regeneration drive and our five-year socio-economic program for a better life for the people but also to solve in an effective manner the current problems like the problem of providing rice to our people and the general problem of prices.

CONFIDENCE AND COURAGE

It is of the essence of the presidential system of government that after an Administration has been installed for a specific period, it should receive the support of the people during its tenure for the execution of its program of government. It is in the next presidential election thereafter that the people will decide whether to continue supporting the party in power or shift its support to the opposition. To withhold support from an incumbent Administration during its tenure would put to waste the efforts of the Administration and the energy of the people to the detriment of the country’s welfare.

To give undue credence to opposition criticism in the middle of an administration over and above giving a chance to the Administration to execute its program means destroying the program itself by denying to it the confidence that the people and the leadership should forge together to implement the program successfully. It was this mutual confidence and courage between the people and the Administration that helped to pull America out of its worst peace-time economic crisis in 1932 after it installed the administration of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Let the ringing words of wisdom of President Roosevelt echo among our people in the midst of the moral degeneration and economic stagnation which our Administration has been elected to remedy:

“Confidence and courage are the essentials of success in carrying out our plan. You must have faith; you must not be stampeded by rumors or guesses. Let us unite in banishing fear. We have provided the machinery to restore our financial system; it is up to you to support and make it work.

“It is your plan no less than mine. Together we cannot fail.”

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.