Radio-TV Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines In the program, “President Macapagal Speaks to the Masses”

[Released on May 18, 1963]

Obstacles to Economic Progress

WE ARE MAKING only tonight our first radio-TV chat with the people for this year because it is only now that the picture of the national situation has cleared at the closing time of the regular session of Congress. Our State-of-the-Nation message to Congress last January contained the national situation at the beginning of the year and the measures needed to bring about the progress that the people seek. It was necessary for us to watch for the action or inaction of Congress on these measures before we could update our assessment of the nation’s problems.

Now as Congress is about to end, we regret to make the estimate that Congress, particularly the Nacionalista opposition, have not done their duty to the people of passing the Administration’s legislative proposals to implement the Nation’s program of economic and social progress and reforms.

It is a pity that the Nacionalista senators did not see their way clear to turning over the full responsibilities to the Liberal Party for the conduct of the people’s affairs, which would have enabled the Administration to enact the necessary measures. The enactment of the Administration bills was the remaining thing needed to open the kingdom of a better life for our masses. It was a case of, for want of full Nacionalista cooperation, “for want of a nail, a kingdom was lost”—or delayed.

It is all the more a pity because with all the odds and handicaps with which we commenced our herculean task of economic, social and moral reforms, knowledgeable experts agree that we have forged ahead. It is noteworthy, for instance, that in its report to the U. S. Congress, the State Department has included this year the Philippines with Taiwan and Thailand as the stable economies in Asia.

PRICES

In making an assessment of the economic situation, let us take a look at the significant problem of prices. At the time we took over, the prices were soaring without hope of remedial restraint in their rise. Had the past administration stayed in power, with its lack of economic orientation and its systematized corruption, prices now would have doubled or trebled their present level.

Because of the success of decontrol, however, as well as the successful launching of our five-year socio-economic program, the prices in the Philippines are now among the lowest in the world.

All those who have been abroad can attest to the higher prices in other countries than those in the Philippines. A tomato costing five centavos in our country costs eighty centavos in Japan. “Pancit mami,” which costs seventy centavos here costs five pesos there. One-fourth of a melon costs twelve pesos abroad while here the whole melon costs one peso. The “alimasag” which costs fifty centavos here costs five pesos abroad. A chicken which costs three pesos here costs eight pesos abroad. Beef which costs four pesos and fifty centavos a kilo here costs eight pesos abroad.

Coca-Cola which costs twelve centavos here costs forty centavos abroad. Gasoline which costs twenty-six centavos a liter here costs seventy-eight centavos abroad. Carnation milk which costs fifty-five centavos here costs one peso and fifty centavos abroad. A loaf of bread which costs forty centavos here costs one peso and eighty centavos abroad. Ordinary rice which costs from eighty-five to ninety-five centavos per ganta at the RCA or one peso and ten centavos at the private dealers costs from five to eight pesos abroad.

While the prices of goods are rising in all countries of the world, without any exception, the rise of prices in our country has been moderate. An Associated Press survey of world prices at the end of last year showed that the highest prices are in France, Italy and the United States while the lowest prices are in Holland, the Philippines and Egypt.

RICE

With reference to the price of rice and the available supply, last year there was an abundant supply of RCA rice at prices from P0.85 to P0.95, even during the traditionally lean months of August to October.

We are accepting the estimate of the RCA and the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources that there is also sufficient supply this year. The difficulties in distribution which have been encountered in the last few days, simultaneously with the shift in trading from alien to Filipino hands as directed by law, are now being coped with. Considering the sufficiency of the supply and the improving distribution, we are confident that as last year, there will be sufficient supply of rice this year at the RCA prices of from P0.85 to P0.95, even during the lean months of August, September and October. At the proper time we shall release additional information regarding rice which further insures sufficiency of the rice supply in any eventuality.

In general, considering the moderate rise of prices in our country and the increasing income of exporters, producers, farmers and workers, the economic situation may be that, after the successful surgical operation of decontrol on the ailing economy and the application of the correct medicine which is the five-year socio-economic program, the economic patient is not yet well but is now feeling better and on the way to recovery and robust health.

This is gratifying, especially if we look back to the beginning of our term more than a year ago. Although we successfully put decontrol into effect and launched a five-year integrated socio-economic development program, we have been handicapped by an opposition-dominated Congress. All presidents before us worked with a Congress controlled by their party. It soon became clear that it was only by also having the two Houses of Congress controlled by our party that we could move ahead. Before the end of last year’s session, our party acquired control of the House through the increase of Liberal members to sixty-one out of one hundred four and the consequent election of Speaker Cornelio Villareal. The House thereafter quickly passed the Administration measures. Since our party failed to acquire control of the Senate, the latter body failed to approve the Administration measures.

In this year’s session, our party succeeded in electing as Senate President, Senator Ferdinand Marcos but failed to obtain the other Senate posts, including the chairmanship of the vital Committee on Rules and other committees. There is still a deadlock between twelve Nacionalistas and twelve Liberals. Because of this situation, the Senate will fail to pass the Administration measures as last year. The dominant Nacionalista senators in the committees, will, of course, pay lip service to cooperation for measures for the good of the people but between lip service and performance there is a wide chasm. We must accept the fact that in democracy, as it operates in the Philippines the only way to pass Administration measures in a satisfactory scope and form is for the President and the two chambers of Congress to belong to the same party.

We are, therefore, resigned to non-passage of the Administration measures and the consequent delay in the implementation of our program of economic and social progress for the people for one year due to the obstruction of the Nacionalista senators. Only today, in a morning paper, an economic writer, Hector Villanueva, observed that “it is undeniable that the Philippine Congress must shoulder part of the shortcomings of the Administration since the political immobilise has undermined all the honorable efforts of the Government to accelerate economic development.”

We fervently hope that as a result of the senatorial elections this coming November, in next year’s session, the Administration party will obtain full control of the Senate, thereby enabling the Nation to move forward in its program for a better life for our people. We also hope that both Houses of Congress will at this session pass at least the national budget, the land reform bill and the public works bill as a minimum performance of duty to the people.

From the events of the past year and a half, highlighted by the adamant non-cooperation of the Nacionalista senators, we can now say that at this second year of our Administration we have enough opportunity to perceive with clarity the obstacles to the solution of our grave problems and the chances for such successful solution.

MAIN PROBLEMS

We reiterate our conviction that the main need and problem of the country is increased production in industry, agriculture, mining and other economic activities in such magnitude and pace as to outstep the growth of population. Among the principal obstacles to the successful meeting of this prime problem are some unfavorable traits and attitudes of the people themselves, as well as their leaders.

We shall point to three of these impeding, unfavorable traits, namely: (1) That our sense of responsibility has not measured up to our enjoyment of liberty; (2) That there is a deficiency of unselfish attitude; and (3) That there is a lack of proper perspective relatives to the importance and gravity of the national problems.

There is no question that we have found the correct solution to our economic difficulties consisting of our successful decontrol operation and the launching of a sound socio-economic development program which only awaits vigorous implementation through a united national effort. Not only local but foreign experts are unanimous in this assessment and conclusion. Only the other day, a highly authoritative business leader, A. Calhoun, demonstrated that decontrol proved to be a wise decision.

It was, therefore, with eagerness and expectation that we sent the necessary economic measures to Congress in its current regular session in order that we could mount the vigorous implementation of our program for rapid economic and social progress.

Yet, as the regular session on which we pinned so much hope is about to end, what is the situation?

First, we are confronted with the spectacle that the rabid Nacionalistas and newspaper columnists, instead of encouraging us in our earnest endeavor of giving at long last a break to the people, continuously needle us, insult us, obstruct us and discourage us in the name of freedom.

FIRST OBSTACLE

Because of this situation, we say that the first obstacle to the solution of our economic problem is the sad truth that our sense of responsibility as a people has not kept pace with our love for liberty.

We are with those who maintain that we are among the staunchest freedom-loving peoples in the world. This is a virtue for which we are grateful to Divine Providence. We have spurned the superficial accusation that we have dictatorial tendencies because we, too, believe strongly in freedom and we thank God that He has imbued our people with a passion for liberty.

But true liberty has its responsibility. Liberty is not license. In our country, we seem to be so much for liberty that in its practice we commit license. Yet we must make it clear that we ourselves are such ardent lovers of liberty that if we were forced to make a choice between license and regulation of liberty, we would prefer licentious freedom to regimentation because licentious freedom can in due time count on its inherent corrective quality of self-discipline while regimentation can lead to despotism and tyranny.

Still, we invite attention to the dangerous result of licentious freedom—chaos, which our ideological enemies are waiting for. While if forced to make a choice between licentious freedom and regimentation we would prefer the former, yet we would also prefer true freedom to license.

We feel it our duty, therefore, to underscore, the fact that licentious freedom is endangering the success of our earnest program of economic, social and moral progress for our people.

Indicative of this fact is the spectacle of our oppositionist politicians and columnists abusing the dignity of the Presidency of the Republic thru vulgar and irresponsible language. Irrespective of who is the president of our country, the President embodies the sovereignty and dignity of our people. For an oppositionist politician and columnist to refer with derision to the President, especially without concrete basis, and to hurl slanderous attacks and insults upon him, without concrete proof, is not only to commit unpardonably licentious freedom but to insult the sovereignty and dignity of our people whom the President, by their mandate, embodies.

Are the people of this country, who take pride in being educated and responsible people, going to tolerate for long this abuse of respect to the Presidency in the name of licentious freedom of speech?

On our part, as President, we do not mind being criticized but we do mind being insulted. We will give time to our people to summon their innate sense of righteousness and power to put a stop to the irresponsible and destructive abuse of liberty committed against their President. On our part, we feel that we cannot leave our position of President which our people entrusted to us without first discharging our inescapable duty of protecting and upholding the dignity of the Presidency against those who mistakenly believe that licentious freedom is higher than the dignity and honor of their President.

In the face of the evil tactics of the opposition to smear us unjustly even as they criminally cast aside the pressing economic and social problems of our country, we wish to make the reminder that we have been in public life since 1950 to the present time, being elected by our people from congressman to the presidency, in a period of twelve years; and that in the atmosphere of nauseating corruption prevalent in our country since the end of the war, our people would not have elected us to the presidency in such a period of time, if we had associated at all ourself with things corrupt, evil or anomalous.

Indeed, we have always endeavored to adhere to ethical norms of public life. Let us look at the mental facts. Among all presidents in our Republic, we are the poorest in material circumstances. In view of our financial straits we would be in need of enriching ourself more than the others. Have we done so? Absolutely not. Likewise, they being of poorer circumstances than we are, our immediate relatives, more than the relatives of other presidents, were in need of exploiting their relationship with us to enrich themselves. Have they done so? They have not. This is due to the creed of integrity that has become the tradition in our humble family.

We have been president now for one year and a half. Our modest material position has not improved since we entered public life thirteen years ago. Until now, we do not even have our own house. Countless officials, both elective and appointive, have built or acquired better homes, upon improving their official positions and compensations. Many senators, congressmen, governors and cabinet members, have done this. The former President himself, among his first acts, was to build a mansion on Bohol Avenue. On our part, this is one thing that we have not even thought of because all our working hours are spent on formulating plans for a better country, implementing them and seeking means of overcoming the thoughtless and vicious obstacles put on the way of the country’s progress by the opposition and other thoughtless critics.

If the opposition ever hope by judging us the standard and acts of their leaders in the past administration, that we will also commit the mistake of directly or by knowing tolerance indulging in corruption, they might as well hope forever because we will rather stop breathing than commit this betrayal of the ethical creed that we have sustained throughout our life. We renew the vow that with God’s continuing grace, while we shall labor so that all our countrymen will attain a better life, on our part, as long as we are president, we and our family will not enrich ourselves by one centavo beyond our compensation as an indispensable part of our duty as leader of the Nation who is interested in bringing about moral regeneration among our officials and among the people.

Let this be made clear. If the opposition prefer to indulge in sensationalism and pretend to show that we are corrupt or as corrupt as the former President and that our relatives are as corrupt or more corrupt as the relatives of the former President, we are ready to give them full opportunity to thresh out the truth on this issue provided that they approve the economic and social legislation needed by our expectant people.

STONEHILL CASE

On the Stonehill case, if the opposition want to expose the case to the full, we are ready to oblige them. After the Liberal administration destroyed the Stonehill web of corruption, proceeded to collect his tax liabilities, deported him forever from the country, and relieved two cabinet members and fifteen officials, for deterrent purposes we feel that we have sufficiently served the interest of our people in this case. We feel that having already done this, to exhume the foul cadaver of the Stonehill affair would only distract the Nation’s time from its prime task of economic progress and permit that man to unnecessarily cause more harm to the country than the havoc he already wrought.

However, if the opposition want to subordinate the national welfare to sensationalism by a full expose of the Stonehill affair, we are prepared to go along this step if only so that this case may cease to distract the Nation from its program of progress. Indeed, we are at the edge of our patience over the pretense of some opposition politicians that the Liberals have more to hide than the Nacionalistas in relation to Stonehill. The naked fact is that the Nacionalista administration and leaders created Stonehill and his web of corruption; while the Liberal administration and leaders destroyed him and his web of venalities. In order that we may get rid of this distraction from the economic effort, we are ready to expose the full details of the Stonehill affair in a manner that will spare no one, including the highest officials of the past administration, those who pose to be desirous of exposing this affair both in the Senate and the House, and all those who did favors for Stonehill and his associates.

The present Secretary of Justice and I are ready at a proper time to establish the following with documentary evidence: first, that the Nacionalistas, from their President and his kin down to numerous Nacionalista subordinates benefited from Stonehill and in return helped him create and operate his web of corruption; second that despite hypocritical insinuations to the contrary, the present leaders of the administration have not done any favors to Stonehill but on the contrary destroyed the Stonehill web of corruption; and third, that the former Secretary of Justice protected his Chinese client and a personal friend, a fellow Nacionalista, in such a manner as to make him unfit to deserve the confidence of the Filipino people.

In this connection, in the face of the vicious and futile attempts of irresponsible Nacionalista leaders to smear us, we say finally before God Almighty that our conscience is clear of any guilt of misusing our public office for material gain. We wonder if those Nacionalistas and others who try to smear us can truthfully say the same of themselves.

SIMPLE LIVING

With reference to the trip of our children, may we say this: The First Lady and I have adopted, as temporary residents of Malacañang, simple living to which we have become accustomed. We believe that it would be of help to the moral regeneration program of my administration if the same can be followed by other leaders and by our people, but we realize that we can only hope for this and are in no position to compel anyone to practise the same. It is regrettable that this creed of simple living in which we believe has been meanfully distorted for political purposes. The only thing we can do is to state our concept of simple living, leaving it to our other leaders and countrymen to practise it as we intended it to mean.

What do we mean by simple living? To us, simple living means frugal and dignified living within one’s means. It means neither wasteful and extravagant nor shabby living.

It applies both to the poor and the rich. To the poor, it means frugal living in as dignified a manner as their poverty will allow. This is why, even to the poor, simple living does not embrace shabby living.

On the other hand, to the rich, it means dignified living commensurate with their station but frugal enough not to be wasteful and extravagant.

In the light of this concept of simple living which the First Lady and we always had in mind, we spurn the malicious and political smear that the educational trip which we allowed our children, with their grandmother as companion, is contrary to simple  living. We regard it not only the right but the duty of parents to provide the best possible education to their children as their means will allow. We believe in travel as highly educational. This is exactly the nature of the trip of our children, with the assistance of their grandmother who is financially in a position to do so.

It is sought to be made to appear that our children’s trip violates our creed of simple living because they were accommodated in the best suites of the ocean liner, which constituted the first lap of their trip. Our children applied only for ordinary first-class passage, which was what we could afford; but the liner management offered the courtesy, without extra cost, of accommodating them in their best suites in accordance with their universal practice to grant this courtesy to the immediate family of all heads of state. We accepted the courtesy because to decline courtesies accorded to the Chief of State of our country in accordance with international practice would mean being recreant to our duty to protect the dignity of our country and its Chief Executive.

In brief, it is our sincere judgment that the accommodation of our children and their traveling companion, my mother-in-law, in the best suites of the ocean liner where they traveled, was in accordance with the true concept of simple living because they paid only what we can frugally afford and they were accorded the courtesies that in dignity pertain to the children of a head of state.

The tendency to convert liberty into license is a roadblock to our progress because the alacrity for licentious freedom results in the loss of self-discipline which is necessary for constructive economic organization and endeavor, particularly in the system of free enterprise. In this connection, we agree with the observation made by one of our thoughtful economic thinkers, Bernardino Ronquillo, that free enterprise succeeds among peoples who have the quality of self-discipline.

“The former autocratic or totalitarian countries that have become democratic and encouraged free enterprise are now the most progressive. They have attained the fastest rate of growth after the war.

“West Germany has demonstrated what free enterprise under a democratic system can do to lift a war-ravaged country to the fastest growing economy with the highest national income in Europe.

“Italy too has shown considerable gains under the free enterprise system.

“Japan is at an even higher level of industrial development than at any time in its history with full employment and the highest standard of living in Asia.

“What is important to remember is that the most progressive countries in the world today have not attained their present state of development or economic gains through free enterprise.

“A certain degree of self-discipline has accompanied their march to progress. There is no such thing as absolute free enterprise, in the same way that there is no such thing as absolute freedom.

“Developing countries trying to get out of chaotic conditions brought about by the last war need self-discipline even more.

“What we need in the Philippines is not free enterprise alone. We also need self-discipline.” ( Manila Daily Bulletin , May 7, 1963.)

SECOND OBSTACLE

The second obstacle to the effective solution of the prime problem of economic growth is that many of those who are taking part in shaping a better future for our people think only of themselves and do not think of others—namely, our people. If our leaders from both parties could but genuinely think not only of themselves but also of others, particularly of the people, there would be a miraculous change in the manner they play their roles in the national effort and an equally miraculous spurt in the Nation’s progress.

Among businessmen who supported the past corrupt regime, there are still those who endeavor to obstruct the administration in carrying out the socio-economic program notwithstanding that its implementation is conducive to better business and to better living conditions for the people. Among opposition politicians, the only thing they are interested in is that the party in power must be debunked, regardless of the injurious effect on the economy and the people’s well-being go hang. It is sad to admit but it is true that there are members of Congress who are unconcerned about the crusade of the Administration as long as they themselves manage to continue in office.

We ardently hope that our legislators will fully realize that times have changed, bringing in new challenges and responsibilities. Before, a lawmaker could manage doing his work by average or casual attendance to his tasks with occasional avowal of serving the people. Now, such nonchalant discharge of legislative duty will not suffice. Today, the people expect that their lawmakers will give full support with courage and determination to those measures of reform which will truly-open opportunities of a better life to all the people.

THIRD OBSTACLE

The third obstacle to the solution of the paramount economic problem is the lack of proper perspective on the true needs of the people at this particular time. Among the many conflicts of views that arise in a democracy, there is an inability on the part of so many to pick out the grain from the chaff.

Thus, many do not realize that our main problem today and in this generation is to create the conditions for a rapid rate of economic growth that will not only elevate the level of living of our existing population but will thereafter be able to keep pace with the growth of population. Many do not understand that while other problems are also important and vital, the economic problem is the paramount one.

As a result of this lack of perspective, some have no concern for our economic program and prefer to indulge in character assassination, clever inuendo, endless argumentation, and other recriminatory acts that in their totality tend towards dissension and confusion which is detrimental to a concentrated implementation of the economic program.

We do not mind dissension; and, if the opposition wish, even confusion do not jeopardize the vigorous implementation of our program for economic and social progress.

Yet, what has been happening is the reverse. More importance has been given, particularly by the opposition, to the other and lesser problems in disregard of the main problem of economic and social progress. Thus, in the Senate, the opposition have shown more concern for sensationalizing the Stonehill web of corruption and in the House, the opposition have shown more concern for putting in ignominy, although without basis, the President’s relatives, first, the President’s children, then his brother and married daughter and then his mother-in-law.

In the meantime, vital legislation needed for the vigorous implementation of the Nation’s five-year socio-economic development program has been neglected and cast aside. In our estimate, the present session of Congress faces the heaviest and most far-reaching legislative agenda in our history. The administration bills alone constitute twenty-six economic measures, the land reform bill, revenue measures, electoral reform, the calling of a Constitutional Convention, apart from the national budget, public works bill and other measures which the Congress may in its initiative propose as its own program for the solution of the nation’s grave problems.

It is only a few days before the end of the session, yet the vital economic and social measures have practically been set aside.

While it looks now to be impossible to pass these measures, so intense is our longing for things to be done to give a break to our people who have long been languishing in hardships, that we are still hoping against hope for the miracle of a change of will and heart on the part of the Nacionalista senators that would enable the Congress to approve in the last days of the session the pending economic and social legislation which constitute the solution to our people’s problems.

The opposition and some thoughtless persons are guilty of sowing confusion whereas the need is for cooperation in a national effort to implement the Nation’s economic program. In the midst of this tendency to confusion we must make our attitude clear. There are two ways of discharging the task of the presidency: (1) to act in order to win more supporters even if what is to be done is not good for the people; or (2) to do what is best for the people even if it means displeasing others and losing supporters.

We encountered this dilemma early on our assumption of the Presidency. There were influential individuals and sectors who had supported our predecessor because they received undue favors from him. It would not have been difficult for us to win over these individuals and sectors to support us and our administration by doing them the same favors which they received under the past administration.

Our decision however, was to adopt the second mode of discharging the presidency, that is, to do what is best for the people, even if it means displeasing others and losing supporters. The result is that while in the judgment of objective observers here and abroad, the country is moving in the right course under our administration, some individuals and sectors who fought against us in the past in support of a corrupt regime have continued to oppose, calumniate, and fight us and our administration.

We are not, however, daunted. Since we represent the sovereign will and aspiration of all our people for a better life, we cannot be daunted because the spirit of the people must not ever be dismayed by odds and roadblocks to their effort for a better living.

In this connection, our attention has been drawn to the thoughts of one of our countrymen, Jose Rosas of 1006–J Int. Pandacan, Manila, who in an article published in a morning daily on May 8, 1963, said:

“In the Philippines, even the highest official of the land, the President, can become horse manure in the hands of critics by their personal attacks and sarcastic commentaries.

“From the time Manuel L. Quezon assumed the presidency of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, and then from Sergio Osmeña down to President Manuel Roxas, Quirino, Magsaysay, Garcia and Macapagal, all these Filipino Presidents, not one of them ever escaped the tirades and philippics of critics in the halls of Congress, in plazas and over the radio.

“There is no perfect Filipino President. Even Magsaysay had enemies and bitter critics. During elections we vote for the best man and placed him in the highest position with all the ardor of devout parishioners. But once that same man had already assumed the presidency, like Jesus Christ after Palm Sunday, we hurl stones and spit at the man whom we cheered during the inauguration at the Luneta grandstand.

“It’s really a martyrdom to become President of the Philippines.”

We shall carry on the martyrdom of being President. We shall continue bearing the heavy cross of leading our impoverished people to better times. We may be jeered, maligned and stoned on the way; we may even fall as we carry the cross; but we will rise and keep on, nourished with strength by the faith that at the end of the agonizing journey, a better life awaits our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.