Radio-TV Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On the Program “President Macapagal Speaks to the Masses”

[Delivered on November 29, 1962]

DEFECTION AND ARRASTRE

THE MAIN ENDEAVOR of the Administration is our five-year integrated socio-economic development program. After the successful shift from the system of controls to the system of free private enterprise, we are now in the second phase of the program, which is the faithful and vigorous implementation of the program.

As we expected, the implementation of the socio-economic program is well underway. We have solved the vital rice problem by assuring a good price to rice producers and an abundant supply to consumers at prices ranging from P.85 to P.95 per ganta. Although we have just started the implementation of the program the reduction in the rate of increase in prices under the present Administration has been such that an Associated Press survey of world prices disclosed on Nov. 22, 1962, that prices in the Philippines today are among the lowest in the world, next only to the low prices in The Netherlands. According to this survey, the countries with the highest prices are France, Italy and the United States, while the lowest prices are in The Netherlands, Philippines and Egypt.

Among the countless experts and business executives from other nations who have lauded the economic trend in the Philippines, Alfred Wentworth, vice-president of the Chase Manhattan Bank, on November 27, 1962, described the Philippines as now “one of the best investment possibilities in the Far East because of: ‘1 The decontrol program implemented by the present Administration and 2. The government’s positive action against graft and corruption.’”

Stephen Streeter, president of the American Tourist Association, after a tour which included other countries of Asia, declared on Nov. 22, 1962, that with the policies of the present Administration, the Philippines will soon become “the center of tourism in East Asia.”

Dr. S. Savkar, director of the Asian department of the International Monetary Fund, after weeks of observing the Philippine economy, declared on Nov. 24, 1962, that if we continue in the direction we have taken under our socioeconomic program, the Philippines looms to become in a few years as prosperous as, if not more prosperous than, Japan. Dr. Savkar said:

“Within the last 10 months, the Philippine economy has fared much better than most countries trying the same experiment. The introduction of decontrol in any country carries with it a period of readjustment of the economy and economic policies. However, the success so far by the local decontrol program has reflected on the government’s determination to make such adjustments smooth and easy for the people. Your government is doing its best to lead the nation forward, and your economic prospects are very promising. You surely are moving in the right direction.”

Indeed, because the courageous, constructive, and sound economic policies adopted by the Administration are geared to the awakening and utilization of the innate strength of the national economy, with the passage of time, and the continued cooperation of all necessary sectors, our economy will continue to improve and give rise to greater investments, increased production, more jobs and the stabilization of prices within the reach of the people.

Satisfied with the trend of progress for which we exerted grueling efforts to bring this about in the face of unnecessary self-seeking maneuvers of political adversaries—let us now dwell on matters of current public interest, namely, the mass defection of Nacionalistas into the Liberal Party and the assumption by the Commissioner of Customs of the operation of the arrastre service at the Manila harbor.

Already, the Nacionalista defections into the Liberal Party have included among incumbents one senator, thirty-one congressmen, six governors and several vice-governors, board members, mayors, vice-mayors and councilors. Arrangements have been made for many more incumbent Nacionalista officials throughout the country to affiliate with the Liberal Party.

The depleted opposition has posed the following issues, in connection with these defections: (1) that they are contrary to the two-party system and (2) that we have been inconsistent on the matter because when we were in the opposition, we deplored defections from the minority to the majority party. Both these contentions are unfounded and misleading.

The events taking place in the national scene today under the present Administration should be assessed in the light of the fact that in the fulfillment of its campaign pledge and in obedience to the people’s mandate, the LP Administration has launched a reform movement. The actions of the Administration are in the pursuance of this reform program.

Generally, this reform crusade is aimed at improving the conditions whereby Philippine democracy may become an instrument not for the aggrandizement of a privileged few but for the benefit of the masses of the people under the wholesome atmosphere of fair and equal opportunity for all.

Many of us have taken it for granted that our democracy is perfect; that it exists in the Philippines as it should be. In the classic definition of Abraham Lincoln, democracy is said to be a government of the people, by the people and for the people. In a republican system such as that which we seek to operate in our country, a government of and by the people would be one under which the people, as the primary source of power, would have enough collective strength to choose their leaders despite undue obstructions posed by tainted money, terrorism, patronage and the forces of entrenched vested groups.

In the election of 1961, the world hailed Philippine democracy because by the election to the Presidency of an oppositionist and penniless candidate against an entrenched, financially-equipped and patronage-wise incumbent President, it was demonstrated that we were capable of having a government of and by the people because our people asserted their sovereign will against the ruthless use of money and power by an entrenched incumbent President.

However, with the election of an opposition candidate to the Presidency, a curious situation significant for a young democracy was created with the election of a Congress belonging to the other political party. In advanced democracies, like the United States, a situation in which the President belongs to one party and Congress is under another party has been considered undesirable. President Dwight Eisenhower declared that such a situation should be avoided as it is inimical to a properly working democracy.

Confronted with the unwholesome predicament of Malacañang pertaining to one party and Congress controlled by the other party, at the beginning of our term, we did our best to carry out our reform program in this peculiar situation. It will be recalled that we exerted all efforts to appeal to Congress for cooperation but later events convinced us that the deadlock between the President and Congress had to end, otherwise we would fail in our gigantic task of bringing about moral regeneration and socioeconomic progress. Acting on the conviction and taking into account that our economic problems were of serious proportions, we went along with the proposal of ranking Administration leaders to admit the Nacionalistas into the Liberal Party until Malacañang and Congress would both pertain to the Liberal Party.

Our sentiments while we were in the opposition criticizing the defection of the Liberal minority into the Nacionalista majority are being cited in an effort to show an inconsistency. It should be obvious that there is a vital difference between the situation at the time and situation today. Between 1954 and 1961, when the Nacionalistas were in power and the Liberals were in the opposition, there was no reason for the Nacionalistas to win over the Liberals because both the President and the two Houses of Congress pertained to the Nacionalista Party. The only possible purpose of the Nacionalistas in admitting the oppositionist Liberals was to eliminate the opposition, an act of theirs which they now pretend to condemn. In their disregard of moral considerations for political expediency, the Nacionalistas had even maneuvered the defection of a Liberal stalwart into the Nacionalista Party as a means of going to power in the 1953 election.

The Liberal Party now faces a different situation from that under which the Nacionalista Party acted without principle and treasonably to the two-party system. When we were fighting for the Presidency, we had expressed ourselves against the oppositionists joining the majority party on the assumption that if we won the Presidency, our party would also win both Houses of Congress. We were entitled to make this assumption because in all presidential elections since the founding of the Republic, the party of the winning President also won in both Houses of Congress. This happened in the election of Roxas in 1946, Quirino in 1949, Magsaysay in 1953 and Garcia in 1957. It was only in our case where we won the Presidency but our party did not win either of the two Houses of Congress.

Convinced that this situation whereby the President belongs to one party and Congress belongs to another party is inimical to the national interest and would not be conducive to the success of moral, economic and social reforms expected by the people, we have been admitting Nacionalistas into the Liberal Party who subscribe to the prosecution of such reforms to the end that Malacañang and the two Houses of Congress shall pertain to the Liberal Party not later than next year, 1963. After this normal and desirable situation in a healthy democracy of the Executive and the Legislative being under one party is attained, it is the party policy not to admit anymore Nacionalistas into the Liberal Party.

Whereas the Nacionalistas during their Administration admitted oppositionists into the Nacionalista Party without a valid purpose except to eliminate the opposition, the Liberals are accepting oppositionists into the Liberal Party, up to a point, in support of a sound public policy of bringing about the normal and desirable situation of placing the Executive and Legislative under our party.

The action of the Liberal is, therefore, not against the two-party system because it is not aimed at the elimination of the opposition. On the contrary, it is to support and strengthen the two-party system because it is a cardinal principle of the two party system to give party responsibility for the conduct of government and which is only possible by having the President and the Congress pertain to the same party.

The important significance of the necessity for the Liberals to admit Nacionalistas who believe in Liberal principles into the Liberal Party is that democracy in the Philippines is undergoing a period of growth towards maturity and strength. Democracy as practiced in America and Western Europe is comparatively new among the young independent nations of Asia, which includes the Philippines. We have a long way to go before democracy matures in Asian countries, considering that we have to adjust its operation to the peculiar conditions obtaining in every Asian Country.

As in other countries in this region, the Philippines has been undergoing development and evolution towards a mature, healthy and strong democracy. The 1961 election was significant in that it has increased the ability of the masses to assert their majority will over the entrenched power of traditional political cliques, vested interests and the moneyed sector of the populace. But while in that election Philippine democracy made a forward advance in demonstrating that it has effectively become a government of and by the people, the advance was incomplete and lopsided in that it manifested a new frailty in creating a predicament undesirable in a healthy system of having a President and the two Houses pertaining to different parties.

To seek to correct this frailty immediately before it produces its adverse effects on the national welfare and slow down the advance of growing and maturing democracy is neither politicking nor sabotaging the two-party system, much less rendering a disservice to democracy, but rather this effort constitutes an awareness of the nation’s fundamental problems and reflects a resolute readiness to solve such problems.

It is not simply an imperative of political science but a matter of national welfare that this predicament is rectified as soon as possible because to allow a deadlock between the President and Congress to linger would jeopardize the national interest and frustrate the people’s expectations for a better life. Moreover, such a situation would open the way for selfish compromise at every turn which would mean moral retrogression and a harm to the national well-being.

For the Liberal Party to admit Nacionalistas into its fold in order to place the Executive and Congress under the same party is not, therefore, politicking but rather, it is an endeavor for the determined pursuit of the high national goals involved in the Administration’s moral and socio-economic programs which should not be allowed to fail.

Accepting as a fact that our democracy is undergoing a process of vigorous growth, the objective of placing the Executive and the Legislative under one party at the earliest possible time is itself a part of that growth. For while the 1961 election showed that our democracy is a government of and by the people, there remains the formidable task of making it a government for the people that is to say, not a government that showers its benefits to a privileged few but one that spreads its blessings to all the people.

This is the core of the reform program of the Administration—to make our democracy a government truly for the people and not an instrument for the perpetuation of monopoly and privilege on the part of those vested and powerful interests who exercised effective control over public agencies for their monopolistic aggrandizement under the cloak of false gestures of serving and promoting the people’s welfare. This is the rationale of this Administration’s policy of seeking the equal application of the law to both the rich and the poor, the powerful and the weak and the emphasis on the principle that no man shall be above the law. It is the justification for the government’s identification of certain categories of baneful groups and the taking of action against the most powerful leaders of such progress-obstructing groups. The goal is to so apply the law as equally as is humanly possible to all the citizens and to so discourage the persistence of monopolistic designs of powerful vested and unscrupulous interests as to bring about conditions of fair and equal opportunity for all the people. It is only in the midst of a general atmosphere of equal and fair opportunity for all that democracy can be effective in promoting at an adequate pace the general welfare, conditions in which democracy is truly a government for the people.

To carry out this monumental reform program in sufficient scope within four years is a task of gigantic magnitude that will require unprecedented measures both in the Executive and in the Legislative sphere of the government. To attempt such a herculean task in a situation of a deadlocked President and Congress wherein leadership had become accustomed to an attitude of partnership and not statesmanship, would either be a gross underestimation of the dimension of the job or frivolous attitude towards it. Measures of a far-reaching consequence will have to be pushed through in Congress. A sense of realism makes it indubitable that the enactment of such measures by a Congress politically at odds with the Executive would be a forlorn and empty hope.

It is on the basis of these considerations that the Liberal Party leadership has embarked on the difficult but essential undertaking of placing Congress and the Executive under the same party through both the admission of the necessary number of Nacionalistas into the party of the President and the election of the necessary number of senators in the next elections. While respecting the rash judgment of those who may be viewing our problems in a superficial manner, we submit to sober-minded citizens and to our countrymen in general that in embarking on this undertaking, we are not engaging in politicking but in relentlessly discharging our mandate to effectively bring about moral growth and the economic and social progress of our people.

Let me now dwell on the arrastre service case at the Bureau of Customs. There are involved in this case, first, the implementation of the Administration policy of turning appropriate government enterprises over to private capital and, second, the extension of the reform drive to labor by discouraging corrupt and unscrupulous labor leaders who exploit the laborers.

In the implementation of the policy to turn over to private enterprise government business concerns, the arrastre service should be the first one to be returned to private enterprise.

This is so because the arrastre service was already in private hands during the first Liberal Party administration but was taken over by the government and placed under the Manila Railroad Company when the Nacionalistas came to power in 1954. The MRRCo operated the business through the Manila Port Service which entered into a labor contract with the union headed by Roberto Oca.

The contract of the Manila Port Service with the Bureau of Customs to handle the arrastre service ended on June 30, 1961. When the Secretary of Finance Dominador Aytona did not renew the contract between the Bureau of Customs and the Manila Port Service relative to the arrastre service, Oca’s group, fearing as a consequence the ineffectuality of their contract with the Manila Port Service created a troubled situation, forcing Aytona to call in the armed forces to maintain peace and order at the piers. Parenthetically, while the Liberal Party administration is being taken to task for calling in the armed forces in connection with the arrastre affair, no criticism was and is being made against Aytona who called in the armed forces to avoid trouble with Oca’s men and to maintain order at the piers.

The immediate background of the present arrastre conflict started when Oca declared a strike in October against the Manila Railroad Company which was operating the arrastre business through the Manila Port Service by demanding a P30 cost-of-living raise despite his knowledge that the Manila Railroad Company was bankrupt. To maintain industrial peace at the harbor particularly during the coming Christmas season, MRRCo Manager Paulino Cases and Manila Port Service Manager Julian Chavez granted Oca’s demand. Then this November, Oca declared another strike, this time demanding that his renewed contract with the Manila Port Service be respected by the winning bidder in the transfer of the arrastre to private enterprise which Romualdez advertised to take place on November 23rd. Again to preserve industrial peace during this Christmas season at the piers in order to protect the public from the adverse effects of failure to release goods at the harbor, Secretary of Finance Rodrigo Perez and Commissioner Romualdez decided to heed Oca’s demand by proposing to cancel the November 3rd bidding in order to consider Oca’s desire to include his contract in the bidding terms in a manner so as not to defeat the projected transfer of the arrastre to private hands. Instead of accepting or considering this clearly reasonable proposal of the government, Oca hid from Perez and Romualdez. When Perez succeeded in communicating the proposal to Oca, the latter rejected it and insisted on the immediate inclusion of his contract in the bidding terms, which demand would have had the effect of sabotaging the transfer of the arrastre to the private sector. Oca continued with his strike, thus leaving the Bureau of Customs no other alternative but to operate the arrastre service to avoid paralyzation of commercial and industrial activities.

Under the law, after the Bureau of Customs had decided to operate the arrastre, it shall do so as a government service and not as a business under proprietary functions. Romualdez accordingly asked the assistance of the navy and the army to furnish and operate needed equipment and protect public and private properties at the customs premises.

These are the material facts in the arrastre case. The persistence of Oca in creating trouble at the piers shows his irresponsibility and his desire to harass the Administration and prejudice the public welfare by dislocating release of goods at the piers during this time of the year. When in addition, he challenged the government to sue him in court, the government, being in possession of evidence against him for penal and administrative violations, was left without choice except to accept his challenge and take steps to expose him in court for the unscrupulous and corrupt labor leader that his record shows him to be.

From the foregoing, the following should be evident:

1. The law confers on the Commissioner of Customs the authority to operate the arrastre service as a government function.

2. Oca’s union has no contractual relation with the Bureau of Customs; hence, no strike exists against the Bureau.

3. The Commissioner of Customs was justified in seeking the help of the navy and the army in pursuance of the practice that one government office may seek the help of another in the discharge of its governmental function.

4. Oca’s activities are in disregard of the rights and welfare of his members and appear to be designed to embarrass the administration by giving up goods at the harbors during this season. In today’s papers, Oca bragged that: “I have been very vocal in my criticisms against this administration for the suffering of the masses.” ( Manila Chronicle , Nov. 29, 1962.)

5. The position taken by the Government does not justify a slur that the administration is anti-labor.

With reference to the fifth enumeration, this administration is a friend of labor. Its program is precisely to elevate the level of living of the working masses and to create conditions of fair and equal opportunity whereby labor and its professional leaders can effectively fight for labor’s rights under more or less equal footing and strength with management. To do this for labor, the administration has taken unto itself to engage in decisive struggles with powerful groups who obstruct better-opportunities for the common man. In extending our reform program to the ranks of labor, it is our hope that there will be fostered an increasingly responsible and efficient leadership that will gain more respect from management and from the public, which will certainly be fruitful of better concessions and benefits for labor.

The provocations of Oca have given an opportunity to the administration to extend its moral drive in the moral field by exposing Oca, thereby discouraging unscrupulous and corrupt leaders from exploiting their laborers-followers for their selfish personal interest.

This moral drive which has already included the corruption of public officials by persons like Stonehill, alien corruptors like Peter Lim, politicians who misuse political power and public office for undue accumulation of wealth like the Lopez brothers and former Speaker Jose Yulo and foreign meddlers in our national elections, like Stewart, tax evaders like Kho, pernicious naturalized Filipinos like Ernesto Ting, Ko Keng and Yao, profiteers like Bio, and now extended to undesirable labor leaders like Oca—is calculated to strengthen our democracy as an effective implement for the people’s welfare by establishing conditions of equal and fair opportunity for all our people.

In the evaluation of public issues like the Nacionalista defections and the arrastre matter, the important thing to remember is that a job has to be done by this administration. The present administration was elected by our people to do the task of undertaking reforms to curb graft and corruption and to give a chance to all citizens to attain prosperity. This work must be done if our people are to enjoy what by right they are entitled to in the form of a better life in a democratic atmosphere of fair and equal opportunity for all and if our people are to keep their faith in democracy. This job must be done so long as its accomplishment is within the context of the Constitution and the law. That its accomplishment will upset accustomed ways which precisely tended to perpetrate monopoly by a few or puncture false postures and expose hypocrisies that have heretofore obstructed real progress is unregrettable. On the other hand, if we are to refrain from the accomplishment of the job to be done simply because we wish to avoid unpleasant aftermath, it would make us recreant in our duty entrusted to us by the mandate of our sovereign and people.

It is not easy to go against the interests of particular individuals, some of whom enjoy our personal affection. Indeed, the task of the presidency is not an easy one. But there can be only one way to handle this post if the President is to be worthy of his trust and of the faith of the people—it must be done by doing what is right and what is demanded by the welfare of the people no matter if it hurts other and even his own self. It is only thus that the Presidency can be an instrument for the nation’s good and not be a position for the benefit of the incumbent and a selected few. On our part, with God’s guidance, we shall act firmly on what is right and on the exacting dictates of the national interest—with absolutely no ill-will against individuals concerned—ever conscious of our duty to strive for the fulfillment of the people’s mandate for them to attain a better life.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.