Radio-TV Adress of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines

[Delivered on December 17, 1963]

REPORT ON UNITED STATES AND AFRICA TRIP

I AM HAPPY to be home and to be in the midst of our people again. I left our homeland on a mission in the United States. On behalf of our country, too, I visited other states in the emergent African continent. The time is too premature to make categorical statements of ultimate tangible results of those state visits. As the editorial of the Manila Times today said: “It is essential first of all to understand, without necessarily approving of, their politics before our foreign policy (or our national commitments, for that matter) can start building that bridge between Africa and the West.” Nevertheless, my mission in this trip has properly insured the national role in international relationships and affairs. This being significant to the welfare and interest of our nation, I am therefore glad to make this report to our people.

The practice of heads of states to make carefully-selected visits to other countries involves pertinent truisms which are integral aspects of a sovereign nation like ours. Throughout the year, there is hardly a day in which a head of state or government is not visiting in another state. It is of vital importance to our people’s interest that we fulfill the role and responsibilities of our country in international affairs. Corollary to the status of an independent state, each nation in the world today must discharge this function as a civic duty to mankind and in protection of its own interests.

This international function of a nation, whether large or small, is a new essential in the affairs of our contemporary times. A nation at this instance of world history cannot allow itself to be abstracted or isolated from the world society itself. Like the family unit in, say, a national society, a nation today insures its own welfare by determining its own position in the international community.

Under the auspices of this current international condition, good-will missions or visits are therefore viewed as reciprocal honor. When a nation is visited by the head of another state, it is deemed an act of friendship and homage. Our own Republic feels honored that in the last two years, it has been visited by an extraordinary number of heads of states and governments from other countries. Similarly, when the head of a particular nation-state is received in the terms of such a visit, a reciprocal invitation is in order. All these are necessities in a world committed to shaping a universal order of unity and peace.

At the proper time and in a proper manner, the expenses incurred by the government in the foreign visits I had undertaken will be made public. In the light of the necessities and propriety of state visits, they should not be gauged in terms of expenses especially when such are prudent in nature and extent. We cannot exchange the international value of friendship and mutual good will, nor can we sacrifice the national interest for a modest sum of pesos and centavos.

As you all know, my main mission was to represent the Philippine Republic in the funeral rites of a great President. The decision to make the trip proved to be a wise one because other heads of states all over the world attended the funeral ceremonies. The new American President, Lyndon B. Johnson, and other American officials expressed their deep appreciation and that of the American people that the Philippines, their traditional ally in Asia, stood beside them in their hour of sorrow.

On the way home, it also became necessary to go to Bangkok to express the condolence of our people over the death of the Thailand Premier, Sarit Thanarat. In the same manner that we condoled with the American people over the death of their President in view of the extraordinary ties between the Philippines and the United States, a similar act of goodwill in Bangkok was necessary because of the exemplary relation of friendship between Thailand and the Philippines.

My trip to the United States was more than just an observance of ceremonial propriety. It was an expression of our relatedness and kindship with the American nation. And on more fundamental issues, I, your President, had to convey the sentiment of the Filipino people. For we do share the sense of loss and mourning of the people of America over the demise of the late President John Fitzgerald Kennedy.

Our feelings derive not so much from the natural grief a people experience over the death of a worthy member of the whole human community; but we do naturally share the sentiment of the American nation because of our commitment to the cause of democracy; because of our common concern with the same ideals; and because of the fact of our affinity with the American people in our devotion to human rights and human liberties. Nobody in recent times has articulated these causes and principles more cogently and with more sincerity than the late President Kennedy. For that matter, at no other time of our recent history had we ever felt, more intensely, the actual congruence in ideals and commitments between our nation and America.

The Filipino people owe it to the American nation, therefore, to pay its last respects to a great American leader. And if you consider that in the lifetime of the late President, I had accepted but decided to defer a state visit to the United States, it became therefore an obligation for me to be present in those last rites honoring the late lamented leader of the American people.

It has been said here, in my absence, that my mission should have been solely singular in purpose; that I should not have attended to any other affairs but that which pertained to my mission. Indeed that could have been done. But after the intention of my mission was accomplished, the goodwill of the Filipino expressed on that touching occasion of America’s late President’s rites, there was also the necessity, the fact of the matter, that President Kennedy’s death involved several implications, perhaps not really new both in America and in the relationships between other countries and the United States, but which also had to be confirmed, and threshed out.

As I had previous occasion to say, one of the compelling reasons for having consultations with the American President, even during the administration of President Kennedy, was to anticipate the changes in the nature of our relations with America after 1974. For one thing, the Philippine Trade Act which still conditions our economic ties with the United States now, provides for graduated terms of agreement. This was urgent. The other factor was in having consultations with America over what recently have presented themselves as matters to be immediately traced out, namely, the status of our textile enterprises insofar as it is involved in quota agreement with American business firms, the imposition of a tax on excess Philippine oil exports to the United States and the effective application of $30 million of the additional war damage to a land reform educational program. There were others that had to be attended to, all vital to Philippine interests.

But it was not alone with America that the death of President Kennedy offered some implications. While in the United States, I held conferences with American officials including the new President, Lyndon B. Johnson, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Undersecretary Averell Harriman, Ambassador Adlai Stevenson, General Douglas Mac Arthur, Governor Nelson Rockefeller and other American officials. Likewise, I conferred with UN Secretary-General U Thant and other foreign leaders. After my talks with American and Asian leaders, it became clear to me that it would be of great benefit to our country and for the ideals which we uphold to return via Africa considering that the additional time and expense of returning via the Pacific would be minimal. Accordingly, I made state visits to Liberia, Tanganyika and Madagascar in Africa.

These visits to the African states were not only fruitful in good will for the Philipines and our people but have also laid the bases for the protection of vital Philippine interests in foreign affairs. I am confident that time will confirm how valuable this trip is to the welfare of our people.

In Liberia, the government has arranged for Philippine technicians in bamboo craft to be employed there and a similar agreement was made by the government of Tanganyika. Arrangements were initiated for trade mutually beneficent between Madagascar and the Philippines, and the same can now be done with Liberia and Tanganyika. In Tanganyika, for good will, I donated ten thousand shillings, which are roughly equivalent to six thousand pesos, at the opening of their first medical school to which their President invited me and Mrs. Macapagal whom they knew to be a medical doctor.

In Madagascar, which is more than twice as large as the Philippines, there are eight million inhabitants who are predominantly of Malay origin like the Filipinos. While proximate to Africa, they are more Asian than African. Their leader, President Philberto Tsiranana, is a hard-working, patriotic, farsighted former school teacher and farm boy of poor parentage who is ready to forge closer relationship with the Filipino people and other Malay peoples. The dream of Dr. Jose Rizal of a Malayan reunification which we have sought to implement through Maphilindo will be incomplete without the participation of the Malagasy Republic in Madagascar. In our pioneering visit to that far-flung Malayan country off the east-southern coast of Africa, we have immeasurably contributed to the ultimate fulfillment of the hegemony of the Malayan peoples within the context of a better world.

In our trips to Liberia and Tanganyika, with a useful stopover at Nairobi, Kenya, we obtained a valuable glimpse of Africa with its thirty-five newly independent states which constitutes an important factor in the destiny of the modern world. In comparison, there are thirteen new independent states in Asia. Since the Philippines pins its ultimate security and welfare among the nations in the United Nations, we would be recreant to our interest if we did not begin to establish effective contacts of harmony and cooperation with these thirty-five African states whose votes have become vital in United Nations affairs. With the good will we have established with the highest leaders of Liberia, Tanganyika and Madagascar, together with the personal contact gained with the Emperor of Ethiopia at the Kennedy funeral, it may now be said that the doors of Africa have been opened to the Philippines for cooperative action with African states on matters that concern our interest and welfare. Considering our cultural links with South American countries and our natural links with Asian countries, the connections which have thus been initiated with African countries now place the Philippines strategically situated to adequately safeguard its interest and welfare in the council of nations.

Should the Philippine claim to North Borneo, for instance, be in some manner placed for consideration in the United Nations, we shall already have a broader base for a more sympathetic and promising reception of our cause.

In a wider sense, the value of my visits transcends even these. Committed as we are with the other nations in Asia and Africa to the democratic ideals and the liberal principles which President Kennedy espoused, there was a need to feel out the sentiment of our brother Asians and Africans regarding our joint commitments. It was not because we anticipated changes as a result of the change of leadership in the White House. It was merely because there was need for even a new affirmation of loyalties to the causes we share with the free world.

Parenthetically, may I say that if the foreign visits availed of in the return from the mission in the United States were motivated by other considerations than that of duty, we would have visited countries which are noted for the opportunities they offer for leisure and comfort and to which I have standing invitations by their heads of state or government. Instead, I devoted the time and expense to visiting countries in Africa, which in the language of diplomats are regarded as “hardship posts” because in the discharge of my duty as President, it is my desire to always place the national interest and the public welfare above personal convenience and comfort. That I am not inclined to make state visits for frivolity or leisure was also shown when I suspended my already arranged state visit to the United States on invitation initiated by President Kennedy, upon seeing that such visit would not then serve our national interest.

Indeed, my trip to Africa on my way home from my mission was still part of the necessities borne by the circumstances of having to pay homage to the late American President. The ideas and ideals I had to pay attention to, in alliance with other developing societies in the Afro-Asian continent, were precisely the ideals that were touched by his death.

Summing up all, I am able to say that I am now back from that mission with a clear and new vision of the future relations between the Philippines and America. It is expectable that we should have differences of opinions with America regarding the things and events that directly touch us; but it is also expectable that, because of our common commitments to the same ideals and aspirations of humankind, these differences should not be irreconcilable or fundamental.

In my meeting with President Lyndon B. Johnson, who has taken over the responsibilities of the American presidency, he and I have had the occasion to talk about our separate countries and our individual national problems when he came to the Philippines in 1961. But since we were both vice-presidents at that time there was no propriety for both of us to come to specfic commitments or to indicate national policies. I am therefore happy to report now that the new President of the United States has a clear understanding of the Philippines’ point of view; of our attitudes and problems; and of our goals and aspirations as a distinct political entity and as a separate Republic.

It is also a welcome circumstance on our part that a leader of President Johnson’s sympathies and attitudes should be now in the White House. We feel that his viewpoints would precisely foster and promote the sustained and continuing relations of our two countries. At this stage of our life as an independent nation, I personally feel that the new American President would be in a position to comprehend our national reactions to the problems that the contemporary situation presents on our consciousness and the degree of urgency that we shall perhaps be compelled to respond to the events within the immediate context of our national life.

I take pleasure in reporting to you, therefore, what I feel is a more confident future both for our national survival and our relationships with other nations, more particularly our relationship with America and the newly-emerged nations of Africa. I take sanction of this assured point of view from the personal experience I derived from my trip to the United States and from the consultations I had with the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the leaders of the nation-states I visited in Africa. After my mission, I am more convinced that our basic national policies are right; that a sustained commitment to the ideals and promises of democracy must take cognizance of the plight of the general masses of our people; that as we affirm freedom in our premises of government, we should also be ready to exercise its general application.

But ours is not just to realize for ourselves the benefits of modern science and technology; nor to enjoy the privileges which contemporary times have made available for mankind in the 20th century. Concomitant to this duty, is also the labor of continuing the logic of our national history. This we shall achieve by re-asserting the high hopes and lost illusions of those who made us aware of our distinct identity as a nation, and of the profound significance of realizing this national image under the auspices of freedom and independence.

I spoke earlier of the actual congruence in ideals and purposes between us and the American people. It is to be noted that America now confronts the issue of extending the limits of constitutional freedom and of granting the common masses the rights and benefits that they are expected to enjoy. These we are doing through basic agricultural reforms; through means by which we could maintain economic stability and elevate the general level of the national life.

Yet, even as we address ourselves to the task of meeting the demands and necessities of our own society, we cannot remain immune to the fact that we have responsibilities to confront in collaboration with the nations of our immediate geography and the countries of the other spheres of the world. In the 20th century, it has become increasingly compelling to be committed not only to the cause of national survival and advancement, but also to issues beyond the boundaries of national states or regional cultures. A nation in our own times cannot take its stand on the egoistical concern of its welfare alone, but it has definitely become clear that the welfare of one nation is inextricably linked with such general issues as freedom, equal rights, and the rule of law in the management of human affairs. That is why we have bigger responsibilities to take up; larger commitments to sustain.

So that we have a greater revolution to undertake—one which does not merely have a superimposed rule upon our society to deal with. Bonifacio and the Katipunan revolution undertook this task; Quezon and the other Filipino statesmen did their share of continuing the aspirations of the Filipino people under the American regime.

Political independence was the legacy we happily inherited from the endeavors of our past leaders. Our role now, our responsibilities at present, will have to take the form of substantiating this truth of our political autonomy by raising the level of activities of our society; by seeing to it that the possession of sovereignty is not travested through unwitting neglect of our foreign relations. Independence is a responsibility which has to be exercised both in the national situation as well as in the schemes and general intentions of our immediate region. We cannot remove ourselves from the rest of Asia; we cannot abrogate our linkage with the rest of mankind. The revolution that we wish to continue in our society is part of a great revolution in Asia. And the ideals of this revolution take for its general concern the welfare of mankind.

It was for this truth that I held consultations with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. U Thant, and that I decided to undertake a trip to Africa. The African continent, like Asia itself, has long been a large fact in the geography of the world, but it is only in more recent times that the human implications of its geographic fact is beginning to be acknowledged as of political significance. Yet between ours and the societies of the rest of Asia and of Africa are obvious common givens of historical circumstances. This, and the present situation of our political status is compelling enough, on our part, to make common cause and collaborate on general schemes with societies and peoples beyond the national geography.

I have read it said that I had gone to Africa on a safari. This interpretation of the trip, in itself, would imply the necessity of my having to make it. The issue of colonialism, from its purely political implication, seems to have pervaded even the human fact of societies. The apartheid question is one such aspect. In another sense, we ought also to correct the impression that the African continent could offer nothing but a location for a Hollywood movie such as “The Road to Zanzibar” or a site for a virile sportsmanship such as a “safari.” One does not always go to Africa helmeted and in a hunting outfit; nor is the contemporary significance of that large continent reducible to its supply of ivory tusks, lions, elephants and zebras. In our own times, we have to correct this impression and check the romantic flights of our reportorial imagination with significant political facts. It may not be too disastrous to misrepresent Africa in such imaginative terms, but it would certainly be yielding to a colonial myth to allow these images to condition our response to the developing societies in that continent. Ultimately, this would be politically harmful, because inaccurate. Nevertheless, if the word “safari” be insisted on, then I admit that I did no less than that. I had gone on a safari not in terms of a recreational gamesmanship but it must be conceded, in order to penetrate the heart of what was once called “an impenetrable dark continent”; to feel the beat of its human pulse, and in order to fully understand the nature of the common truths between us. In short, my safari was undertaken in order to come to terms with the nature of our common cause.

It was perceived before, and it is still being said now, that as a result of our colonial situations in Asia and Africa, our various countries had remained alien to each other. Our separateness had resulted not merely in the ignorance of our societies of the common bonds between us, but in the tactical error of not knowing our collective strength. Each of our societies have, in the past, desired freedom; affirmed equality and the rule of law; economic prosperity for all peoples. But we seldom had the opportunity to work jointly together, and in the spirit of collaboration and mutual assistance, for these noble ideals. Now and then we would have the chance to express ourselves on this. The Bandung Conference was one such instance. But the consciousness of our common necessities and ideals seldom found its practical issue in a collaborative and collective endeavor for economic and social development or in the joint task of regional security, or in the generous gesture of a more intensive program between nations in the Afro-Asian continent in terms of high-level consultations or cultural exchanges.

The SEATO was one of such practical results of a consciousness of common survival. But historical circumstances have changed. The idea of national responsibility; the idea of regional security and development of belongingness have all now been placed in larger context. The countries in Southeast Asia are now awakening to the truth that they are part of a whole continent. At the same time, the idea of a united world has been greatly enlarged. New countries in Asia and in Africa have attained statehood; concomitantly, the representation in the United Nations has greatly expanded.

The presence of these new nations in the representative body of the United Nations has changed for all nations, whether in the East or in the West or in the Mediterranean, the manner of regarding national responsibilities and the relationship that one nation ought to take towards the universal order. For one thing, new issues have come up; new challenges have presented themselves; and a new concept of politics as well as of moral responsibilities have been necessitated.

It is not the Philippines alone that is being compelled to recognize these facts. It has become compelling even to relatively larger powers such as the United States, Germany and France, or even Soviet Russia. But we who share a common cause with the countries in Asia and Africa find it more urgent to acknowledge these realities. We must not remain petty, or withhold participation in moral responsibilities that we ought to properly recognize with countries in the same situation as we are.

I feel this to be the larger responsibility of Philippine nationalism. I feel that nationalism must be an assertion of the rights of man, both in the native context of a particular country and in any sphere of the world. The idea of freedom and economic prosperity that we recognize in one nation or region cannot be denied in any other area where man himself is established as a given fact.

It is therefore in the spirit of national responsibility that we include into our awareness the acceptance of the common cause we have with other peoples in building a united world anew.

I conclude my report to you on my foreign trip with an expression of my feeling that conscious of my responsibility as the head of a sovereign and esteemed nation, I have done my duty in promoting the cause and well-being of our country in the society of nations.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.