Radio-TV Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines In the program, “President Macapagal Speaks to the Masses”

THE BIG DRIVE

Isinasagawa ng Kagawaran ng Interyor at Lokal na Pamahalaan (DILG) ang isang malawakang kampanya kontra sa iligal na droga, na tinatawag na “Mamamayang Nagkakaisa Laban sa Droga” o “MNLD”. Layunin nito na palakasin ang pakikipagtulungan ng pamahalaan at mga mamamayan sa pagsugpo sa iligal na droga sa bansa.

Ang MNLD ay may tatlong pangunahing layunin: una, ang pagpigil sa pagpasok ng iligal na droga sa bansa; pangalawa, ang pagdakip sa mga drug pusher at drug lord; at pangatlo, ang pagtulong sa mga drug surrenderees na magbagong-buhay.  Ito ay isang whole-of-government approach, kung saan lahat ng ahensya ng gobyerno ay inaasahang makikipagtulungan.

Inilunsad ang MNLD noong Nobyembre 26, 2023, sa Camp Crame, Quezon City.  Dumalo sa paglulunsad si Pangulong Ferdinand R. Marcos Jr., kasama ang mga opisyal ng DILG, PNP, PDEA, at iba pang ahensya ng gobyerno.  Binigyang-diin ng Pangulo ang kahalagahan ng pagkakaisa at pagtutulungan upang masugpo ang problema sa iligal na droga.

Ang DILG ay nanawagan sa lahat ng mga lokal na pamahalaan na suportahan ang MNLD.  Hinihikayat ang mga barangay na magkaroon ng Barangay Anti-Drug Abuse Council (BADAC) at aktibong lumahok sa mga programa kontra droga.  Ang tagumpay ng MNLD ay nakasalalay sa aktibong pakikilahok ng bawat mamamayan.  We need everyone’s cooperation to make this a success.

TONIGHT, we shall dwell on the unrelenting drive undertaken by the Administration against venalities in the past two weeks.

This drive had, in fact, been long delayed. Even before we took over the Administration last January, we had scheduled a big drive against top malefactors. We announced that we would start the prosecution of big offenders last January 2 after we were assured by the former secretary of justice that there was evidence to start on two or three big cases and that he would file subsequent ones every week thereafter. But after the case against Cosme Garcia for violation of the corporation law was filed, no other cases were filed by the former justice secretary despite his subsequent assurance that more would be filed once a month. He mentioned three prominent officials against whom, he informed us, there was evidence for criminal prosecution, which he was going to file, but until his separation from the service, he had not filed the cases. Wondering over this matter to the present moment, we can only surmise that the concentration of the Department of Justice on one deportation case prevented attention to other cases. Even in this deportation case, the work was incomplete because a prominent and culpable Chinese alien was inexplicably excluded from the case.

In these circumstances, it was only after the termination of the Stonehill deportation case, which unduly paralyzed the justice department for several months, that the Administration could undertake its delayed drive under the new leadership at the Department of Justice.

In this drive the Administration has taken action against a number of prominent persons, both aliens and nationals. For the smooth and successful implementation of our socio-economic program, tackling the problems of corruption had to be expanded to a general reform movement that would emphasize the necessary values that can assure our goal of free enterprise, the essence of which is the effective availability of fair and equal opportunity to all.

Our actions were in accordance with pledges that we made in our campaign for the presidency. It is well known that our economic program based on decontrol and free private enterprise was a campaign pledge. In addition, we made certain pledges in the moral and social field. Since we have become accustomed to say what we mean and mean what we say, these pledges were made not to be forgotten but to be fulfilled upon our election to the presidency.

In the moral field we recall having pledged that, “If Divine Providence and the people should will that the LP be entrusted anew with the direction of the destiny and affairs of our people with me at the helm, our people should know now that the country faces an era of reforms.

An improved or a better administration is not enough. Nothing less than a national overhaul or comprehensive reform to bring about good government, prosperity to all, and a better life for the poor, will suffice.” (Radio speech, Nov. 28, 1959.) Specially, we pledged that “What is needed in a demonstration of sincerity in dealing with graft is to mete out the law upon the big grafters, not only the small ones.” (Speech at the U.P., Oct. 23, 1959.)

In the field of social reform, we declared as follows:

“It is sometimes said that it will make no difference in the lives of the people if the Nacionalista Party or the Liberal Party is in power, if President Garcia or Vice-President Macapagal wins in 1961. Those who say or think so are in serious error.

“The LP under its present leadership represents change—change for the better.

“Our cause is the need for a new economic and social order in our young nation. After we win in 1961, there will result a vast difference in the lives of the people.

“The old system of a few monopolizing the benefits of the government and the wealth of the land will end. The old system of politicians using the power of the people to enrich themselves, their families and their friends will end.

“A new socio-economic era will open, in which, after dishonesty in the government has been destroyed as a first step, the economy will be organized in order that the politicians and their friends will no longer abuse the power of the people for selfish aggrandizement but that the gates of better life will be opened to all the people.

“This is a need of our young Republic that must be realized at all costs. This is a cause that our enemies cannot stop, that no one can stop. The Liberal Party under its present leadership has dedicated itself to this cause and it will not be stopped in its course. Because we are convinced to the core of our soul that we represent this irresistible cause of our misruled and exploited people, let not our enemies and their agents believe that their intrigues, maneuvers, ill-gotten money, or anything that they can do, will stop us. Against all calumny, intrigue, deceptions, and all hindrances that they will put in our way, we shall move on fortified by faith in God and in our righteous cause until we achieve the victory of the people and of their right to a better life in freedom.” (Speech at airport, Dec. 6, 1960.)

Having made these pledges to the people we have endeavored to fulfill them, otherwise our long and arduous campaign for the presidency and our lifelong struggle would have been in vain. This drive against big-time grafters and socio-economic roadblocks is a painful one but we have braced ourselves to make all necessary decisions, no matter how hard and painful, for the sake of our people in this lonely post that we have accepted from them.

It is alleged that in the Administration’s drive, we have proceeded only against Nacionalistas. This is not true. In our drive, we look only at the merits of the case and not on partisan affiliation. We have proceeded against prominent foreigners and Filipinos. Among the foreigners, partisan affiliation is irrelevant because they cannot participate in politics. Of the three Filipinos, two are Nacionalistas and one is a Liberal.

But even if it were true, although this is not the fact, that all were supporters of the former President, this cannot be taken against us. In the 1961 election, most of the prominent figures in politics and business supported the former President and only few supported us because this took courage and strong civic spirit. Many of those who supported the former President belonged precisely to circles who were ready to compromise with venalities by supporting a corrupt administration. Our campaign against wrongdoers can therefore find proper objects for action mostly from among those who were willing to prolong a graft-ridden regime and not from among the generally principled elements who stuck their necks for the opposition.

In undertaking the drive, it was necessary to follow policies and basic guides based on justice and sound principles in the attainment of our objectives. In our Administration, we do not act arbitrarily but follow basic guides. One guide to which we subscribe is that which should bring about cooperation and harmony between the two political branches of the Government, Congress and the Executive. No guide in this field had been attempted in the past, to the detriment of the public welfare. Now that the country is steadily moving towards crystallizing correct values, it would be for the nation’s good to follow an orderly and rational procedure between congressional and executive investigations.

In conformity with the separation of powers, interdepartmental courtesy and the lessening of politics, each Branch should in the first instance conduct its own investigation of officials under its jurisdiction. Congress should in the first instance conduct investigations affecting its members while the Executive should conduct investigations of executive officials. Once the Senate or the House of Representatives has initiated an investigation affecting its members, the President should wait until the Congress finishes its investigation before he takes his own action concerning the same investigation, and only, if he should not be satisfied with the Congressional investigation and action. Similarly, when the Executive has initiated an investigation of executive officials, the Congress should conduct a similar investigation on the same subject matter after the Executive has completed its investigation, particularly if Congress would not be satisfied with the Executive investigation and action. For both Branches to conduct concurrent investigations over the same subject-matter would not only produce confusion but provide frictions and animosities that can be needlessly injurious to the national interest.

In our last broadcast, we enunciated the basic guide followed by the Executive in meeting the problems of graft and corruption, namely, that while we would undertake punitive action on violations done in the past, particularly where there exists significant evidence or evidences to support a criminal case, we are most concerned with preventive action that would deter the recurrence of such wrongs and offenses under our Administration.

Apart from the justness and soundness of this policy, it was the only approach possible because of the numerous wrongs committed during many years of moral decadence and abandon. If we were to attend to all the cases where there exists significant evidence or to attend to each exhaustively, it will take us longer than our term of office to undertake this task alone comprehensively and thoroughly to meet the requirements of justice and equity.

This is the reason why we could not afford to be concentrated too long on just one deportation case. While those who criticized us sought political advantage in the case, we have regarded the case in the context of a whole task of which it was merely one of numerous and similarly significant cases. In our accustomed candor, we say that those who would persist in tying up the time of the Administration and of the nation on one case are either moved by the narrow political outlook of the past or have very little idea of the magnitude of the task of moral, economic, and social reconstruction in which this Administration must accomplish with maximum results during its limited period of mandate from the people.

Because there are so many cases of venalities supported by significant evidence and it being impracticable to attend fully to each and all of them, it became imperative to select a few exemplary ones classified into categories relevant to our objectives. Having determined these categories, the step was to select the cases that would be most effective in bringing about the necessary change of thinking among our people and in deterring the perpetration of similar wrongs in the future.

The main obnoxious activities may be categorized into five for foreigners and two for nationals. Among foreigners, the categories were (1) aliens who organized networks of corruption to advance in business, to which category Stonehill, Robert Brooks, and Peter Lim belonged; (2) former aliens who, although not weaving elaborate webs of corruption, engaged in venalities to promote their business interests, to which group were included Ernesto Ting and Ko Keng; (3) businessmen who engaged in profiteering like Ti Bio Suy; (4) foreigners who evaded the payment of due taxes, like Vicente Koh, and (5) foreigners who participated actively in partisan politics, which is prohibited by law, like Robert Stewart.

Among the nationals, the two categories are (6) those who have utilized organized political power to build business empires and vice-versa, to which category the Lopez brothers pertain and (7) those who have misused their public trust to amass wealth, to which group former Speaker Jose Yulo belongs.

We submit to our people that these types of nefarious activities must be discouraged if we are to succeed in our ambitious socio-economic program based on free enterprise which should make available to all businessmen and to all citizens equal and fair opportunity to advance not through unfair tactics but according to the merits of everyone.

Let us say a word or two about the selected categories. The groups involving profiteers and tax evaders are clear enough to need added comment. Because of the shift from a controlled economy to free enterprise, a sense of discipline and responsibility is demanded of the business community whose opportunities for profit have been expanded by the new system of freedom. Those who would engage in profiteering would violate this duty and would be rigorously proceeded against. Likewise, the need for bolstering revenues for social overhead in the economic program and for social services, through a tax collection system based on integrity and equity, makes it imperative that tax evaders should be strictly dealt with.

On the first alien category, we say that we should stamp out the unholy alliances between powerful economic groups and strategically-located government officials who not only facilitate frauds against the public treasury, but also enable the untrammeled illegal operations of unprincipled economic saboteurs. It is with this aim in view that Stonehill and Brooks, as well as Peter Lim, had been deported and those who had kept unethical relations with them had been given the choice of resignation from office or investigation for charges based upon their improper dealings with the Stonehill cabal.

On the second category, we should point out that former aliens who had obtained Filipino citizenship in order to take advantage of the rights reserved for our citizens, and this in a corrupt way, should be shorn of their undeserved status as Filipinos and later deported. This is necessary because in flagrant violation of our laws, they have prostituted the national economy and, while remaining aliens at heart, have made full use of privileges which would not have been available to them had they not unlawfully become citizens. Persons like Ernesto Ting and Francisco Cokeng have no right to be one of us; hence, their kind will be proceeded against by this Administration with vigor. As long as the group which they typify exists, we cannot hope to succeed completely in our program of social and economic development.

On the fifth category, aliens who interfere with our political life and would impose their political choices upon us should be removed from our midst. Their presence and activities here are an insult to our national dignity and inimical to our national security. They can sow seeds of dissension to promote their own self-interest, in the hope of reaping profits from the internal turmoil which would follow. Equipped with powerful means of distorting facts, they interfere in our elections and political activities. It is for this reason that Robert Stewart is now facing deportation proceedings, and those who, like him, will meddle in our internal political life will be similarly dealt with.

In the selection of the party to be prosecuted under the category of aliens intervening in a partisan way in Philippine elections, the Department of Justice chose Stewart because it is of public knowledge that he openly and brazenly supported presidential candidates since 1953. Other foreigners may have offended the law prohibiting their electioneering but they appear to have been discreet about it, indicating some deference to our laws. Stewart has chosen to be different—the justice department found that he had intervened in Philippine elections openly and brazenly, utilizing his radio station and hiring commentators for the purpose, as if he could mock at the country’s laws with impunity.

On the first Filipino category, we declare that the wealthy should not be allowed to amass more wealth through political power, dubious business practices, and other illegal means. The Lopez brothers, with all the wealth that they already possess, and taking advantage of their political influence, have availed themselves of our Government institutions to enhance their financial fortunes.

The Lopez brothers are typical of those who organize political power and weave a network of influence to serve their business interests. At a time when conditions of equal and fair opportunity are needed to give the people at large a chance for advancement, the existence of powerful vested groups entrenched in political power is inimical to the general welfare. Through the power of the Lopez group in the Senate, despite the numerical plurality there of the Administration party, the legislation needed for a full and fully-safeguarded decontrol program could not be enacted in the last congressional session. Through their admixture with the sugar industry which is facing a crucial future, measures for full assistance to the industry have been impeded. Through their incursion in banking activities, for the financing of their vested interest and high-finance activities, the banking system which is vital to economic reconstruction has become polluted and less receptive to invigoration.

One of the counts cited by the Department of Justice in the case against the two leaders of the Lopez vested interest group, that of acquiring more than 44,000 square meters of PHHC land that was intended for the poor, exemplifies the conflicting interest of this group with the welfare of the common man.

In brief, should the dominant position of the Lopez group in our political and economic life be given up, the result will be the removal of a roadblock to the accelerated progress of the Nation’s socio-economic program and the acceleration of the attainment of more blessings from a prosperous life by all, including the Lopez group themselves, minus their privileged and unwholesome position in the politico-economic life of the country. Despite all the power at their command, therefore, our duty to the people has left us no alternative but to institute immediate proceedings against them.

On the second Filipino category, we believe that those who, mainly by abuse of public office and influence, had in the past been able to amass wealth unduly should be made to restore their improperly gotten gains. This should serve as a warning that no man in this and future Administrations should take advantage of his position by unduly enriching himself. For this reason, action has been instituted against former Speaker Jose Yulo. The concentration of wealth in a few hands is inimical to the general welfare, and it is worse when such wealth is acquired through improper means.

Our decision to take action affecting Mr. Yulo was a painful one because he had been a valuable leader of the Liberal Party but, in the discharge of our duty, we must apply the law to both the rich and the poor alike and to both colleague and foe alike. The fact that his offense took place way back in 1948 is added reason why action must now be taken against him before time perpetuates the moral and social injustice involved and prevents completely a redress for the offended people. The Administration’s action in the Yulo case serves to underscore the fact that the evils that plague our country today and which, by the people’s mandate, it is our job to curb and overcome, had their roots, insofar as we assess them, in the general moral breakdown which shook our people under the Japanese occupation during the Second World War. Thus, corruption, misuse of public trust, unduly built economic empires, unconcern for the people’s welfare, and other forms of venalities have been going on unchecked, despite repeated verbal avowals of reform, from the post-war reestablishment of the civil regime to the present time. An effective implementation of an authentic and earnest moral regeneration program, therefore, requires that it be not confined to the artificial veneer of present acts but should sweep through its deepest sores that have festered across the whole post-war years to the present day.

We wish to point out that the Administration seeks primarily the taking over by the State of the 4,778 hectares of agricultural land for distribution to the landless out of a total of 7,000 hectares which constitute the Canlubang Sugar Estate. The Administration is willing to allow Mr. Yulo to keep the sugar mill and the 2,300 hectares on which the mill and its accessories are situated. This should show that in taking action against the former speaker, the Administration is not moved by rancor but by a sense of justice and equity. Out of this sense of justice and equity, we believe that the least redress to which the people are entitled is for Mr. Yulo to give up the agricultural part of the vast estate so that the said farm land may serve in the promotion of the government’s social program of giving land to the landless.

Adverting back to the pledges we made during the presidential campaign, we recall having pledged to do something against the false moral values consisting of “the acceptance by businessmen of the necessity of politically and materially helping out high officials in order to obtain the needs of their business.” (Speech before Jaycees, July 18, 1959.) Our action against foreign businessmen corrupting public officials and foreigners intervening in our elections is the initial step in a set of measures that we will submit to Congress for action next year, an election year, calculated to eliminate financial support by foreigners and to regulate financial support by nationals for candidates to public office, as part of a project to reduce the cost of running for public office in our country. In accordance with a constructive approach to our grave problems, we must endeavor to improve continually political practices and morality in our democracy.

Our task has scarcely begun. Even critics agree that never before has so much been done by any Administration in so short a time. We are accused of spreading terror, violating civil liberties, choosing personal enemies for purposes of vengeance. My record is the best argument against these unfounded charges. The innocent need not fear, for they will not be molested; nor the guilty, because they will be given all the opportunity to be heard.

Businessmen, whether Filipino or alien, big or small, as long as they comply with our laws and regulations, need not have to fear anything. The Administration is not against the rich but against the unscrupulous rich who injure the general welfare. We precisely wish to give wider opportunity for the inhabitants of this country to become rich through honest toil. We shall protect and indeed encourage business ventures which contribute to the national progress and which pursue their activities in accordance with law. Legitimate business has no reason to fear; the elimination of illicit business in our country, which we have commenced to do, should be reason for legitimate business to rejoice.

We have exposed the main classes of obstacles in the attainment of our national goals and we have shown how the Administration is going to deal with them. Confident that the forces which endanger its success are no longer in a position to hamper its progress, we must now proceed with the main task of pursuing with vigor our encouraging socio-economic program.

Only today, the Associated Press has reported from New York that “foreign investment attention is suddenly hitting the Philippines” and that the reason for “the sudden scramble of foreign investors climbing on the Philippine bandwagon stems from the abandonment of foreign exchange controls and the freeing of the peso last January and the economic philosophy of President Macapagal’s administration.” ( Daily Mirror , Aug. 28, 1962.)

The drive against venalities should now make it clear that under this Administration, no man is above the law. There will be no untouchable sacred cows. Whosoever commits a transgression, no matter how wealthy, powerful, or prominent, will not be so big as to be beyond the reach of the law. It is only in this way that real democracy can exist in our country, that there can be fair and equal opportunity to all the citizens, and that it will be possible to push through successfully a socio-economic program based on freedom.

This drive of the Administration has been handled by the President and the Secretary of Justice. We have entertained counsel but the decisions have been made by the two of us. For the protection of the public from harassment, any official or person who approaches any businessman, public official, or citizen and poses as having a part or being aware of any decision or action in this drive should be reported immediately to me or to the Secretary of Justice so that we can take corresponding action against such impostor.

We will be fair to those who will be fair to us. As regards those who, despite our selfless and conscientious discharge of our responsibility, will seek for political or other ignoble motives to be unfair to us, we shall be constrained to take defensive and adequate action in order to maintain our capability to do our sworn and inescapable duty of serving only the highest interest of our people which we have accepted as a sacred trust.

A good test of fidelity to the people is whether one, while being in the public service or in public life, has in the process materially benefited because public service is often used as a disguise and a means to material gain. On our part, we have not materially benefited from public life. We ask those who would assume a posture of superior fidelity to the people to consider whether in the process of their public career, directly or indirectly through the medium of their official position or prestige, they have not advanced themselves materially, and if they had, we venture to advance the proposition that their right to assume a righteous posture decreases proportionally to the increased level of their material aggrandizements.

This drive will mean grappling with powerful men and groups but for a good purpose. No sensible person will prefer to have enemies where he can make friends. Yet our sense of duty leaves us no other alternative than to accept the struggles inherent in a fight against men of vast wealth and power. This is because we are not fighting for ourselves, but we are fighting the fight of the people who, long being underdogs, need someone to fight for them.

Let us give a break to our people. Let us join hands to give fair and equal opportunity to the average businessmen and the common citizens. Let us make our vaunted democracy a true one. Let us uphold the principle which the Administration has set out to establish that no man is above the law so that it will become a permanent part of our system and way of life. Let us minimize politics and help one another to build a better society. On our part, having accepted the responsibility of bringing about new opportunities for a better life for all our people, with God’s grace we will not allow ourselves to fail no matter who or what stands in our way.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.