Radio-TV Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines In the Program, “President Macapagal Speaks for the Masses”

[Released on August 14, 1962]

THE STONEHILL CASE

IN my previous Radio-TV address, I enumerated the principal accomplishments of the Administration during the first six months and discussed our performance in the economic field. Now, I shall dwell on the accomplishment that “graft and corruption has been contained and reduced to the minimum,” especially in relation to the recently disposed of Stonehill deportation case.

Accelerated economic growth and moral regeneration are the two objectives of our administration. As stated in our previous broadcast, with reference to the economic task, we successfully executed the shift from a controlled economy to decontrol and the system of free private enterprise. The implementation of our economic program will continue to be pursued with vigor and devotion.

In the moral task, we took the following steps:

(1) My family and I have set the personal example in integrity. If he chooses, the President of the Philippines can become a multi-millionaire in one day from sunrise to sunset. Mrs. Macapagal and I, however, have vowed to God, to ourselves and to our people, that during my incumbency, we shall not earn one centavo beyond my salary.

(2) In the appointment of Cabinet members and other key officials, I placed first consideration to honesty and integrity among the required qualifications.

(3) We have removed the causes of corruption; such as, licensing of dollars and imports.

(4) Although not required by law, the members of my Cabinet and I have published our assets and liabilities.

(5) We have waged a determined drive in government and business circles against the “tong” system and against influence peddlers.

(6) We have extended recognition to those citizens, no matter how humble, who have performed acts of honesty by inviting them to the presidential palace.

(7) We have recommended to Congress the establishment of a Moral Commission to coordinate measures for ethical reform.

After our vigorous drive, graft and corruption have clearly been minimized. In Tokyo, the notorious reparations influence peddlers who lorded it in Japanese nightclubs to the shame and disgrace of our people are gone. In Manila, the vice centers and jewelry shops which used to thrive because of influence peddlers who spent graft money like water have suffered in their businesses. A new morality has set in most government offices. In the Bureau of Customs and partly in the Bureau of Internal Revenue, corruption still persists but soon the massive weight of our total effort will straighten out these offices. On the whole, there has been such an improvement in public morality that the Philippines Free Press stated on June 2, 1962, that ‘one of the most difficult promises Macapagal made has, from the evidence, been fulfilled. He has reduced corruption. One did not think this was possible.

The Stonehill case may be viewed as a demonstration of our determination and policy in meeting the problem of corruption.

The acts of corruption of Stonehill had been taking place for many years in previous administrations. Even when I was a member of Congress, I already heard of the activities of the American businessman, although in my whole public service of eight years as congressman and four years as vice-president, I myself had absolutely nothing to do with him.

Early in February 1962, after the new administration had taken over, the NBI director, Jose Lukban, accompanied by then Secretary of Justice Jose Diokno, informed me that he had in his possession overwhelming evidence showing large-scale venalities and influence peddling by Stonehill and his associates and asked for instructions whether he could proceed with the gathering of evidence to bust the case. I told him to go ahead, remarking that the new administration was determined to destroy graft and corruption and that in this drive, no man would be held above the law. The director suggested that I take a look at the evidence but the Justice Secretary said that the President should not be bothered about details and that the two of them could scrutinize the evidence and handle all details. I forthwith told the Justice Secretary that he had a free hand in the case.

Early in March, upon being informed that Stonehill and his associates would be arrested and his establishments raided, I sent word for the justice department officials to go ahead. We backed up fully the Department of Justice, Deportation Board, and NBI in the case until the end. It will be seen that our attitude in this case reflects our determination in the drive against corruption.

Given our determination, what about our policy in solving the problem of corruption? This policy was announced during the presidential campaign. We stressed that in a sincere and effective campaign against corruption, what is vital is not so much the punitive action on cases of venalities that had already taken place in the past, but the preventive measures that shall insure that such cases would not take place again. This was the issue we raised against the empty claim of the previous administration that it was investigating 32,000 cases of venalities. On our part, while we would send to jail the crooks who committed criminal offenses against our people, we would be most concerned with creating a new moral tone that will prevent the occurrence of venalities altogether.

We have not changed our position on the means of eradicating graft. We have applied this yardstick in acting vigorously and firmly on the Stonehill case and we will apply the same guide in all anti-graft cases involving undesirable aliens. While taking action against the guilty and against those whom there is significant evidence, our primary objective has been to insure that the acts of corruption committed by Stonehill and those who worked unethically with him will not be repeated and never take place in our regime. Towards this end, we geared our efforts to the following:

(1) The speedy expulsion of Stonehill from the Philippines as a decisive step in terminating and smashing the web of corruption that he created;

(2) The filing of proper action against those who in their collaboration with him committed criminal and administrative offenses;

(3) The protection of the innocent from becoming victims of blind hysteria and political intrigue and machination; and

(4) The establishment of adequate safeguards for the material rights of the government and private persons.

In accordance with these objectives, we issued Administrative Order No. 19, dated August 3, 1962, ordering the immediate deportation of Stonehill and Robert Brooks, as recommended by the Deportation Board, with the difference that the deportation would be mandatory and forcible, so that they cannot return to the country instead of the voluntary deportation which in surrender they sought, which would have permitted them to come back to the country. In this order, we made the following dispositions:

“1. Respondents Harry S. Stonehill and Robert P. Brooks be immediately arrested and deported by the first available transportation from the Philippines. The Commissioner of Immigration and other proper officials are ordered not to readmit them into the country for any reason whatsoever.

“2. Respondents John J. Brooks and Karl Beck should be placed under probation for two years under conditions as will hereafter be imposed, any violation of which will be cause for their immediate deportation.

“3. The tax and other liabilities of all the four respondents to the government shall continue to be due from them and shall be enforced against their property wherever the same may be found. Likewise, all other proceedings which lie without the presence of the deported respondents shall be allowed to continue or be commenced against the four respondents.

“4. ( a ) The Secretary of Justice shall continue in such manner as he may determine the investigation of officials pertaining to the Executive Branch, whoever they may be and to whichever party they may pertain, whose names appear in the Stonehill papers in order to establish whether or not any of them has committed a criminal or administrative offense, and he shall in due course disclose the names of those against whom a criminal or administrative action lies and shall forthwith commence such action;

( b ) He shall cooperate with the Senate and the House of Representatives or their committees in such investigation or action as these two bodies may take affecting their members in relation to the Stonehill files, for which purpose he shall continue to conduct such investigation as he may deem necessary and proper; and

( c ) As regards other persons whose names appear in the Stonehill papers, he shall take such action as justice and the cause of good government may require in accordance with law.”

We emphatically reject malicious political insinuations that the deportation of Stonehill was hurried up in order to whitewash the cases of the officials who were corrupted by him or to prevent him from testifying in Congress.

The case was certainly not hurried up because it took five months to finish it. It is more correct to say that, based on the established acts committed by him, his deportation was unduly delayed. The proceedings in the Deportation Board, which conducted the investigation on behalf of the President, and the presidential order following the board’s investigation, constituted a single proceeding.

Being satisfied with the report of the Deportation Board and the Secretary of Justice that Stonehill and Brooks were dangerous aliens, I had only one duty—to expel them immediately from the country to prevent them from causing more harm by their baneful presence in the land. Obnoxious aliens who are dangerous to the community are like infections. Once determined, the germs and infected tissues must be immediately cut out to hasten the cure.

The defense and maintenance of the security and welfare of the state is a prime duty of government. This responsibility devolves upon the Chief Executive. Because it is a grave responsibility, the law confers upon the President plenary powers, including the power of deportation. In the discharge of this duty, the President must act with the promptness which the circumstances demand. Similarly, he must take that course of action which affords the most effective protection to the state. In the particular case of Stonehill, having arrived at the conclusion that his presence in the country constituted a continuing and present danger both to the security and the welfare of the state, it was my inescapable duty to take the only course of action which would remove the danger effectively and immediately. The only way to do this was to order Stonehill out of the country immediately. Other considerations had to give way to the immediacy of removing a continuing threat to the security and welfare of the state.

Insofar as this administration is concerned, the policy in the Stonehill case will be followed in all similar cases. Once a foreigner has been adjudged to be a dangerous alien whose continued presence tends to harm gravely the country’s welfare, he must be sent out of the country immediately. No one should be allowed to retain his person longer in the country by instituting proceedings against him, but his properties will be held to answer for his pecuniary liabilities. If others desire the presence of his person, they should do so during the pendency of the deportation proceedings but not after. In the final analysis, this is in the nation’s best interest because dangerous aliens must necessarily and unobstructedly not be allowed to stay one day longer in the Philippines or allowed to return ever.

Indeed, it is not for the President to establish why he immediately deported an obnoxious alien since this is his duty. It is up to those who disagree to prove that the prolongation of the alien’s stay in the country was absolutely demanded by’ the public welfare. In the Stonehill case, there were no valid reasons for delaying the ouster of the aliens from the country, in the light of the following considerations:

1. Since the deportation proceedings took five months, those who needed the testimony of the deported aliens had time, if they were serious, to summon them before their deportation. The Supreme Court’s injunction on the use of the Stonehill papers was no excuse for failure to summon the aliens earlier because the injunction was against the prosecutors in the deportation case and not against another body. Moreover, the Supreme Court lifted the injunction on June 20, 1962, or more than one month before the order of deportation.

2. The time to get the testimony of an undesirable alien is before he is ordered deported and not after, because after he is ordered deported, his testimony comes from a polluted source and becomes next to worthless.

3. As a matter of fact, Stonehill appeared in the House Committee on Good Government where he twice refused to answer questions by invoking the inviolate constitutional right against self-incrimination. There is no similarity between the Stonehill case and the Arnault case because in the latter case, the alien voluntarily testified on the subject of inquiry, thereby waiving his constitutional right, whereas in the Stonehill case, since he invoked his constitutional right, he could not be compelled to testify even if he continued to stay in the country indefinitely.

4. Stonehill’s testimony was not essential to the inquiry of the House Committee on Good Government which was intended not to determine guilt, for which it had no power, but to formulate a Code of Official Ethics. Surely, Congress, if it desires, can formulate a Code of Official Ethics without Stonehill’s testimony. Even if guilt were the purpose of the committee’s inquiry, in our legal system you cannot prove guilt by compelling a person to testify against himself in breach of the Constitution.

5. As to the advisability of compelling Stonehill to testify, attention is drawn on the comment of the Commissioner of Immigration, Martiniano Vivo, as follows:

“Stonehill should not be the sole judge of who are the good and the bad in the government. If Stonehill had talked, what would have prevented him from accusing his enemies and protecting his friends in the public service? Would it not have been possible for Stonehill, considering the finding of the President in the deportation order, to brand his enemies who may be good as crooks, and his friends who may be guilty as angels?” ( Manila Times , Aug. 8, 1962.)

6. To delay the ouster of the two aliens would have prolonged the harm to the public interest because excessive time and attention had already been put into just one deportation case for many months. In the words of Emiliano Jurado of the Philippines Herald . “To be fair, the President had three strong points, which should have been exploited by his spokesmen. The government had already spent much time, money, and effort for a single anti-graft case . Congress had all the time within five months to probe Stonehill and there’s no reason why it chose only now to go about it. The continued stay of Stonehill and Brooks would in effect have tolerated the efforts of the two to continue to weave their web of corruption. The prolongation of the case was proof of this.” ( Philippines Herald, August 5, 1962.)

7. Contrary to some uninformed view, the pendency of criminal proceedings against him was no reason for Stone-hill’s prolonged stay because it is the rule that the interest of any other party in any pending criminal, civil or administrative proceeding must be deemed subordinate to deportation and must yield to its overriding necessity.” (Tama Miyake vs. U.S., 257 Fed. Rep. 732.)

Moreover, as pointed out by Press Secretary Leoncio Parungao:

“With all the evidence in his possession and all the forces at his command, former Justice Secretary Jose Diokno, who initiated legal action against Stonehill, did not file any criminal or any other proceedings against him except one for deportation. When Diokno was handling the case, he was known to be satisfied if Stonehill would do two things: ( a ) leave the country and ( b ) settle his tax liabilities, especially after the negligent disappearance of Spielman.” ( Manila Chronicle , August 6, 1962.)

The situation might be different had the department of justice, in initiating action, filed criminal charges against the aliens and based their deportation upon conviction. Since the secretary of justice, who initiated the case and who had a free hand in the proceedings and who was aware of the evidence in detail, found as sufficient the deportation of the aliens without necessity of criminal conviction, there is no reason why the Chief Executive should not be pictured as having acted unwisely in line with the action of the said secretary of justice.

Because of the danger to the community of the continued stay of undesirable aliens, it has not been considered unwise to deport an alien without criminal proceedings. President Garcia deported an undesirable Australian alien despite the pendency of criminal charges against him for the smuggling of gold bullion. When the late President Magsaysay was secretary of national defense, he also personally ousted the undesirable Chinese alien Co Pac who was deported without criminal conviction.

In the case of Stonehill, the harm, to the public welfare would have been compounded if, instead of being sent out of the country, preference was given to his being sent to jail. Let- us consider what would then have happened. As everyone knows, you cannot send a man to jail unless he is convicted in court. In other words, there must be a judicial proceeding. And, as everyone knows, a judicial proceeding takes a long time, oftentimes stretching into years. Had the state chosen to prosecute instead of deporting Stonehill, the preliminary investigation and trial alone would have taken months, and perhaps a year or two would have passed before a judgment of conviction or acquittal would have been rendered by the court of first instance. Assuming that the judgment would be for conviction, Stonehill would have had the right to appeal to the Court of Appeals, and from the Court of Appeals to the Supreme Court. This would have taken more time-perhaps years. At the same time, considering Stonehill’s obvious affluence and influence among some circles, the Government would have had to contend with his strong forces as well as his vast resources—a situation which would have tied up many agencies and offices of the government for many years. In the meanwhile, assuming that the criminal charges would be for crimes which do not involve the penalty of death—and the evidence of Stonehill’s transgressions involve economic activities and the corruption of public officials which do not warrant this penalty—he would have demanded as a matter of constitutional right that he be granted bail during the pendency of the charges against him. Thus, for years while resorting to every tactic that would have protracted the proceedings against him, Stonehill would continue to be at liberty in this country, free to continue inflicting the mischief and damage that he had already caused the Filipino people. It would have been a dereliction of duty to allow such a situation. Not all the years which Stonehill could have suffered in jail would have been sufficient justification for the Chief Executive to allow the country to be exposed a single day to his pernicious machinations. His presence being akin to a cancerous growth, it was our duty to act with surgical decisiveness. The desire for personal retribution, or to put it colloquially, the desire to see a wrongdoer rot in jail cannot be held above the overriding necessity of protecting the security and welfare of the state with dispatch and immediate efficacy.

To those who say that jail and not deportation was the proper punishment, may we point out that had we not deported Stonehill immediately and, instead, held him for prosecution, the latter would, today and for years to come, still be enjoying the privilege of staying in this country, free to continue with his business operations and nefarious activities. On the other hand, deportation immediately deprived him of the privilege, which he had enjoyed for the last 17 years, of staying in this country and enjoying the opportunities that had enabled him to irregularly amass a fortune, to the detriment of the country. Had we waited for a final conviction against him before withdrawing this privilege from him, who can tell but that years from now, if and when that final conviction finally came, intervening circumstances—such as a new administration which would be unable to stand up to pressures brought to bear upon it by his cohorts—would have defrauded the people’s expectations of either seeing him in jail or out of the country? In effect, by the order of deportation, the Administration has inflicted immediate, actual punishment on him, in lieu of expected, future punishment which no one could tell when it would be imposed and, worse still, no one could guarantee that it would be imposed at all.

It is being made to appear by critics that the Administration has been lenient to Stonehill by giving him freedom. It is being forgotten that Stonehill did not want to leave the country, that he savagely fought against deportation, thus paralyzing the department of justice for five whole months. Even members of the press confirm this—that he gave up the fight only “after the President had accepted the resignation of Finance Secretary Fernando E. V. Sison and reassigned Executive Secretary Amelito R. Mutuc for alleged involvement with the tobacco tycoon.” ( Philippines Herald , Aug. 2, 1962.) For an alien who desires to stay in the country, deportation means the loss of his most cherished freedom to return and live in the land of his choice. To such an alien, deportation is the highest form of punishment. This may be judged from Stonehill’s words when he was forcibly ejected from the country never to return:

“I fought as vigorously as I could the move to deport me because deep in my heart I felt this was the right place to raise my family in the Christian way. I leave with a heavy heart and much regret.” ( Manila Times , Aug. 5, 1962.)

Indeed, he had reason to leave with regret because now without his capacity to fight for his interests, the Administration has been able to proceed administratively and in suitable cases criminally, against those who were involved in unethical relations with him; seize his assets, including the U.S. Tobacco Corporation to satisfy the government’s pecuniary claims against him; and in his place of exile in Europe, the foreign press has reported that he is continually watched by the police and has had to transfer stealthily from one hotel to another. The government will continue to flush out those of Stonehill’s confederates who would seek to continue with his illegal activities and evil influence in this country. The administration will also see to it that the doors of this country shall forever be shut to Stonehill and his activities.

We have done our duty in this case to the best of our ability with no motive, as ever, but the wellbeing of our people. It is gratifying that discerning and objective sources have recognized the merit of our fortright action. Ernesto del Rosario of the Manila Chronicle acknowledged that “It is to the credit of the President that in doing away with Stonehill he demonstrated firm determination in ridding our society of a festering sore.” ( Manila Chronicle , Aug. 6, 1962.) Abroad our action has also been applauded. U.S. Time magazine wrote in its Aug. 10, 1962, issue said that: “Macapagal moved in earnest to end Stonehill’s career in the Islands. Haggard and forlorn, he offered to leave voluntarily—a move that would permit his eventual return. But Macapagal wanted no part of Stonehill now or in the future. At week’s end he ordered Stonehill’s arrest and deportation as an undesirable alien.”

While we have sought only the nation’s good, those who have sought to misrepresent us in our actuations appear to be motivated by politics. Most of them are the same parties who criticized us at every turn before our presidential victory. To them, in the past and now, I cannot do right. When I had no occasion to act yet on the deportation case, it was bruited about that I was protecting my Cabinet members. When upon receipt of the report of the Secretary of Justice, I acted on the same day by replacing my two cabinet members who were very close to me, I was criticized as being stern and unfair to them. When the case started and I declined to comment, being the final authority who would decide the case, it was bandied about that I would not deport Stonehill. When I received the report of the Deportation Board and mandatorily deported him the following day so that he could not return to the country, I was criticized for deporting him immediately. Because of his immediate deportation, it was also alleged that the cases of the executive officials involved would be whitewashed and their identities would never be known. When two days later, we not only revealed the names of these incumbent officials but took action by relieving them from the service, I was accused of being a dictator. It is plain that the critical attitude towards the Administration in this case is political, based on the odds, heads we lose, tails they win.

Any insinuation that Stonehill’s immediate deportation would lead to a whitewash of those involved in unethical dealings with him is a canard springing from political motivation. It was plain from the deportation order that the investigation would continue, as, indeed, they have continued. Since the deportation order, action has been taken against fifteen executive officials. On my directive, Department of Justice officials have continued using the evidence and following up leads until those against whom criminal or administrative action lies would be exposed, although the innocent would be protected, in the pursuit of our basic policy that similar venalities would not occur in the future. As we have acted firmly in the Executive Branch, we are hopeful that the Senate and House of Representatives will also do justice to their members.

There is a fact which betrays the political motives behind the criticism against the Administration in this case. We refer to the queer fact that the congressional investigations, conducted concurrently and prematurely while the Executive Branch was vigorously investigating the case, were undertaken not by the proper Senate and House committees but by committees led by henchmen of the Lopez bloc interests. In the Senate, where there is a Blue Ribbon Committee whose traditional task has been to investigate reported anomalies, instead of the Blue Ribbon Committee undertaking the investigation, it was conducted by the Committee on Elections and Privileges headed by Senator Oscar Ledesma, a political associate of Senator Lopez. In the House, where there is a Committee on Internal Government, which should look into the reported involvement of congressmen, the investigation was conducted not by this Committee but by the Committee on Good Government headed by Congressman Jovito R. Salonga of Rizal.

From the fact that the initiative to investigate, Congress was unduly taken by Senator Ledesma and Congressman Salonga, even before the Executive Branch had finished its investigation, it is clear to those who know politics in this country that the criticism being mounted against the Administration on the Stonehill case is political support of the interests and ambitions of Senator Fernando Lopez whose candidacy for the presidency in 1965 has already been launched in Davao and other places. The press has reported from Davao that “queried regarding his political plans, Senator Lopez frankly admitted that he is interested in a draft for the presidency in the 1965 presidential fight.” ( Evening News , August 13, 1962.)

Our people should know, therefore, that Senator Ledesma and Congressman Salonga, in their actuation in the Stone-hill case had, wittingly or unwittingly promoted the effort of the Lopez block to use the case against the Administration for political purposes. Because they failed to prevent the deportation of Stonehill, it is no surprise that Congressman Salonga has moved to turn over the investigation to the Committee on Internal Government, and Senator Ledesma has turned over the investigation to the Blue Ribbon Committee with the extraordinary but transparently significant change that the Blue Ribbon Committee. headed by Senator Roseller Lim, has been turned over to Senator Lorenzo Sumulong, another political associate of Senator Lopez since 1953 when together they bolted the Liberal Party and formed the defunct Lopez-controlled Democratic Party. It was even less surprising that the first decision of the now Sumulong-controlled Blue Ribbon Committee was “to conduct a separate probe into the Stone-hill case to include officials in the Executive Branch of the Government.” In short, the Lopez group has treated the Stonehill case not as an anti-corruption case for the public welfare but has converted it into a political implement to promote the political and economic interests of the Lopez bloc.

In candor, I must say that I have not budged from the position that the political ascendancy of the Lopez vested interest group will be against the national welfare. Their tactics in the Stonehill case constrain us to do what is legal and proper to frustrate their political maneuvers. Our socio-economic program for the country demands that we oppose those who would utilize business empires to advance organized political power and vice-versa because this obstructs the establishment of fair and equal opportunity to the common people for advancement. We are prepared that the now announced Lopez bid for the presidency in 1965 through every opportunity, like seeking the Senate presidency and using the Stonehill deportation case for political purposes, be resisted and submitted to the people for decision.

There is not only irony but foul play in the attempt to arouse passion against the administration for its unequivocal and decisive disposal of the Stonehill case. Those who shed copious tears of righteousness over the case may well ask themselves, who were responsible for the conditions of moral decadence that enabled Stonehill to weave his web of corruption? Was it this administration or those who would now strike their breast in hipocritical indignation? The Stonehill case was known by the past administration, yet they did nothing against him. Now that we have deported him after due process, which the past administration did not dare to do, we are the ones being taken to task.

Having inherited this case and the moral decay in which it festered from our predecessors, what have we on our part done? We have busted the case, unmindful of who would get hurt; we have replaced two members of our cabinet; we have relieved many ranking officials and are proceeding to relieve more as the facts and justice require; and we have gotten rid of the source of infection without delay. And in the wake of our decisive action for the people, Stonehill who for years moved in the highest circles, was exposed for what he was, jailed, his prestige undermined, his offices and home stripped of pertinent documents, his assets and properties seized, and was uprooted from his adopted land;—separated from his wife and family.

Can anyone remember any administration that has acted with more drastic decisiveness in any case of even less magnitude? Allow me to solemnly declare that while it is possible that being human we may be, in the sight of some, in error in our judgment, it is a judgment that we made with all the lights of which we are capable in the fervent pursuit of what we saw was for the best interest of our country and the cause of justice.

Since becoming President, we have exerted so much effort to make the Nation and its leaders realize that the main task is to accelerate economic growth to enable our people to enjoy a better life. Upon assuming office, the first thing we did was to formulate with the aid of experts, a five-year socio-economic development program and we succeeded in having it adopted as the whole Government’s program by the House of Representatives and the National Economic Council, in which the Senate is represented. This is the first time in our history that an economic development program has been officially adopted by the Government. We have doggedly implemented the program. Because the successful implementation of this program will mean the salvation of our people from hardships, we have pleaded with all elements to cast aside or minimize politics. It is gratifying that the top leaders of the Nacionalista Party, Senate President Eulogio Rodriguez and former Speaker Daniel Romualdez, have extended their cooperation, particularly in the sensitive phase of prices. Now lesser leaders, ecstatically delighting in politicking at the expense of the nation’s good, would dissipate the nation’s energy in passionate political wrangling and veer from the constructive task of pushing onward our economic and social program.

We cannot get anywhere as a people if we continue to look at everything from the standpoint of politics and political gain. The time has been long overdue for a new outlook that would discard the habit of negative thinking and attitude in favor of positive thinking and constructive action. We cannot indulge in constructive and destructive thinking forever, such as in dissipating the nation’s energy over the sensational case of one alien as if the fate of the nation depended upon one single case which had been firmly decided—ignoring that there are other undesirable aliens in our midst who, too, the country must get rid of; that there are Filipino Stonehills who, being also undesirable, must be stopped in their selfish bid to cling to a position of monopoly and privilege that obstructs a progressive life for the common citizens; and forgetting above all, that the real job to which we must all buckle in one united and herculean effort, is to develop the economic resources of our land which God in His bounty bestowed not to lie dormant but for our people to enjoy in a good life.

The choice lies in the hands of our political opponents and their friends who showed support for a regime of corruption in the last polls. They may either join hands with us in a constructive and patriotic endeavor to seek a better life for our countrymen or continue to engage in the destructive game of blind partisan politicking. If the first be their choice, ours shall be a fortunate nation. If the second be their preference, we shall meet them in the game of their choice for no other purpose than to strive to clear the ground of old habits of selfishness and irresponsibility so that leaders and citizens of good faith may build auspiciously thereon a better future for our people.

For our part, whatever our political adversaries and their supporters may choose, with no other desire but to serve the best interest of our country and people, we shall use all the gifts that God Almighty gave us to pursue relentlessly and honorably our program to bring about economic and social progress to our people and infuse honesty and integrity in our government.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.