Radio Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On the program, “President Macapagal Speaks to the Masses”

[Released on May 14, 1962]

ON THE STATE VISIT, CONGRESS AND DECONTROL

I SPEAK to you in the midst of events that concern the entire Nation and affect the national interest. Among these are the disapproval of the $73 million War Damage Bill * by the American Congress, the approaching end of the regular session of our own Congress and the continued vigilance over the implementation of the socio-economic program together with the decontrol of foreign exchange.

First I will speak of the war damage matter. After the disapproval of the bill, the Philippine House of Representatives unanimously passed a resolution urging the postponement of my state visit to the United States. The Philippine Senate Committee on Foreign Relations conveyed the same sentiment to the Vice-President and concurrently Secretary of Foreign Affairs for reference to me and other proper authorities. For my part, after consultation with my cabinet and other administration leaders, I expressed concern over the repercussions of the disapproval of the measure on Philippine-American relations and summoned our Ambassador to Washington to come home for consultations. Ambassador Emilio Abello arrived this morning upon which I held a long conference with the Secretary of Foreign Affairs and him.

When I accepted the invitation of President John F. Kennedy to make a state visit to the United States, I looked forward to an occasion for a public manifestation of the historic good will that had prevailed between the Filipino and American peoples for many years. Now the disapproval of the $73 million war damage bill by the U.S. Congress shortly before my scheduled arrival in the United States has caused nationwide disillusionment and indignation among our people. This unfortunate action has been interpreted by our countrymen as indicative of a negation of legal and moral commitments to our country by the United States government and lack of interest on the part of the American people in the successful solution of the economic problems of a steadfast ally in the struggle against international communism.

The resentment of our people was further aggravated by the fact that Congressman H. R. Gross who reportedly expressed the attitude which caused the disapproval of the measure declared categorically that the war damage amount and the economic assistance extended by the American government to the Philippines in the past were handouts. I vehemently deny the correctness of this aspersion.

The outstanding fact in the present situation is that the feeling of resentment among our people and the attitude of the Congress of the United States negate the atmosphere of good will upon which my state visit to the United States was predicated. I feel that our people will never understand how, under the circumstances at this time, I could go to the United States and dwell on the subject of good will. At this present moment, the word will sound empty.

While reiterating my gratitude for the invitation that the American President so kindly extended to me, it is with deep regret that I am constrained to postpone the date of the visit until such time as the circumstances will permit me to go on a state visit, which would be most pleasant, because it would be acceptable to our people.

I look forward to making the visit and therein discussing personally with the President of the United States common problems confronting our peoples if and when the basic atmosphere of good will shall again prevail.

I shall next speak on the congressional session. When I was elected President last November, there was elected, contrary to previous results, a majority in the House of Representatives belonging to the Nacionalista Party. In the Senate, although five of our eight candidates won, there resulted a deadlock in that chamber due to the composition of the remaining senators. Thus, for the first time in our political history, the Nation had a President belonging to one party and a Congress controlled by the other party.

This was a problem for me because I could not carry out my program involving solutions to the national problems of moral regeneration and economic development without the joint action of Congress. My initial approach to this problem was to rely on the spirit of bipartisanship or non-partisanship. However, it soon became evident that the Nacionalista leaders in both Houses would not budge from a partisan attitude. The only alternative left was for me to support Congressman Cornelio Villareal for Speakership in the House and Senator Ferdinand Marcos for the Presidency of the Senate.

Villareal became Speaker in the House through a coalition of Liberal and Nacionalista congressmen known as the Allied Majority. The members of the Allied Majority, both Liberals and Nacionalistas, deserve the approval and appreciation of the Nation. The Liberals sacrificed their claim to preferential treatment from the Administration in order to effect cooperation between the Executive and the Congress. The Nacionalistas in the coalition sought no concessions but joined the Allied Majority out of a realization that the highest interest of the Nation demanded that the deadlock between the Executive and Congress be broken. It was likewise admirable that after the formation of the coalition, the Nacionalistas in the Allied Majority have adhered to the basis of our relationship that while the Administration shall help them in their problems to enable them to better serve their constituents, our cooperation shall be confined to the support of good government and shall not extend to the condonation of wrongdoing, past or future.

The wisdom of the second alternative that we took to solve the problem of an Executive-Legislative deadlock was justified by its success in the House of Representatives. After the election of Speaker Villareal, all the vital administration bills were passed in the House. These are: the national budget, the public works bill, the creation of a Rice and Corn Administration, the Emergency Employment Administration, the Multi-Storey Housing for the poor, the P20 million calamity bill, the foreign investments bill, the amendment to the Basic Industries Law, the calling of a constitutional convention, and the adoption of the Administration’s Five-Year Socio-Economic Program.

There are signs that the Nacionalista-controlled Senate may approve the Administration bills * as they acted on the Rice and Corn, Unemployment and Housing Bills. I appeal anew to the Nacionahsta senators to approve all the ten Administration measures because these are the minimum requirements for the success of our program of solutions to the problems of our people. I have always believed that the senators’ sense of patriot-ism would make them rise above partisanship; I trust that events will bear out this faith. The approval of all the Administration bills would bring about a fresh atmosphere of national unity in which partisanship would be reduced to a minimum. In such event, the Nacionalista leaders can look forward to a reciprocal attitude of cooperation from the Administration.

I am glad that the Supreme Court has forthwith decided the issue of the two Commissions on Appointments, although the decision was adverse to the Administration. I have been criticized for upholding the Allied Majority commission but those who made the criticism do not understand our position. My attitude has been to send all legal controversies to the Supreme Court for quick decision in order to clear the setting as early as possible upon which we can proceed to carry out our program of moral and economic reforms. This, again, became imperative because of the obstructions towards the fulfillment of the mandate of the people for the eradication of corruption and the opening of opportunities for a better life to the people. Because of the control of Congress by the Nacionalistas, their partisans have moved to block the Administration by making midnight appointments, refusing to resign from key positions, and other obstructive acts.

The only remedy left to me under these circumstances was to act resolutely in order that the Supreme Court may decide quickly the legal controversies involved. Between the two legal sides, the Administration chose what it believed was the right side while allowing the Supreme Court to decide the legal issues speedily. Thus, arose cases like Administrative Order No. 2, the right of the midnight appointees to return to their positions, the tobacco case, and the case of the two Commissions on Appointments. My part in these cases was necessitated by the need for seeking remedies against the obstructions of Nacionalista partisans to the measures we needed to clean the government of corruption and to make the government an effective instrument for the people’s welfare. It is a gross misunderstanding of our position to impute to us a light attitude toward the courts. On the contrary, we are showing exemplary respect for our Supreme Court in taking positive steps so that the highest tribunal will resolve the relevant legal disputes for all to heed and for the good of the Nation.

Let me now dwell on the decontrol program. It is generally realized that the wholesome effects of decontrol are not immediate. The question is asked—when will the favorable effects of the Administration’s economic program come? I will answer this question.

As a background, I will start by saying that at the inception of the new regime there was general agreement that the system of controls which had been in operation for twelve years had to be discarded because of its two primordial evils: first, the control of foreign exchange was a source of widespread corruption; and secondly, the economy under controls could no longer grow at a pace to meet the needs of an increasing population.

To enable the people to meet the adverse conditions of these short-run effects of decontrol, we have moved to raise the salaries of government employees and we have urged private entrepreneurs to follow the example of the government. We shall also keep the prices of rice, corn, and other prime commodities as steady as possible; provide housing to the lowest-income groups; and create employment opportunities in the public sector which will also stimulate private enterprise and thus promote a rising level of income for the people.

After a reasonable period during which the aforesaid short-run effects would be experienced, the beneficial effects of decontrol and free enterprise will set in. These beneficent effects are: the exchange rate between the dollar and the peso will be stabilized at a level that will promote productivity; exports will exceed imports; investments, both domestic and foreign, will multiply; more goods will be produced; there will be more jobs and income; prices will level off and become steady; and because the people will have more than additional income to meet the cost of their needs, they will begin to enjoy a better life compared to previous years. This will finally mean a more abundant life, thus bringing about the redemption of the masses of our people from the prison walls of their poverty and misery.

I am confident that these two periods of development will take place during my tenure of office. Because of this, I ask for understanding and patience from the public as well as from those who complain of the transitory and transitional difficulties and who are mainly; first, those who complain of tight credit restrictions; and secondly, those who are dismayed by the fluctuating and rising dollar rate.

Regarding credit, it was necessary to prescribe credit restrictions upon the launching of decontrol to prevent the exhorbitant rise in the price of the dollar and to prevent the soaring of prices. The alleged tight credit, for instance, has been unduly magnified. There are some banks today that find it difficult to meet the credit demands of their customers, because they are undercapitalized; and there are some businessmen who find it difficult to borrow more today because, for one thing, they had overextended their borrowing capacity in the past due to speculative anticipation of decontrol. Some banks, however, have sufficient credit capacity to service their customers; and many businessmen are being accorded credit which they have not publicly announced. In the Philippine National Bank alone, there is available at least P250 million for qualified borrowers.

While prescribing credit restrictions on commercial transactions, the Administration has moved vigorously to expand credit facilities for productive investments.

The Development Bank of the Philippines has stepped up its lending activities for industrial and productive investments, bolstered by 50% of the loanable funds of the GSIS and SSS which continue also to give loans from their remaining funds. The DBP has granted credits amounting to more than P100 million and it is considering loan applications amounting to another P100 million. It is also in the process of releasing some P40 million for loans previously approved. The Administration has also taken steps to establish a private industrial development bank capitalized at $100 million to help finance medium and long-term industrial and productive investments in various parts of the country as called for by the socio-economic program. This bank will be established during this calendar year.

Regarding the price of the dollar, it has been noticed that the dissatisfaction about the fluctuating value of the dollar has been lumped together with the tight credit restrictions complained of. This is an indication of the lack of merit of the complaint or criticism on these two matters, tight credit and rising cost of the dollar. It is evident that you cannot remedy both together by the same step. If the credit restrictions are removed, the price of the dollar will rise.

The value of the dollar, therefore, must be viewed together with credit policies. To those who advocate that the dollar must have a fixed equilibrium rate, which should be set by the Central Bank, I say that there is no disagreement on this. The divergence is as to when this will be effected.

Again, I ask for understanding on this matter. Upon taking office, I was called upon to institute decontrol, in accordance with the pledge of the two parties during the presidential campaign, under extraordinarily adverse conditions. The international reserve was, to use Governor Cuaderno’s expression, “in extremis.” The dollar reserves were less than $100 million. In addition, the Central Bank had commitments of over $300 million at previous rates which were payable within one year. Therefore, today we are still carrying this burden resulting from past and previous commitments.

The Administration should, therefore, be given ample time to establish a stable rate for the dollar. The important thing is that it is agreed that the price of the dollar must be stable, meaning to say it will not fluctuate beyond one per cent, above or below what is considered the ideal rate.

The Administration is as desirous as the business community in fixing the dollar rate and will do this very thing at the earliest possible time.

One of the obstacles to the hastening of the time when the rate of the dollar will be fixed is the 20% retention by the Central Bank of the export proceeds. This 20% retention of the export proceeds has been necessitated by the virtual discontinuance of the margin fee which netted the Central Bank some P200 million annually. In the absence of another source to fill the gap left by the margin fee, it became expedient to retain 20% of the dollar receipts of exporters.

It is imperative to remove this 20% dollar retention in order to make decontrol full and complete. The elimination of this 20% retention will speed up the establishment of conditions that will enable the Central Bank to fix the dollar rate. For this reason, I am poised to ask Congress to approve a measure to effect full decontrol by assessing for a temporary period an impost on the excess profits of the exporters who as a group have benefited the most from the decontrol.

I reiterate therefore the following: first, that current credit restrictions which were prescribed by the Central Bank in Circular No. 133 upon the institution of decontrol will be relaxed in due course; and secondly, that the Central Bank will, as soon as conditions are auspicious, establish a fixed rate for the dollar which the bank will support with our stabilization fund.

I appeal to all to do their part in this national and gigantic effort for socio-economic progress. Those who are identified with the Administration should help in the formulation, coordination and proper implementation of policies and decisions. Those who are not should cooperate whenever they are called upon to do so and should at least not undermine public confidence in the Administration’s effort. All should comply with the laws and should absolutely avoid bribery of officials. Persons with capital should invest in the many opportunities for profitable enterprise which are now available without restrictions. Exporters should export their goods as soon as these are ready for exportation under their usual schedule in the past without speculating on changes in the exchange rate. Importers should not transgress the customs laws. Market vendors should not unduly raise their prices and, if necessary, should be satisfied for the time being with less profits to maintain prices at more or less the prevailing levels. Customers should not pay unduly high prices for goods and should habituate themselves to buying substitutes which are available at lower prices. Everyone must act in a manner as to contribute to the success of the nation’s program for economic recovery and expansion under the new system of decontrol and free enterprise.

I ask our people to give us the chance to work out solutions to the Nation’s problems within the term of four years which constitute my covenant of service with the electorate. Although I have the handicap of a Congress belonging to the other party, I have faith that at the end of my term our people’s lives will be better and happier than when I began. Of one thing you can be certain: in these four years, in fulfillment of my campaign pledge, you shall have a President who shall seek nothing for himself and his family. Disregarding my salary, Mrs. Macapagal and I will step down Malacañang not one peso richer than when we came to live temporarily in this Palace of the People. This means denying to our family the advantages open to the rest of our people; for while my endeavor shall be to open opportunities for material advancement and a better life to all our countrymen, my own family will not in any way participate in those opportunities in order to insure that my decisions and actions shall be completely without any selfish intent but shall be wholly for the public welfare. If at the end of my term, I shall have succeeded in helping our people, especially the common man, to have within their reach the blessings of an abundant life, then that shall be my highest reward for my incumbency of sacrifice. But if God should will that due to the fact that Congress is in control of the Nacionalista Party and other such factors, I shall fail, then I shall at least have the consolation of knowing that I shall, more than ever, be with our people because if their life has not advanced, I shall not have advanced with them.

You should, therefore, know that whenever our lives shall be in the four years of my term, you are assured of a President who will use all his endowments from Divine Providence not for his personal advantage but for the attainment of a better life for our beloved people.

* The U.S. Congress finally changed its stand and approved this controversial measure. President Kennedy signed it into law on August 30, 1962. 276

* Congress approved only five of the Administration’s ten major bills. See page 166.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.