Radio-TV Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines In the program “President Macapagal Speaks to the Masses”

[Released on October 10, 1962]

FOOD AND FREEDOM

TONIGHT I would like to speak to you on the subject of food and freedom. I chose this subject because the opposition has tried to make it appear . . . unfairly . . . that under the present Liberal Party Administration, a choice must be made between food and freedom.

At the outset, let me state, so that there may be no further question, that under my Administration, no choice need be made between food and freedom . . . that, in fact, through our vigorous program of government, we in the Administration seek to bring within the reach of our people both food and freedom.

I am happy to report that while the opposition is busy making an artificial issue of food and freedom, we in the Administration have begun to succeed at the task of making this life’s necessities available to all our people.

Chairman Cornelio Balmaceda of the National Economic Council in a report dated October 4, 1962, stated that “food production for domestic consumption increased by more than three per cent.”

Mr. Bernardino Ronquillo, a reputable and objective economic analyst, wrote on October 4, 1962:

“The rise of prices has not been as steep or serious as feared . . . The economy is not doing so badly considering the adoption of such drastic measure as freeing the exchange after more than a decade of controls.”

I shall later quote more extensively from these two reports and cite a few others to show that there has been a healthy progress in our efforts to improve conditions in our country. The Administration does not lay claim to solution of all national problems for we have barely started. Much still remains to be done. But what we have accomplished so far gives us reason to hope for a better life for our people.

There are today three forces contending for a decisive voice in determining the course of our national life—whether or not we and our children shall have food and freedom. These are, first, the Administration and the majority party; secondly, the opposition and its supporters; and thirdly, the communists and their sympathizers. Tonight, we shall concern ourselves with the first two forces and leave the third for future dissertation.

On one hand, the Administration offers its positive program of government, specifically, its program for moral regeneration, accelerated socio-economic growth and general reform. On the other hand, the opposition groups offer to the public their criticisms, whatever may be their validity and effectiveness, and, during periods near national elections their own alternative program of government as a substitute for the program of the present Administration. Whichever of these two forces prevails will determine the conduct of the people’s affairs and the future of the country.

As regards the third force emanating from the communists, which we shall discuss in the future, we only ask that the opposition now refrain from saying or doing anything that would further communist ends or from trafficking with the communists. Both the Administration and the opposition should be loyal to the free way of life and to the principles of democracy which communism seeks to destroy. As long as the two political parties refrain from joining forces with the communists, our democracy and our country will be safe no matter how severe partisan struggles may become. In contending with each other, it is expected that the two parties would employ means of attack and defense which are generally accepted in a democracy. We take this occasion to assure the opposition that in contending with them, we shall adhere to fair and customary means that are sanctioned by the Constitution and the laws of the land. In asking the opposition not to resort to the desperate recourse of teaming up with the communists which has proved to be a dangerous expedient in other countries, we would be lacking in candor if we did not state that upon clear proof that any leader or group in the opposition party has joined hands with the communists, we shall consider it our duty to take such steps as are sanctioned by the Constitution and the law in dealing with communist forces in order to safeguard the security of our country.

In our appraisal, the force that normally is generated by the opposition has weakened since the Administration not only launched its positive program of government for moral renaissance and socio-economic progress, but also set out to execute resolutely the program despite odds and obstacles. Indeed, it is difficult to stem the march of authentic reform and progress, particularly by those who by their own previous excesses cannot summon the moral qualities required in a great contest and endeavor.

Thus, the opposition has retreated from one untenable position to another. Exulting prematurely over the prospects of the Stonehill case on which they had the initial advantage because of the prominent participation in the prosecution of one of their partisans, they were soon confronted with the truth that this case was but one of a series in a massive reform drive of the Administration. This series has already included the cases against Stonehill, Peter Lim, Ernesto Ting, Francisco Cokeng, William Li Yao, Ti Bio Suy, Vicente Kho, Robert Stewart, Fernando and Eugenio Lopez, and Jose Yulo. In truth, these cases do not represent the end of the anti-graft drive From its abortive attempt to raise moral issues, the opposition shifted to the economic issues, like the prices of commodities, only to be confronted by the phenomenon that during this period of scarcity, rice is selling at from P0.85 to P0.95 per ganta, and that prices of other essential commodities have behaved satisfactorily considering the major economic reforms. The opposition also has been met by a successful shift in the; fundamental pattern of the economy from controls to free enterprise and the auspicious launching of a sound socio-economic program which, as time passes, will continue to improve the price situation.

In frustration, the opposition next moved to the bugaboo of an ominous dictatorship, a criticism which, having no foundation in fact because of the Administration’s blind respect for the decisions of the Supreme Court, subsided easily with the reinstatement of the chairman of the science board and a suspended provincial governor who was accused of terrorism. Thus, the tempting false issues based on food or freedom vanished before they could take form because by the very act of removing controls over the economic activities of the people, the Administration precisely enlarged the areas of freedom and through its vigorous program seeks to bring within the reach of the people food and freedom.

The opposition appears stumped by the authenticity of the Administration’s twin program for moral reconstruction and socio-economic advance. Feeling a dearth in sensational exposes, the opposition would normally enjoy in an era of graft, the most that the present opposition politicians could attempt in the face of the integrity of the new regime was a labored and magnified narrative of a so-called “attempted scandal” in tobacco importation—in other words, a supposed graft that admittedly has not yet taken place.

The weakened force that stems from opposition criticism is good for the people because it conversely indicates that the Administration’s constructive task for their welfare is being well received. During the early months of our regime, we were anxious about opposition criticism because those were critical days when we were effecting the fundamental shift in the pattern of our economy from regimentation to freedom, an operation the success of which depended upon public confidence.

Now we have a greater acceptance of the attitude of the critics of the Administration. From their recent utterances, it is obviously the attitude of some oppositionists that in a democracy the opposition must criticize. One oppositionist has written that the right to criticism includes the liberty to make foolish criticism and another that the President may ignore criticism merely for the sake of criticizing which is a right that has to be somehow exercised.

Frankly, we disagree with the view that the right to criticize includes the liberty to make foolish criticism. We believe that the proper exercise of the right to criticize, in order that it will not degenerate into license, contemplates sound and not foolish criticism. In the same manner that the Administration is expected to formulate sound and not foolish policies and decisions, the opposition ought to (make sound and not foolish criticism. Yet, although we disagree with the opposition’s view as to the exercise of the right to make foolish criticism, we respect their right to their opinion. Knowledge of their wrong concept of criticism has, at least, a useful purpose in that the people will know how to evaluate the criticisms against the Administration.

We are being reminded by critics that when we were in the opposition, we personally exercised the right of criticism and that we should not now begrudge their right to criticism against the Administration. Apart from the fact that there were many valid causes for criticism at that time, we also took care that we had the moral authority to criticize by not being guilty of the wrongs we criticized and by not committing malfeasances in the discharge of our own public trust. As he who goes to a court of equity must do so with clean hands, he who would claim the right to make criticism must also do so with clean hands. Predicated on our own norm when we were in the opposition exercising the right of criticism, in viewing criticisms aired against us today, which we do not find valid or which does not conduce to the national interest, it is a legitimate defense on our part not only to show the fallacy of the criticism but also, in appropriate cases, to show that the critic has no moral authority to make such criticism because of his own guilt in the transgression of our laws and in the discharge of his public office.

There is only one criticism that we consider now necessary to comment on. It is the challenge to our attitude that the acts of public officials must not only be legal but moral as well. Would our critics want the country to go back to the corrupt past which justified graft because it was legal? In moments of extreme superficiality the opposition has alleged that we have no right to question the morality of a law because a law must be presumed to be moral. What is not perceived by the critics is that it is not the morality of the law itself that we question but the morality of its application in some specific sets of circumstances.

An illustration is the case of the now notorious presidential midnight appointments made on December 29, 1961. The law which vests authority in the President to make appointments as long as he is President is certainly moral. But its application under the set of circumstances to which the law was applied in this specific case was not moral, indeed to such a degree that the immorality vitiated the legal application of the law.

In disputing the validity of our ethical approach to public acts, it is argued that the President takes it unto himself to determine what is moral and immoral. If the President cannot determine the morality of official action, who will determine it? The opposition forgets that the President of our country, by virtue of his exalted position and the persuasive effects of his example, must necessarily exercise political, economic and moral leadership. To leave the determination of public morality to everyone would be chaotic since there would arise numerous conflicts of views, none of which would carry authority or sufficient persuasiveness.

By his position as the official leader of the nation, the President acts within his sphere of responsibility to set the moral guide for the nation. It is certainly beneficial for a country when its President pursues a higher moral criterion than a degraded moral standard. It is better that the moral basis of the law is not indiscriminately assumed to exist in all given situations because if legality were the sole test of official action in all situations, it would lead, as indeed it had happened in the past, to decisions and acts that would be corrupt and harmful to the community. It is better too that the determination of the morality of official action be made by a responsible authority, that is, the President of the country, because as long as he holds his position he acts by authority of the people and in the discharge of a responsibility entrusted by the people.

Having touched on the weakened force of opposition criticism, we shall now advert briefly to the force generated by the performance of the Administration in connection with its drive for moral rehabilitation and socio-economic development.

In the Administration’s moral drive, we are confident that we have arrested graft and corruption and that we have set a new moral tone that will deter anomalies in the future. Despite the headway made and despite resistance, we shall push the moral program without fear or favor. While in its punitive phase the drive has been concerned with a few exemplary instances, the punitive operation will continue in cases of guilt exhibited by clear evidence involving notorious offenders or in cases where the guilty parties against whom there exists prima facie evidence show incorrigibility. It is our view that the success of the moral drive has been outstanding in the upper echelon of officialdom, especially on the part of new appointees. We shall therefore proceed to insure that the ways of integrity will also be observed by the public servants down to the lower levels. Among the higher echelon involving especially our own appointees, we shall be ever vigilant. In our relentless moral drive, we shall spare neither friend nor foe, neither political opponent nor partisan supporter.

It is, however, in connection with our socio-economic program where we hope to unleash the most powerful, constructive and decisive national force upon which to stake the fate of our Administration and to achieve the role to which we aspire in the building of a greater Filipino nation. On this, we are gratified to report that we have effected the crucial shift from a regimented to a free economy, that we have coped with the transitory and transitional problem of prices, and that we have launched a universally considered sound and integrated five-year socio-economic program.

There is no question that immediate decontrol was imperative at the time of our assumption of the Presidency. No less than an official of the World Bank who made a searching study of the Philippine economy in 1961 has attested that if decontrol had been delayed further, it would have resulted in disaster to the economy. With decontrol unavoidable, the relevant question is how well it has been handled. We hold to the view that the shift has been done well. This view is shared by such authorities as Mr. Dragoslav Avramovic of the World Bank and former Governor Miguel Cuaderno of the Central Bank.

Our people may judge for themselves from the economic report of Chairman Cornelio Balmaceda of the National Economic Council dated October 4, 1962, an excerpt from which follows:

“The economy during the first six months of 1962 showed an expansionary trend. Food production for domestic consumption increased by more than 3%. For the crop year 1962, production of palay (rough rice) increased by 8% over that of the previous crop year. Similar increases were recorded in the export crops which have risen by 3.5%. The most significant increase was registered in sugar which showed a 10% increase in production in response to an anticipated increased quota in the US market. In mining, the estimates placed a 7% increase in volume of output in the first half of 1962 over that of the corresponding period in 1961. Available data for manufacturing production for the first quarter of 1962 show a 20% increase over that of the same period in 1961.

“A net receipt of $37.08 million was recorded in the first six months of 1962 in contrast to a net deficit of $37.42 million during the same period in 1961. The increased export receipts of $30.98 million during the first six months of the year is the result of a higher rate of exchange coupled with favorable export prices. On the other hand, import payments decreased by $28.02 million compared with the same period in 1961 as a result of the higher rate pi exchange. Invisible receipts increased substantially as a result of the attraction of large sums of funds accumulated abroad due to the decontrol of the currency.

“The rate of exchange which opened at P3.50 per dollar for foreign exchange receipts and at P4 per dollar for foreign exchange disbursements stabilized at P3.55 and P3.88 per dollar, respectively. The wholesale prices of imported food products went up by 22.8% although domestically produced goods rose by only 3.1%. No doubt, the increased production of agricultural products served to dampen the increasing trends in the prices of domestically produced commodities on both the wholesale and consumer levels.

“To immediately alleviate the difficulties of the low-income groups who are most affected by the increases in prices of imported commodities like milk, canned fish, medicine and corned beef, the Government through the Namarco will continue to import these selected prime commodities to supply the total national requirement for the rest of the calendar year 1962 and for calendar year 1963.

“Monetary and fiscal restraints were exercised to complement the full decontrol. Private credit expansion increased the money supply by P99.3 million and foreign exchange transactions injected P59.6 million into the economy. Altogether, money supply increased by P170 million at the end of June, 1962, over the money supply in the same period the previous year.

“It is assumed that the supreme monetary authority which is the Central Bank will take the necessary steps to provide whatever increase in money supply which in their opinion is proven to be consistent with the stable price level and the resultant growth in output.

“The country’s output of available goods and services at 1961 prices will grow at an average rate of 6.6%. Relative prices are assumed at 1961 levels . . . since this is the goal of government action.”

Lest it may be said by our critics that the foregoing appraisal is from a biased source, we invite attention to an appraisal made by Mr. Bernardino Ronquillo, a respected business editor of a morning daily, which follows in part:

”Lifting of control on exchange transactions has had a stabilizing effect on the economy. While the gains expected in the efforts to improve the balance of payments have been modest, the adverse impact has not been as severe as feared.

“The international reserve was up to $132 million as of the end of August against $103 million as of the end of 1961, a gain of $29 million.

“Although imports rose by $11 million to $252 million during the January-May period of 1962 from $241 million in the same period of 1961, exports increased by $13 million to $219 million.

“This reduced the trade deficit to $33 million in the first five months of 1962 from $34 million in the like period of 1961.

“The government’s budgetary deficit at the end of the 1962 fiscal year was also reduced to $127 million from $54 million for the 1961 fiscal year.

“Prices have naturally gone up as a result of decontrol. But the rise has not been as steep or serious as feared.

“The wholesale price index for export products has gone up even more steeply—by 29.1 points to 169.3 as of last August.

“The economy is not doing so badly considering the adoption of such a drastic measure as freeing the exchange after more than a decade of controls, and considering such miscalculation as over-tightening of credit restrictions.

“The economy should respond more vigorously to further easing of credit restrictions, release of new money for production and economic development.

“The full impact of credit relaxation and new spending is likely to be felt in the first half of 1963.”

A favorable trend in the economy now moves under the propulsion of its innate strength as reflected in the report of Central Bank Governor Andres Castillo at the recent meeting of the International Monetary Fund. Predicting a 6% rate of economic growth for 1962–1963, Gov. Castillo referred to the freed Philippine economy as an example which other developing nations may well emulate. Exuding confidence, Gov. Castillo also talked of developing countries not needing foreign aid and instead needing only trade. This optimistic and prideful reference to the economy by our official spokesman in world economic agencies is a contrast to their previous gloomy reports in the past when they could only talk of difficulties and crisis characterizing the Philippine economy under controls.

Another favorable indication is the uniform report of increased interest of foreign investors to come to the Philippines. Vice President Pelaez reported the other day that there is increased confidence among American business leaders in the Philippine economy. Senator Lorenzo Sumulong also reported that more American businessmen have become interested in investing in the Philippines.

With God’s grace, success under the socio-economic program is inevitable even as failure was imminent under controls. Under controls, those favored were the importers, the foreign producers and the influence peddlers who through connections obtained dollar licenses for favored persons, and those prejudiced and discouraged were the experts and local producers. In such a situation, the economy could not grow healthily. It was obvious that if controls were successfully removed, the economy would expand on its own strength because under decontrol, with the peso value of locally produced goods being higher, farmers, exporters, and local producers would earn more and thus be spurred to increase their production. This would mean more jobs, more income and more goods that spell prosperity. We have personally observed signs of this favorable movement of the economy in the increased income of the copra growers in Laguna. copra and abaca growers in the Bicol region and the abaca and plywood producers in Davao.

The outstanding fact in the situation is that the administration has passed through the critical period in the bold effort to discard a regimented economy for a free economy and steer the country in the direction of fast economic and social progress in freedom. This raises a grave responsibility for both the Administration and the opposition. For the Administration, it exacts from its key officials and even the entire government personnel a duty to redouble efforts in order that the initial success in the first phase of the socio-economic development endeavor will not go to waste through a smug sense of complacency and failure to undertake a sustained and vigorous implementation of the program until its final success.

We urge the cabinet members, the heads of the public agencies concerned, and all public officials and employees to work harder in order to assure that the nation’s socio-economic program which has been so auspiciously launched will not fail by getting bogged down in an attitude of disorganization and idle-inclined routine in its implementation. The program having been successfully launched despite overwhelming difficulties, let us push the initial success to its finality through a vigorous, sustained and proficient implementation for the sake of a better and happier livelihood for our people.

For the opposition, the challenge is even harder and greater. The call to duty addressed to them involves the supremely patriotic decision of possibly sacrificing their political future for the sake of the prosperity and happiness of our people. We ask them to consider the proposition that at no time in our post-war history has a greater opportunity been offered to our people and its leaders for the attainment by our population of a better and happier life than that which is in store from the continuing and final success of the Administration’s socio-economic development program. Will the opposition spurn the opportunity for patriotism and greatness from their whole-hearted cooperation for the success of this program or will they prefer the selfishness of their partisan interests by withholding such cooperation and seeking to cause the failure of the program?

We trust that the opposition will rise to the challenge of greatness by helping the Administration to insure the continued success of the nation’s socio-economic program. Insofar as their partisan interests are concerned, candor impels us to observe that by according their full cooperation and assistance for the conclusive success of the nation’s undertaking towards economic and social fulfillment, the opposition will not thereby be necessarily acting in detriment to their political interests. Our prime concern is to succeed in the responsibility that we have accepted from our people and upon being satisfied that we have discharged this responsibility in the eyes of history and posterity, we shall act with thorough justice to both the majority and opposition parties and their leaders in their subsequent bids to our sovereign people for the continuation of the task that we have assigned and satisfactorily discharged for ourselves as our role in the endless undertaking of building an ever greater and prosperous nation.

Above that of the Administration and the opposition, the responsibility of our people is even more paramount for the success of the program. Under free enterprise, economic growth and progress lie in the hands of the citizens. The government will be ready to help by exercising fiscal discipline in its own operation, by prudent spending of the people’s taxes for maximum social overhead projects, by providing better statistics and sound business guidance and by just allocation of available public credit facilities.

The main task, which is the making of sound investments and the development of savings, now depends on our people. Because of our faith in freedom, we have restored free enterprise to the extent that it is practicable in this age. In this system, the opportunity and responsibility for economic success pertain to the people. We trust that our businessmen and the citizens realize this fully and will act accordingly by seizing and holding the initiative in availing of their opportunity and discharging their responsibility. Freedom is a precious right and boon. To deserve the right, its responsibility must be accepted and fulfilled. Under this Administration, it is now in the hands of our people to prove that they have the ability to make use of their freedom in order to bring about their economic security and well-being. The mighty task at hand is to attain both food and freedom for all. May God Almighty bless us in this great and crucial endeavor.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.