Radio-TV Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines In the program, “President Macapagal Speaks to the Masses”

[Released on September 18, 1962]

THE PRESIDENTIAL MIND

LOOKING back at the first few months of our administration, we are gratified at the results. The prime goods of our administration are moral regeneration and socio-economic progress in freedom. On the latter, we have succeeded in making the shift from graft-breeding and growth-suffocating controls to free enterprise. No less than Mr. Dragoslav Avramovic, a high official of the World Bank who has seen the same economic reform attempted with much more difficulty in other countries, has described the shift that we made in our country as “brilliantly done.” Only the other day, former Gov. Miguel Cuaderno of the Central Bank opined that the shift from controls to decontrol has already definitely succeeded and that from here on, the national economy can take care of itself to move healthily forward.

In the moral fields, too, we feel that we have succeeded in eliminating or discouraging the mentality of influence peddling and get-rich-quick-through-smart-deals in favor of legitimate ventures and in promoting an atmosphere of no one being above the law and of giving a fair and equal opportunity to all the citizens, rich and poor alike.

Now that the painful anxieties and strains of initial effort in an infinitely difficult task are gone, it will perhaps be useful that, in the relaxed mood of satisfaction in work so far well done, we should confide to all concerned, our thinking, our modes of approach in discharging our duties and our basic attitudes that affect the course of public affairs while we are discharging the responsibilities of the presidency of the land.

ON CRITICISM

First, let me express my thoughts on the matter of criticism. We are not “onion-skinned” to criticism, much less are we against it.

In candor, we believe, however, that the criticism against us has been mostly misinformed or unsound. In reacting to criticism we have endeavored to show its deficiency. The critics in all probability believe that they are correct. On the other hand, in most cases, we believe that their criticism ensue from misinformation or from a narrow view. The situation appears to us to be that most of our critics see primarily the narrow confines of their special interest as against the national panorama that our broader background and responsibility enable us to see. To use a popular expression, they see only a few trees while we see the whole forest.

We recognize the right of criticism which belongs to all in a democracy but we also claim the right and the duty to show the fallacies and especially the destructive, if unintended, effect of uninformed and unsound criticism as they affect the good of the country.

We therefore do not mind the criticism hurled against us because this is an inalienable right of all citizens; as a matter of fact, we welcome them because we can perceive their deficiency, if any, and thus be able to expose it. We ask only one thing of our critics—to respect the dignity of our office by not insulting or sneering at us. As long as we hold the position of President of the country, we regard our dignity to be the dignity of our people themselves. As the Supreme Court said in the case of Forbes vs . Tiaco, 16 Phil. 534: “An assault upon the President is an assault upon the people. An offense against him is an offense against the State.” We would feel recreant to our duty of safeguarding the dignity of our people if we allow insults to be made against the President. Insults are no substitute for criticism or for sound argument and facts.

BOTH MORALITY AND LEGALITY

Another basic attitude of ours is that we are not satisfied with legality alone. Thus, in our first “State-of-the-Nation” message to Congress on January 22, 1962, we said that:

“In our actions, we should not be guided only by what is legal. We must go beyond legality into the demands of morality. Our actions must not only be legal but must be moral as well.”

Thus, when we are asked to act on a public matter and we are told and are convinced that it is legal, we then ask the question: Is it moral? If it is both legal and moral, we go ahead. If it is legal but not moral, we desist.

Indeed, when we moto propio study a matter, our first question is: Is this moral? If we are satisfied that it is moral, then we ask: Is it legal? If we are in doubt as to the legality of a course of action, then, availing of our training in law and of our legal advisers, we study and seek a legal mode for its accomplishment. If we are convinced that the matter is moral but there is doubt of its legality, if the matter is necessitated by the national interest, that is to say it could be legal or it could be illegal; then we take steps to bring it to the Supreme Court with the attitude that we would abide by whatever decision the Supreme Court would render as the final arbiter of legality under the Constitution.

This is the reason why we have not been fearful of being overruled by the Supreme Court. To us, it is not a question of prestige but a means of seeking ways of strengthening the democratic mechanism to effectively serve our people. We know that in some situations no lawyer really knows what the law definitely is until a Supreme Court ruling. In fact the Supreme Court itself is often divided on what the law is. Whenever required, rather than desist, we ask the Supreme Court to render a guiding ruling on the law, irrespective of our personal opinion on the legal point. Our attitude in these cases is not that of a lawyer who is guided by his opinion of the law, but that of a leader of the people who is primarily guided by what is good for the country despite legal ambiguities. We leave it to the highest tribunal of the land to determine the law for us and for those who will follow after us for the good of the nation.

Thus, we issued Administrative Order No. 2 annulling the now notorious midnight appointments despite legal doubts because it was the right thing to do for our people; and fortunately, the Supreme Court sustained our position. The majority opinion and the dissenting opinion in the midnight appointments case illustrate the difference between our attitude and that of the past administration. In the dissenting opinion, which reflected the thinking of the previous administration, it was maintained that all that the court had to look into was the legality, without delving into the realm of morality. The majority of the court, however, took a position more or less similar to ours—that the morality of a situation affects the issue of legality. To our mind, the majority opinion in that case is one of the most significant and encouraging decisions in our jurisprudence because it gave indications that we have a Supreme Court which is not controlled by cold or opinionated legalists who might be impervious to the needs of the nation and the democratic system which has made the existence of the court possible, but is composed of judicial statesmen who recognize the moral ingredients of the law. Insofar as we are concerned, both as a public, man and as a lawyer, the fundamental basis of law is morality and a reasonable construction that promotes morality is the true law, rather than an interpretation that sanctions and promotes immorality.

Another illustration was our bringing the Agro-Industrial tobacco importation to the Supreme Court. We took this action not because we were ready to stake our knowledge of the law on the action but because we knew that this importation was filthy with the graft that characterized the regime so recently repudiated by the people. We could not of our own accord sanction such a venture and thereby be a party to a dubious transaction, but when the Supreme Court ruled that it was legal, we had no hesitation in complying with the court’s decision.

In the case of the Querubin reinstatement case, our personal opinion was contrary to that of our then Secretary of Justice, but since the legal actions of the government were his prime responsibility and it was, and still is, our policy to sustain our cabinet members unless we feel that they are grossly in error, we did not stop our justice secretary from sustaining his views before the court. We feel that whatever the ruling was, on which we were not particular, it was conducive to the public interest to clarify the situation through the Supreme Court.

In the Commission on Appointments case, it was less important to us that the Rodrigo commission on appointments be sustained than that in the nation’s interest the conflict between the two commissions on appointments should be resolved conclusively by the Supreme Court in order to avoid a disastrous situation of two constitutional bodies, each claiming legality and supremacy.

It is not fair, therefore, for us to be pictured as being rebuffed by the Supreme Court in any case. In our administration, when we take a case to the Supreme Court, it is not necessarily that we stake our knowledge of the law but that we have doubts about the correct construction of the law. It is necessary for the good of the people that the Supreme Court resolves the legal doubt, being always ready on our part to accept and be guided by the court’s final decision.

The necessity and wisdom of our attitude have been shown in the action that we took against the former NARIC officials. Despite their unfitness to handle the vital rice problems, they refused to vacate their positions, invoking the protection of the civil service. Despite possible legal doubt, we proceeded to suspend them and put in new officials of satisfactory integrity and competence, leaving to the officials concerned to go to court to resolve questions of legality. As a result of our action which was moral, the rice problem has been licked because whereas during this period of last year, rice, when available, was sold from P1.50 to P3.00 per ganta beyond the reach of the masses, today there is plentiful rice available from P0.85 to P0.95 per ganta to the poor.

DICTATORSHIP

Now let us think aloud on dictatorship. It is impossible for us to be a dictator. We believe too much in freedom to become a dictator. When we took over the administration, there were economic controls under which our businessmen and the citizens were not free in matters affecting their livelihood and even their right of movement. Our people had reasonable political liberties but there was no economic liberty. Control of exchange meant overwhelming economic and consequent political power in our hands. Yet what did we do? We removed controls because we want for our people not only political, but economic liberty. In addition, we have respected the freedom of the press. Under our administration, newspaper owners are free to buy the newsprint that they need without restrictions, which was not true before our time. Some columnists attack us daily to the extent of becoming calumnists but we allow them, asking only that they develop self-discipline and a sense of responsibility among themselves and we answer them in public print in the exercise of our own right to free speech. The mere fact that our critics can call us a dictator and get away with it is itself proof that there is freedom in our country.

All we are after is being a leader who believes in, and adheres to, the Constitution and due process and know them well enough to make the said constitution, due process and democracy itself work with efficiency and not with weakness, for the good of the people. Because we love freedom, we believe in democracy not only for other countries but for our own people. We believe that democracy is the best government ever yet conceived by man. It is a great and vibrant system that adjusts itself to varying conditions of every country and the varying challenges of changing times. To fulfill its role, democracy should not be cherished and operated through its weaknesses but through its sources of strength.

Concretely, this means that we shall always adhere to the Constitution and the laws of the land. But we shall seek ways sanctioned in the Constitution and the laws to bring about the progress of the country and the well-being of our people. As evidence of our adherence to the Constitution and the law, we have made it a policy to make known our compliance with the decisions of the Supreme Court even before we knew what those decisions would be.

STRENGTH OF DEMOCRACY

It is not our mind to accept as unavoidable weaknesses of democracy those failures which have been habitually and carelessly attributed to the system and which stem from the lack of resolute will to implement its ideals due to the powerful resistance of those who would be prejudiced by the application of such ideals. It is a source of strength of a democracy that the Constitution ordains that citizens shall receive the equal protection of the laws but it is its weakness that this principle has not been applied to all, thereby creating a privileged group of sacred cows and big fishes who were untouchable by the enforcers of the law. It is a source of strength of a democracy that the Constitution seeks the economic security of all the people but it is its weakness that this objective had not been earnestly sought at all, thereby creating a chronic socio-economic situation where the unscrupulous rich and vested interests get richer only stumbling block to the progress of the country as envisaged in our administration. To insure the formulation and implementation of our full socio-economic program, we need a truly cooperative set-up in both Houses of Congress. In this, we only seek what every President before us had sought and nothing more. In the lower house, we already have this cooperation under Speaker Cornelio Villareal who succeeded in having the administration measures approved in the House. It is in the Senate where we were blocked and significantly one-half of the administration measures did not pass in the last session. Senator Lopez has succeeded in preventing a cooperative set-up in the Senate. Yet it is in the Senate where there should logically be cooperation because the chamber is composed of a plurality of 12 Liberals as against 11 Nacionalistas and 1 Nationalist-Citizen.

Frankly, we cannot understand the obstructions being put up by the senator and his bloc to giving full opportunity to the administration to carry out its program for the people. In the economic fields, his bloc has the same policy as the administration, which is decontrol and free enterprise. Financially their group are the ones benefited by the free enterprise policies of the administration. Why then do they persist in maintaining themselves as the remaining stumbling block to the success of the administration? Our answers to the question would be that they have placed personal ambition above the mandate and welfare of the people; that they do not wish to give a chance for the people at large as this would threaten their vested interests; or that they are in league with forces whose objectives are contrary to the ideal and welfare of our people.

By withholding their assistance for the establishment of a cooperative set-up in the Senate with all its divisive and pernicious effects to the country, the senator and his bloc are rendering a grave disservice to the nation. We express regret over their actuation because if they were to give their assistance to the administration, there would result a total national effort to promote economic growth, thereby eliminating the harmful and wasteful division of the businessmen, entrepreneurs and others into those who are pro-administration and those who are pro-Lopez bloc. With the Lopez bloc assisting the administration, all business leaders and businessmen would be able to join hands with the administration without further distinction of any kind in a total and titanic effort to develop rapidly the nation’s resources and thereby hasten the advent of a better life to all our people.

MORAL DRIVE POLICY

In our moral drive, while it shall be necessary to take punitive action in exemplary cases of past wrongdoings, we take the constructive attitude in stressing the policy of preventive action—one that will insure eradication of past anomalous practices and doings. Even if we wanted to, we cannot spend all our four-year term running after past offenders because of their number. We are therefore led to select exemplary cases that will substantially atone for the past wrongs and deter in a most effective manner their future repetition. To exhaustively penalize past wrongs as would be demanded by the intents of justice, the administration will not only dissipate its tenure but will so provoke widespread controversies, animosities and struggles as would deprive the administration of the precious time that it needs for the constructive and far-reaching effort of socio-economic growth.

SPEEDING UP ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Our passion is to hasten the economic progress of the country. It is not very often that we have an administration which is obsessed with concentrating on developing our rich natural resources speedily as the means of solving our other problems and bringing a better life to the masses of our people. An additional merit of our socio-economic program is that we shall do it in the ways of freedom and free enterprise.

POLITICIANS IN NEW ERA

We ask our brethren politicians and public men to bear with us. It is possible that with our policies and our resolve to implement them, the power of the politicians may be diminished and their opportunity for material aggrandizement through the use of public office and influence will be lessened. They shall, however, have better opportunities to improve materially in such increased legitimate ventures as will become available in the free enterprise system and over which they have no direct authority and jurisdiction. Offsetting in part the loss of old privileges, it is a solace that the cost of running for public office shall become much lower beginning 1963 and the regard of the people for the politicians shall become higher. It is our hope that it will hereafter be less exacting and vexatious to run for and win public office through the simpler mode of dedicated service to the constituents. Above all, in losing the undue privileges enjoyed in the past, there shall be the richly gratifying feeling that we are contributing to the building of a better nation.

We plead for support and cooperation. We are appreciative of the attitude of the two highest leaders of the opposition, Senate President Eulogio Rodriguez and former Speaker Daniel Romualdez, for rendering their assistance to the administration without giving up their right to political battle at the proper time.

Others may believe themselves better than us but as long as we are President, we should be given full opportunity to carry out our task since it is us that the people have entrusted this responsibility during our term of office. Ask yourselves these questions: Is the President spiritually and intellectually prepared for his responsibility? Are the President and his family enriching themselves in office? Is the President doing his best to do his task? If you find the answers to these questions satisfactory, then give the President a chance to carry out his program of government, if not with positive assistance, with constructive criticism instead of obstructionism and derisive fault-finding.

EQUAL AND FAIR OPPORTUNITY

We must all work together to accomplish without fail the monumental task at hand. In fine, this task shall reshape the moral socio-economic order so as to establish conditions that would assure equal and fair opportunities for all our people to attain better life and a just share of the bountiful resources which a magnanimous God had blessed our land. This is a golden opportunity to achieve this mission at a time when we have no choice but to do it, if we are to escape falling into the hands of the ideological enemy and when our country, under its present leadership, is set to build a better future for ourselves and our prosperity. God bless the Philippines!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.