Radio-TV Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines In the program, “President Macapagal Speaks to the Masses”

[Delivered on May 23, 1962]

ON THE SPECIAL SESSION, CABINET REVAMP AND DlOKNO CASE

I DEEM IT MY DUTY to report to you whenever important events take place in our Government and in our country. Two such events are worthy of your knowledge, considering their circumstances and significance. These are the termination of the first regular session of the Congress under our Administration and the revamp of the cabinet which we effected immediately after the session.

When the session started, both Houses of Congress were under the control of the Nacionalista Party, which was and is being dominated particularly by the Lopez sugar bloc headed by Senator Fernando Lopez who sought to complete his hold over Congress by becoming President of the Senate since his men already were in control of the House of Representatives under Speaker Daniel Romualdez. It was before this Congress that I submitted an integrated five-year socioeconomic development program designed to create conditions that would bring about a better and prosperous living for our people and a dignified life for the common man. For the success of the program, I submitted to Congress a number of measures, at least eleven of which were essential to achieve the Administration’s objective of moral regeneration and economic progress.

It was immediately noticed during the session that under the control of the Lopez bloc of the Nacionalista Party, the two Houses of Congress were not acting on any of the measures which I sent to Congress. It was then that I exposed to the public the danger and harm to the Nation of the two Houses of Congress being dominated and controlled by special vested interests like the Lopez bloc. After my denunciation of the Lopez bloc, a group of Nacionalistas, placing the welfare of the country above partisan interest, formed a coalition with the Liberal in an aggrupation called the Allied Majority and elected Congressman Cornelio Villareal, a Liberal, as Speaker in order to break the deadlock between the Nacionalista Congress and the Liberal Executive and give my Administration a chance to apply our solutions to the grave problems of our people. In the Senate, however, the Lopez group has remained in control.

It was only after a Liberal became Speaker of the House of Representatives that that body started to act on the Administration’s measures needed for the people’s welfare. In record time, the House approved all the ten measures which I asked them to approve, namely, (1) the National Budget (2) the Public Works Bill (3) the Rice and Corn Administration (4) Emergency Employment Administration (5) Multi-Storey Housing for the Poor (6) Calamity Bill (7) amendment of the Basic Industries Law (8) Foreign Investments Bill (9) calling a Constitutional Convention and (10) adoption of the Socio-Economic Program. I also asked for the approval of three additional measures, namely, (1) the full decontrol measure (2) increasing the capitalization of the Development Bank of the Philippines and (3) the Moral Commission. The last two were also approved by the House but altho the Allied Majority in the House was in favor, the full decontrol measure was not approved for lack of time.

Of the first ten vital Administration measures, the Nacionalista-controlled Senate did not approve five and did not likewise approve the three additional measures. The Senate approved five bills of the thirteen but so amended them as to tie up the hands of the Administration, rendering difficult their successful implementation.

After consultation with the economic experts of the Administration, I regret to state that the laws enacted by the Congress were inadequate for an effective prosecution of the Administration’s program. In addition to the five Administration bills approved by the House, it is necessary to pass the other five, as well as the three additional measures.

It is necessary to pass the public works bill because it contains vital projects which for the first time have been prepared to support the socio-economic program.

It is necessary to pass the amendments to the Basic Industries Law, otherwise the Government will lose some P100 million annually in revenues.

It is necessary to pass the foreign investments bill to create a favorable climate for the attraction of foreign capital which is an essential requirement of the economic program.

It is necessary to call a constitutional convention to bring about needed political, judicial and administrative reforms.

It is necessary to create the Moral Commission to coordinate and boost effectively the various measures and actions needed for moral regeneration.

It is necessary to adopt the five-year socio-economic program to dispel uncertainty and generate a favorable climate for investments.

It is necessary to increase the capitalization of the DBP to provide sufficient medium and long-term credit to investors for productive enterprises.

Above all, it is necessary to enact the full decontrol measure because this is essential to the success of the decontrol and economic programs. Without this measure, the 20% dollar retention now being made by the Central Bank of export receipts cannot be removed. Unless and until the 20% dollar retention is removed, the country cannot have a stable dollar rate. Unless and until a stable dollar rate is fixed, uncertainty and speculation will continue, resulting in the bogging down and even failure of the economic program.

In a nutshell, the sad situation that faces the Administration and the people is that due to inordinate partisanship, and particularly due to the obstructionist stronghold of the Lopez bloc, the Congress did not fulfill its duty to the people of enacting the Administration measures which are needed for the success of our program for the public welfare. We are faced with two alternatives: (1) to call Congress to a special session or (2) to proceed as best as we can with the use of presidential prerogatives until the next regular session of Congress when this body shall face a second test of fidelity to the people’s welfare. If we call a special session without a change in the attitude of the Senate, the likelihood is that that body will again use up the time in aimless display of partisan strength, and cost the people over P1 million. On the other hand, if we do not call a special session and do our best to use the executive prerogatives until the next session, there may be a delay in the timetable of our program of service for the people. Still, what is good for the people is better delayed than not done at all.

Our decision, therefore, is that unless there is assurance that the unacted Administration measures will be passed in a special session because of a change in the leadership complexion in the Senate or other warranty, we shall not call a special session of Congress but shall proceed with our burden, altho made heavier by the default of Congress, of doggedly applying with the tools available the solutions to our people’s crying problems which are embodied in the Administration’s socio-economic blueprint.

CABINET REVAMP

Now I will speak of the revamp of the cabinet and other important posts which I made immediately after the adjournment of the regular session of Congress.

It should be stated first that one of my difficult tasks as President has been the choice of men for vital positions. The difficulty arose from the clear need of putting at the helm not only men of competence but also of integrity; the contamination of many of those already in the service with the old unwholesome ways; the usual tendency of many officials to think of themselves and not of the people; and the understandable desire of politicians to place their men in jobs, irrespective of other considerations. The essence of this difficulty of choosing the right men was the necessity of having assistance who could individually and collectively be helpful in implementing the Administration’s program for the moral and socioeconomic well-being of our people.

In an effort to obtain the best men, and to promote a nonpartisan approach to the Nation’s problem I began by crossing party lines in the selection of my cabinet members. I chose three Nacionalistas, namely, Secretaries Jose Diokno of Justice, Manuel Lim of Commerce and Industry and Marciano Bautista of Public Works and Communications. I had hoped that by doing this, coupled with my insistent plea for bipartisanship in approaching the Nation’s grave problems, the Nacionalista leaders who controlled Congress would lay aside partisanship for a while so that we could work together to bring about a better livelihood for the people. Gradually, it became apparent that it was difficult for the Nacionalistas to cast aside partisanship and hence, it became difficult to implement the Administration’s program with men who might not have full interest in its success. Still, I clung to the hope that bipartisanship could be made to work to forge national unity for the good of the people. I waited until the end of the congressional session to see to the last whether there was basis for my hope.

Thus, before the close of the session, I invited the Nacionalista leaders to sit with me, on their own terms, in a bipartisan Council of Leaders but they snubbed me. Then I appealed that if they could not sit with me in this Council, they should pass the ten measures which I asked as a minimum requirement for the Administration’s program for the people, pledging that if they did this, there would come about “a fresh atmosphere of national unity in which partisanship shall be reduced to a minimum” and that “the Nacionalista leaders can look forward to a reciprocal attitude of cooperation from the Administration.” I stayed awake the whole night on the last day of the congressional session, praying that Congress would heed my plea. Then without warning, Nacionalista Party President Eulogio Rodriguez, presiding over the Senate session, adjourned the session, without approving the ten urgent Administration bills. As if deliberately flaunting partisanship, the Nacionalistas, in their final session, approved only the Nacionalista member of my cabinet, Secretary Diokno, and disapproved all the Liberal members of my cabinet despite the tradition that a President should have virtual freedom in choosing the members of his official family.

In the face of these developments, the conclusion was inevitable; the cause of bipartisanship had failed. There was only one thing left to do, which was that for the Liberal Party to now assume full responsibility for the Administration. Unpleasant as the task was, I had consequently no other recourse but to finally change the two remaining Nacionalista members in my cabinet, Diokno and Lim. Bautista had earlier retired.

This is the background behind the replacement of Secretary Diokno with Secretary Juan Liwag and Secretary Lim with Secretary Rufino Hechanova. The change was part of a cabinet revamp. Together with Diokno and Lim, two other cabinet members who belong to the Liberal Party were replaced, namely Secretary Paulino Cases of Public Works and Communications and Economic Coordination Administrator Cesar Climaco who were replaced respectively by Secretaries Brigido Valencia of Davao and Manuel Cuenco of Cebu.

The changing of Secretaries Diokno and Lim was in consonance with our constrained decision to accept party responsibility for the Administration in accordance with the usual practice in a party system of government such as ours. All administrations of all Presidents before me had cabinet members none of whom pertained to the opposition party. The practice has become so imbedded in our democratic practice that under the past Administration, altho I was elected Vice-President by the people, President Garcia did not appoint me to the cabinet because I belonged to the opposition party.

THE DIOKNO CASE

Now a word about the particular case of Secretary Diokno. It is acknowledged by all that the President may change any member of his cabinet any time. While my right to change Secretary Diokno is thus conceded, in the same breath it is alleged that there was something amiss in the “timing” of the change. In this connection, I would like to say that the timing was decided by Secretary Diokno himself. In my letter to him on May 19, 1962, I merely informed him of my decision to heed his desire to go back to private practice but I did not tell him that it was to be done immediately. I had expected, as is the normal course in such matters, that he would confer with me so that we could take up the details, such as the date when the change would be made, the handling of important pending matters and other transfer arrangements. This appeared to be Secretary Diokno’s original attitude as shown in the wired report of Secretary Mutuc to me in Legazpi City which said: “Letter delivered early this morning . . . Diokno said it is okay with him.He desires tho to see you at earliest opportunity.” To my surprise, I later received a wire from Secretary Diokno stating: “Please be informed I immediately turned over office to Undersecretary Liwag.” In the same wire he said he was “happy to have had opportunity to contribute to the cause of good government.” Having been apprised by him that he already turned over the department to Secretary Liwag before we could meet personally, I announced the re placement of Secretary Diokno with Secretary Liwag, together with other cabinet changes and the other appointments which were all made as part of a major revamp of the Administration which I have been doing every day for several days now and which I will continue to do for some days more.

May it be pointed out, too, that Secretary Diokno not only did not wait for a conference between us before relinquishing the department, but on the same day, he published my letter to him without my consent and went on television making an issue of the matter. Upon my arrival in Manila the following day, I sent Secretary Liwag to inform Secretary Diokno that in accordance with his wish to see me I was ready to meet with him but he has desisted from seeing me to this hour.

From all these, it can be seen that the timing of Secretary Diokno’s leaving the department was decided by himself. This is in contrast with the case of Secretary Lim who, upon being apprised by my representative that I wanted to appoint a new Secretary of Commerce and Industry, conferred with me, wherein we agreed on the date when Secretary Lim would relinquish his post and on an arrangement regarding the disposal of pending matters. As a result, Secretary Lim is still in the service. It being recognized that the President has the right to change any cabinet member any time and which right I exercised in the manner narrated, it is unjust that I should be criticized for the timing of the relinquishment of the justice department by Secretary Diokno. I will be lacking in candor if I do not say that in the light of the full confidence and authority that I gave to Secretary Diokno and the opportunity that I gave him to serve the cause of good government which he has acknowledged, it was outside my expectation that Secretary Diokno should snub me, publish my letter without my sanction and cast or abet aspersions against the Administration, which acts he never did before.

I find no need to say more on the Diokno case except to state that the changing of Diokno has absolutely no connection with, nor even an effect on, the deportation case against three American businessmen. NBI Director Jose Lukban, who has gathered the evidence against the respondents, will stay in office and will continue with his role in the case with the continued full support of his superiors. As new undersecretary of justice, Judge Magno Gatmaitan, an official of incorruptible integrity, will continue the trial in the deportation board. In turn, Secretary of Justice Liwag will carry on the role of Secretary Diokno in the case with the same energy, the same dedication and—I am convinced of this—with at least the same competence.

The most important thing being overlooked about the deportation case is that after all is said and done, it is not the Secretary of Justice whose actuation is decisive in the deportation case but the Deportation Board and finally the President of the Philippines. Whoever is in charge of the prosecution, the Deportation Board will recommend to the President what action to take. In the final analysis, it is I who will decide whether to deport or not to deport a foreigner. Aware of this ultimate authority and responsibility that pertains to me, I solemnly declare before our people that it is immaterial to me who handles the prosecution, whether Diokno, Liwag or anybody else for when the time comes for me to render my decision, I shall do so with complete fidelity to the welfare of the country and to the cause of justice.

I shall end by saying that it is not easy to be a successful President of a young and developing country like ours. The national problems are complex. Their complexity is aggravated by the fact that many politicians think only of their political or personal interests and not of the welfare of the people; many officials think only of what they can get from their position and not of what they can give to the people; and some citizens want to persist in the ways of wrongdoing.

Recognizing the difficulties of being President, aggravated in my case by a Congress dominated by the opposition party, I am more determined than ever to succeed in helping our people by solving their problems in a way as to promote their prosperity and welfare. But I need the people’s sympathy, confidence and help. I ask our people not to be misled by politicians and others who talk as if they could do better if they were in my place. I am fortunate to have two attributes that should reassure our countrymen and because of which I hope that they will allow me, without undue fault-finding and heckling, to proceed with the grave task of leading in the search for the prosperity and happiness of our people.

These two attributes are: first, that as President, I have absolutely no material and personal interest; my only interest is to consecrate my whole self and exhaust all my faculties in the service of our country and the solution of its pressing problems. Secondly, as stated by Jesus Meritt, in his book “Our President”, referring to my humble self: “He is the best academically prepared president the Philippines ever had, being the holder of the degrees of doctor of civil law and doctor of economics.” With these and my resolve to succeed in helping our people and while welcoming helpful and non-arrogant criticism, I ask for the confidence, trust and sustenance of our countrymen in my actuations so that in the four years of my term we shall, by conscientious grappling with the Nation’s problems, together tread the path towards a better and happier life for all our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.