Radio Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On the Program, “President Macapagal Speaks to the Masses”

[Released on April 16, 1962]

THIS IS MY FIRST opportunity to speak to you since you elevated me to the Presidency of our country in the elections of November 14, 1961. The first feeling that I wish to express coming from the core of my heart, is that of sincere thanks for your support.

I consider it my first duty to report to you what has happened since I assumed the Presidency on December 30, 1961. This is a pleasant task not only because I feel it my duty to report to you from time to time but also because there is so much to report on what had happened during my first thirty days in office.

It is my belief that in thirty days, we succeeded in laying down the foundation for the events of the next four years of my Administration.

In my inaugural address, I summarized the tasks of our Administration which include the pledges I made during the campaign, as follows:

1) The solution of the problem of corruption;

2) The attainment of self-sufficiency in the staple foods of our people, namely, rice and corn;

3) The creation of conditions that will provide more income for our people—income for those who have none and more income for those whose earnings are inadequate for their elemental needs;

4) The establishment of policies that will strengthen the moral fiber of our nation and reintroduce those values that will invigorate our democracy;

5) The launching of a bold but well-formulated socioeconomic program that shall place the country on the road to prosperity for the benefit of all our people;

I am happy to report that all of these were started during the first thirty days of our four-year term.

The significance of this performance is two-fold; first, we clearly laid down and set into motion a program embodying what the people can expect to be done in the next four years; and. second, this was done despite the fact that the Congress is controlled by the other political party, making it clearly evident that with dedication and determination and with the people’s support, we can achieve our goals even under more difficult circumstances.

On the problem of corruption, we have done, among others, the following:

1) I issued Administrative Order No. 1, which bans my relatives from dealing with the Government, and prohibits any office or official of the government from dealing with them.

2) My statement of assets and liabilities and those of my cabinet members were submitted and subsequently made public.

3) We started the prosecution of grafters, starting with the prosecution of Cosme Garcia, the brother of the former President, for influence peddling. In order that no one would be spared in this anti-graft drive, I selected as graft-buster a Secretary of Justice who is not identified with the Liberal Party.

4) I waged a relentless war against the tong system, bribery and influence peddlings by talking and pleading with business leaders and I have pursued this campaign even more vigorously among government personnel at all levels.

5) In selecting our cabinet members and other key officials we used the criteria of integrity, honesty, and dedication,

6) I recommended to Congress the establishment of a Moral Commission which will be composed of upright leaders in government, church, school, business and civic groups to conduct a nation-wide program of moral regeneration.

7) My family and I have set the personal example in honesty and integrity.

The effectiveness of the drive against the occurrence and prosecution of graft—not merely through prosecution as was the case in the past—may be gleaned from the report that some unscrupulous businessmen have been reportedly planning to remove their capital from the Philippines because they can no longer bribe their way into the good graces of the present Administration. This development is a healthy sign for altho I welcome investments, including foreign capital, I must also say that we can only welcome honest and legitimate investors and not fly-by-night operators.

On the problem of self-sufficiency in staple foods, a rice and corn program calculated to bring about such sufficiency despite tremendous difficulties has been implemented.

What were these difficulties? The present Nacionalista leaders of Congress declined to agree to hold a special session to tackle this problem due to preoccupations over maintaining their legislative leadership. Likewise, the officials of the National Rice and Corn Corporation (NARIC), on prodding of the Nacionalista leaders, refused to vacate their positions to enable us to work out our program. To meet these difficulties:

First, I created the Presidential Rice and Corn Committee which will take charge of our rice and corn program;

Secondly, I suspended the top officials of the NARIC for gross inefficiency and appointed new officials who could carry out our own rice and corn program.

Thirdly, I directed the Presidential Rice and Corn Committee to formulate and implement a program of increased productivity in these basic foods.

Fourthly, I recommended to Congress the creation of a Rice and Corn Administration, which would, upon establishment, replace the NARIC and Presidential Rice and Corn Committee and take charge of continuing our rice and corn program.

With these measures properly implemented—and I am resolved to do this—I am confident that we shall achieve self-sufficiency in rice and corn at prices within the reach of the masses of our people.

On the problem of employment, we took the following steps:

1) As a long-range solution to the problem of unemployment, I launched an integrated five-year socio-economic program.

2) As a Short-range solution, I recommended to Congress the creation of an Emergency Employment Administration which would undertake a program under my direction, to assist private enterprise in the creation of job opportunities through a P100-million public operation fund consisting of productive and job creating projects, including land settlement; agricultural land extension; forest conservation and reforestation; promotion of cottage industries; and public works which directly promote economic growth. Upon the enactment of this measure, I shall be able beginning July to put underway an employment program which, as I start, could put to work at least 200,000 people in undertakings that will augment the production and potentiality of the country.

On the establishment of policies that would establish new values, I have been vigorous in this effort. Apart from instilling integrity in Malacañang, the concept of simple living has been launched. Thus, we have been dressing simply, we are using a 1957 Ford car, we have eliminated a “kitchen cabinet” and the usually large retinue accompanying official trips in the past. I have enforced economy in the expenditures of public funds without sacrificing essential public services. We have proceeded against influential persons, showing that in our drive for good government, no man should be spared or held above the law. In general, I have so acted to show that even the President of the Philippines is no different from the average citizen except in those things which are essential to carry his greater burden of bringing about a prosperous and happy life for his countrymen.

Finally, I have submitted to Congress a five-year integrated socio-economic program, the ultimate result of which will be the attainment of our main goal of a better life for our people. While Congress considers this program or its implementation, I have proceeded to its implementation by taking, among others, the following steps:

1) The implementation of decontrol which I effected on my twenty-first day in office, in order to remove an important source of corruption and to unshackle the economy so that through its innate vigor it may propel its expansion in free enterprise.

2) The adoption of executive safeguards to decontrol including a revised tariff code to protect local industries and their consumers; the securing of a dollar stabilization fund from the United States of over $300 million in only eight days; and the increase of the salaries of low-income employees, as well as the insuring of low prices for the staple foods of our people.

3) The synchronizing of the fiscal and monetary policies on the part of the Executive Department to insure the faithful implementation and success of the socio-economic program.

The foregoing are, briefly, what have been done with dedication in the first thirty days of the new era that we seek to bring to our people.

What has been the reaction? It is gratifying to know that the reaction has generally been one of approval and satisfaction. In a survey conducted by Robot Statistics, it was found that 76 per cent of the populace approved our performance.

It is unavoidable that there are some discordant voices. Among business groups, while there is general approval for the decontrol and socio-economic development programs, complaints have been voiced against tight credit restrictions which have allegedly prevented more productive investments because of the resultant lack of capital and that the unstable and unrealistic peso rate has caused anxiety. I want to assure you that these stringent credit restrictions will be relaxed gradually. The removal of the time deposit requirement of 25% on essential imports was a step towards gradual release of restrictions.

It will be noted that the restrictions refer to commercial credit transactions. To provide credit for investments, decisive strides are being made. The Development Bank of the Philippines is being financially strengthened. In addition, steps are being taken to establish a private industrial development bank during the current year.

I am aware of the necessity to make available credit for economic expansion. It is being urged that economic expansion be preferred over timidity which may excessively concern itself with monetary stability. We ask for patience and understanding on this point because our goal, which is an attainable ideal, is economic expansion with monetary stability.

I must draw your attention, however, to those who were associated with the past Administration and who, for partisan interests, now seek to sow discontent and thereby undermine and scuttle our efforts. Although the past Administration also favored decontrol, they now either criticize it or utilize its early and temporary effects to undermine the confidence of the people in my Administration. For instance, they capitalize on the upward effect on prices, thus attempting to impair the faith of the people in the present regime, although this effect on prices is only temporary and is not reflected of the final outcome of the program.

I ask you not to listen to these detractors because they seek to mislead you for partisan ends. If they are sincere or if they know what they are talking about, they should inform you that upward price effect of decontrol is expected to be only temporary but that as the integrated socio-economic program goes underway, goods will become more plentiful, prices will become steady, and the livelihood of the people will be better than it was in 1961. Meantime, we have taken steps to insure a reasonable price for rice and corn and prime commodities in order to safeguard the welfare of the masses.

I ask that more time be allowed before we are judged by the results of our efforts towards moral regeneration and economic progress. Whatever may seem to be the transitory repercussions, I am confident that the final result will be a better life for our people than they had under the past regime. You can rest assured that I will not relax nor falter in the determined efforts towards this objective. Premature judgment is unwarranted, especially on the part of those partisans of the past regime. They should not be impatient and should not agitate impatience and discontent. It should be remembered that I am only straightening out the mess that was caused by them during the past five years. One change is clear: There are no more privileged persons and groups under our Administration. All citizens are being treated equally in the new economic system of private enterprise which is based on freedom and integrity. If there are any difficulties now, everyone faces these difficulties, which are transitional and transitory. What is important is that in due time, these difficulties will give way to conditions of better livelihood and when that day comes, all citizens of the Philippines shall be equal in the enjoyment of those opportunities for a better and happier life.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.