Radio-TV Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines In the Program, “President Macapagal Speaks to the Masses”

ON INDEPENDENCE DAY, APPOINTMENTS AND PRICES

TOMORROW, June 12, we shall celebrate Independence Day. This is the first time that we shall commemorate our freedom on the day it was declared by our patriots and not on the day the former mother country celebrates her own independence, far overshadowing whatever celebration we may attempt on the same day. As I have more to say on this matter in my Independence Address tomorrow, I will now limit myself to stating that commemorating independence on our own day of freedom is more inspiring to the youth and to the Nation since it inevitably recalls to the memory the many acts of patriotism that brought about the declaration of our independence on June 12. I accordingly urge all our countrymen as good Filipinos to participate in this historic celebration.

Tonight, in line with my periodic reports to you on important questions affecting the Nation, I will dwell on the subject of appointments to key positions and the prices of commodities.

APPOINTMENTS

It will be recalled that because of the narrow partisanship of the Nacionalista leaders in Congress, I was constrained to make my cabinet an all-Liberal one in order that the Administration shall assume full responsibility for the conduct of the people’s affairs in accordance with the party system of government. This does not mean, however, that there has been a change in the Administration’s attitude of less partisan politics and more national effort in the field of economics.

In a democracy, particularly in a republican system such as ours, we cannot completely do away with politics. Democracy and republicanism cannot exist without politics, for the simple reason that in a republican government, the people do not rule directly but indirectly through elected representatives who compose the politicians. What should be done away with are selfish politics, corrupt politicians and evil political practices. Politics can only be minimized, which is what the Administration is set to do. Concretely, this means that the Administration will continue to give priority and primacy to economic development. The Administration will indulge in political activity only insofar as it is necessary to overcome partisan obstructionism to its socio-economic program and enable the program to succeed for the welfare of the people.

It will be noted that in the government revamp, among the appointments made were undersecretaries and a few bureau directors chosen from the outside and not from the career men in the service. This action was predicated on the consideration that at this time, we need in certain offices vital to the Administration’s program not merely technical men but leaders. Examples of this are the bureaus of customs, internal revenue, agricultural extension and forestry. These are fields in which the Administration has special projects as part of the five-year socio-economic program. To successfully carry out these projects, technical experts are not enough. Leaders are needed.

We have, therefore, drawn on technically qualified men who have also shown leadership in dealing with people. This has become necessary because career officials now in the service are not acquainted and imbued with the spirit of the new regime and have been exposed for eight years to a type of orientation which has not proved satisfactory to the national welfare. The outsiders who have been appointed are trouble-shooters of the Administration charged with carrying out specific jobs and objectives. When the accomplishment of these jobs and objectives is well under way in accordance with the new orientation, these appointees will be withdrawn from their positions in order that the career personnel will once again avail of the opportunities due them under a new atmosphere of integrity, dedication and action.

Regarding appointments to the judiciary, seniority has been followed by promoting the deserving ones who are already in the service. The appointments of Justice Querube Makalintal to the Supreme Court and Justices Antonio Lucero and Antonio Canizares to the Court of Appeals are cases in point. It must be considered, however, that much is still to be desired of the judiciary below the Supreme Court. One of the reasons for our advocacy of a constitutional convention was that through amendments to the Constitution, judicial reforms could be effected to establish a career judiciary, thus placing our courts beyond the control of politicians. Unfortunately, Congress did not approve the resolution calling for a constitutional convention. Under these circumstances, until the proper judicial reforms are made, it would not be conducive to a strong and independent judiciary to limit the presidential appointing power to those who are already in the service.

In some instances, appointments of outsiders who are eminently qualified accordingly have been made. The appointments of Justice Roberto Regala to the Supreme Court and Justice Jose Bengzon as Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeals fall under this concept. Until a career judiciary is established under the protection of constitutional sanction, the important consideration in cases where outsiders are appointed to the bench is the merit and fitness of the appointees for the posts to which they are named.

In the appointment of officials to key positions in the government, the vital factor to consider is that a task has to be done. It is not a question of giving an official a post of honor or a means of livelihood. He has a role to discharge in the over-all endeavor of giving good government and a good life to our people.

I am in a position to know that there is extreme difficulty in getting the right men to accomplish the tasks that must be done in order for the Administration to succeed. The Administration needs not only men of ability and dedication but also of integrity . It is not everywhere that these men are available.

It has become therefore unavoidable, and even a duty, to appoint those whose qualities we have personal knowledge of. It is not a disqualification to have been defeated as an opposition candidate for public office; what is important are the qualities of the appointee which are not necessarily incompatible with previous political defeat. We have also in some cases utilized the services of men who hail from our province because we know personally their integrity, competence and dedication. In fact, we had to appeal to them to join the public service because of the need for the right men to discharge the difficult tasks. The relevant point to consider is that we have put these men in the service not for making money but in order to help give the country a good government. Let us assess appointees on their performance and not on prejudiced and premature judgment.

PRICES

Now let me speak on the prices of goods. The rise in the prices of goods was already a serious problem under the past Administration. Had the past regime continued in office, the prices would have continued to rise without hope of an effective remedy because it was the result of a mismanaged controlled economic system which slowed down economic growth, compounded by the prevalence of corruption in the government.

In the election campaign, our slogan was to stop the rising prices. The Administration is determined to do this. Towards this end, we immediately launched a five-year integrated socioeconomic program based on free enterprise in order to spur a faster rate of economic growth and greater production of goods. To avail of the powerful impetus of private initiative and fair competition in the production of more goods, we removed foreign exchange controls.

I have had occasion to outline what is expected to develop from the launching of decontrol and the market economy both on short-run and long-run basis. In the short-run, the people may expect the following: the price of the dollar shall rise and fall; the prices of imported commodities will move upward altho the price of rice and corn will remain constant these being locally produced commodities; and producers, especially exporters, will increase their income.

After a reasonable period during which the aforesaid short-run effects would be experienced, the over-all beneficial effects of decontrol and free enterprise will set in. These effects are: the price of the dollar will be established at a level that will promote production; exports will exceed imports; investments, both domestic and foreign, will multiply; more goods will be produced; there will be more jobs and income; prices will level off and become steady; and because the people will have more than additional income to meet the cost of their needs, they will begin to enjoy a better life compared to previous years.

We are confident that as soon as the vigor of the economy, sparked by the freedom under private enterprise, reacts to produce more goods than in the past, the rise of prices will stop and prices will stabilize within the reach of the people to pay. This will occur as both producers and consumers acclimate to the new situation and producers turn out commodities, particularly import substitutes, in increased quantities.

This awaited favorable turn in the economy will not, however, come overnight. In the transition and temporary period before its occurrence, upward movement of prices may be expected. This is the period in which the country is situated today. The present behavior of prices should not, therefore, be ground for concern. The difference between the past and the present may be stated to be that whereas rising prices in the past had no hope of remedy, now there is hope that the rise of prices will stop because a sound solution is in operation. Only today, the President of the Free Enterprise Society of the Philippines has published their view that “notwithstanding the rise in prices, people should be grateful that President Macapagal boldly decontrolled the economy early in his Administration, otherwise by now the price picture as a result of cumulative mistakes of twelve years of controls would have been in chaos.”

I must draw attention to an important fact: the Administration has adopted and is applying a permanent solution, not merely palliatives, to the problem of rising prices, which is as it should be for the people’s welfare. Being an enduring solution, it is harder to execute and will require a period of difficulties which include continued high prices for a time. Stated simply, this solution consists of the production of more goods and the increase of income. This is calculated to be brought about by the determined, successful and timely implementation of the Administration’s five-year socio-economic program.

It may seem paradoxical but in truth, the temporary period of continued high prices is itself a part of the lasting solution in view of the fact that altho the transitional rise in prices is a load on the consuming public, up to a certain limit it is a benefit because it is a stimulus to final prosperity, being an effective incentive to exporters and producers to increase the production of commodities and the creation of jobs that increase income.

But while the Administration is confidently banking on long-range and lasting solution to the problem of high prices, it is vigilantly applying immediately effective remedies to temper the rise of prices. Among the measures being taken are a vigorous rice and corn program, prudent fiscal spending, credit restraints, easing tariffs on prime consumer items, relaxation of special time deposits on essential imports and the price stabilization operations of the NAMARCO. In addition to these measures, the Administration is ready to apply a program of temporary subsidies on highly essential commodities. Our people can rest assured that prices will not be allowed to rise to undue heights because the Administration is ever alert, in case of necessity, to step in and throw the full weight of its resources and authority to foil any exorbitant rise of prices.

Because of this vigilance, the behavior of prices has been better than we anticipated. I draw attention to the fact that prices have already manifested a levelling off tendency since April. The following is the latest of the periodic assessment on the progress of the decontrol program being made by the Central Bank, dated June 6, 1962, to which I concur:

“Retail prices of commodities in Manila rose by 2.4 per cent between December 1961 and April 1962, compared to the 2.9 per cent increase during the second half of 1961. The increase during the first four months of 1962 was mainly due to the upward movement of prices of imported commodities which rose to 6.3 per cent, as prices of domestic items went up by 1.0 per cent altho among domestic items food prices registered a decline of 2.3 per cent. General consumer prices in Manila thus rose by one per cent, much less than what was anticipated and also much below what has been experienced in other countries undergoing similar monetary reforms .

“ Prices appeared to have levelled off during April 1962 . Wholesale and retail prices of home-consumed food displayed downward movements. It is to be noted that the food group accounts for about 45 per cent of the budget of households in Manila and 57 per cent of those in the regions outside Manila. Domestic component of retail prices decreased by 0.4 per cent while the imported component remained steady at 140.7 per cent (1955=100). On the whole, the retail price index registered a 0.2 per cent decline between March and April.”

Not only has the movement of prices given basis for optimism but also the effects of decontrol implementation during the first quarter of 1962 have been favorable and salutary, particularly in a favorable balance of payments, rise in the dollar reserves and increased rate of growth. Again, I reproduce pertinent portions of the Central Bank report:

“During the first four months of 1962 under our full decontrol program our country enjoyed a balance of payments surplus position of $23.31 million, as compared to an unfavorable balance of $27.51 million covering the same period in 1961.

“After a slow start in January, foreign exchange receipts increased appreciably during the last three months to an aggregate volume larger than the same periods of the preceding three years—$263 million compared to $199 million in 1961, $226 million in 1960, and $209 million in 1959.

“From $96.6 million in January 9, 1962, the international reserve of the country rose to $142 million as of June 1, 1962.

“Data on production and export shipments for the first quarter of 1962 showed significant increases on the corresponding 1961 data. Increases in export shipments of coconut products between the first quarters of 1961 and 1962 ranged from 62 per cent (copra) to 126 per cent (coconut oil), and averaged 50 per cent in terms of prices over the earlier year. First quarter production of important base metals also expanded from 21 per cent (copper) to 46 per cent (iron), or by an average 30 per cent over the same 1961 output. Production of logs during the first quarter was similarly ahead of the 1961 output by 16 per cent. Over-all production indices (1955=100) during the first quarter of 1962 for agriculture and mining showed increases of about 3 and 18 per cent, respectively, over their levels in 1961.”

In view of this favorable trend of the decontrol program, there is no reason for worry. There is even less reason for careless criticism which, instead of helping, impedes the solution by unduly shaking the public confidence so essential during the initial and crucial period of the program. What we should do is to brace ourselves to hurdle the temporary difficulty and to cooperate in order to shorten the period of transition. Indeed, the early coming of the turning point in the economy will depend on ourselves, on our willingness to do our part to hasten its arrival.

Specifically, economic recovery will come when the Central Bank is able to establish a stable dollar rate and support such a rate. The Central Bank will be able to do this as soon as it can do away with the present 20% retention of the export dollar receipts. This is the purpose of the full decontrol bill which I certified as urgent during the last days of the past session of Congress. Unfortunately, Congressman Lorenzo Teves, one of the leaders of the Lopez sugar bloc in the House of Representatives, put up a determined opposition to the measure, causing its non-passage.

I can understand why Congressman Teves and the group of special interests who stand to benefit from his opposition obstructed the passage of this bill. This group does not want to give up any part of the benefits that they have derived from the institution of decontrol. I am appealing to them to forego a part of those benefits for the good of the country. Their cooperation means so much to the people. By withholding their cooperation, they prolong the period of transition and the rising of prices.

It is a rare opportunity for a citizen to render real service to the country. That opportunity has come for this group behind Congressman Teves to render real service to the Nation by helping and enabling the country to arrive as quickly as possible at the point when the rise in the prices of goods may be stopped. Moreover, it is also to their interest that the dollar rate is stabilized for when as a result of this event the conditions for profitable investment will come about, greater opportunities for prosperity will be available to them as an important sector of the economy.

Let us then proceed with our socio-economic program in the spirit that while we are aware of the difficulties that lie ahead we shall be ready to face them, confident of the final and timely success of our endeavor to provide our people with effective opportunities for a better life. I especially ask you, retailers, to act as good citizens by not unduly raising your prices. In exchange, the Administration will provide you with helpful credit facilities and other aids to your business.

Not only is our approach to our economic difficulties sound and universally acclaimed as headed in the right direction but it should be remembered that our economy is so inherently strong that there is absolutely no reason for disappointment or misgiving. The economy has the capacity and vigor to provide a good life to our population. With dedication and persistence in our effort, things will be better sooner than we expect so that the gates of the better life that we dream about shall be flung open to our people.

There is one thing that I have noticed. The grumbling about current conditions comes mostly from the privileged ones who used to enjoy special benefits in the past and who must now miss those benefits, while the masses of the people, who really undergo the hardships, have kept their confidence and their hope for better times to come. I could see this stoic confidence and hope of the masses in my weekly trips to their midst.

In fact, this is what gives me courage and grit—this inspiring faith of the common people whose better future we are striving for. I vow before God Almighty that as long as there is breath in me, we shall never fail the cause of the masses. This is the reason I take pride in the established integrity of the Administration. I take pride not for myself but for the common people to whom I shall always belong. By acting with integrity in the highest post within the gift of the Nation, I have shown the virtue of the common masses. We have demonstrated that the sense of honesty among the common people is so strong that altho they have known hunger and have not lived in wealth, even if given the opportunity, they will not become dishonest in order to become rich. I say again that except for my salary, I will not enrich myself by one centavo out of being President. I shall adhere to the creed of integrity and honesty both for the good of our country and for the honor of the common people whose noblest dreams are my inspiration in carrying the heavy cross of the Presidency of this Republic.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.