Radio-TV Address of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines In the program, “President Macapagal Speaks to the Masses”

[Released on July 23, 1962]

THE FIRST SIX MONTHS

ON my arrival from an 18-day state visit to Spain, Pakistan, the Vatican and Italy, I mentioned the tremendous success of the visits and their far-reaching intangible benefits to the country. While I realize that enough mention has been made about the visits, I would like to mention that the Spanish government decided to assist in our socio-economic program in the amount of at least 10 million dollars. The Spanish Ambassador in the Philippines, the Philippine Secretary of Commerce and Industry and the Governor of the Central Bank are now working out the details.

In Rome, the President of Italy decided to send an economic mission to the Philippines to survey means of assisting in our socio-economic program. The Ambassadors of Indonesia and Ceylon, which together with the Philippines are the leading world copra producers, also agreed in principle with our Secretary of Commerce and Industry who was with me on the trip, subject to the approval of their governments, to take steps towards concerted action by the three countries to improve the price of copra which accrues to the producers in said countries. The Vice-President and the Secretary of Commerce and Industry are now pursuing this move which, if realized, would be a boon to the Philippines’ top industry, which is copra.

In Pakistan, I looked into the methods successfully used by President Ayub Khan in combatting corruption, some of which can be valuable in our own crusade for moral regeneration.

I found President Ayub lukewarm to the SEATO due to despair over the inefficiency of the United States, the SEATO leader, and the United Nations in upholding Pakistan’s right to Kashmir which Pakistan considers a matter of life and death for the country. After my conference with the Pakistan leader, who is intensely patriotic and receptive to matters that promote the present and future welfare of his country, it was my definite impression that President Ayub has become amenable to reexamining the utility of SEATO and to considering particularly the idea of incorporating the concept of bilateral action within the SEATO machinery, which would render the Manila Pact more useful to the security of the Asian area.

In leaving the subject of state visits, I reiterate my appreciation, as well as that of our people, to all those officials and individuals, in our country and abroad, who assisted in making the state visits a success.

It was in the course of the aforesaid trip that June 30, 1962 passed to mark the end of the first six months of our administration. We look back at the past six months with extreme satisfaction that so much was done in so little time amidst so much difficulty.

To recount sufficiently what has been accomplished by the administration in its first six months would take longer time than is available in this program. We will, therefore, summarize the same as follows:

1. Graft and corruption has been contained and minimized.

2. Decontrol has been successfully launched, effecting a fundamental shift from a system of economic controls which had been in operation for twelve years to the system of free enterprise.

3. A five-year socio-economic program has been officially adopted and auspiciously set into motion.

4. A new sense of national dignity and independence has been stimulated among the people without creating antagonism from our foreign friends.

5. A new and more respectable image of the Philippines has been projected in the world scene.

6. The attention and effort of the Nation have been focussed towards the implementation of essential reforms and the inculcation of a new spirit of dedicated service to the people.

I shall amplify at some other occasion the first and fourth to sixth accomplishments of the administration during its first six months. Due to time limitation, I shall only dwell tonight on the second and third achievements, namely the change of economic approach and the launching of a socioeconomic program, which are the most important and far-reaching to the standard of living of the masses of our people.

When we took over the administration, the economic situation was deteriorating and the prices were rising. Instead of meeting the needs of our fast-rising population, the rate of economic growth had precariously declined. Increase in the gross national product declined from 6.5% in 1959 to 5.4% in 1960 and national income from 6.1% in 1959 to 4.8% in 1960. In the words of the U. S. Commerce Department, when we took over in January, 1962, we faced “the most serious economic problems in the young Republic’s history.”

There was no question that under the system of controls which had been in effect during the last twelve years, the country could no longer grow at the required pace and our people would have to face the problem of ever-increasing prices and other hardships in the indefinite future without any visible hope of remedy. In the campaign, we therefore proposed to the people, as a permanent solution to the economic situation, that we would remove economic controls and return to free enterprise in order to set loose the innate capability and strength of the national economy which was being shackled by artificial restrictions and aggravated by rampant graft and corruption. In electing us, the people gave approval to our economic program.

Pursuant to our campaign pledge which the people had approved, within one month after we assumed office we launched a full decontrol plan on January 21, 1962 and a five-year socio-economic program based on free enterprise on January 22, 1962. The House of Representatives and the National Economic Council, in which the Senate is represented, subsequently approved our socio-economic program.

The launching of our program was universally hailed not only in our country but also abroad. The following were typical of the comments on the launching of our decontrol and socio-economic program:

“The Macapagal administration’s decision to lift exchange control and allow the peso to seek its true level was endorsed yesterday by spokesmen of leading trade chambers as a big step forward in the effort to restore economic stability.” ( Manila Daily Bulletin , January 23, 1962).

—–

“Alfredo Montelibano, banker-agriculturist, said that the decontrol program is the best thing that has happened here in the past decade.

“Alfonso Calalang, banker, said the bold measures taken by President Macapagal in lifting exchange controls is similar to the one made by Herr Erhardt in bringing about West German economic resurgence.” ( Sunday Times , January 28, 1962.)

—–

“The Philippine-American Chamber of Commerce Monday hailed removal by the Philippine government of import and currency controls.” ( Manila Chronicle , January 24, 1962.)

—–

“Rep. Vicente Peralta (NP, Sorsogon) told PPI that the administration’s decontrol program is ‘bold and forward looking,’ and in the long run ‘would be best for the country.’” ( Daily Mirror , Jan. 27, 1962.)

—–

“The bold decontrol program was a necessary forward step. The President should be congratulated for his courage in making such a decision.” (Teodoro F. Valencia, Manila Times , Jan. 27, 1962.)

—–

“Franz Pick, who publishes ‘Pick’s Currency Report,’ called President Diosdado Macapagal’s sweeping economic order ‘the most constructive decision taken in the past 15 years’ in the Philippines.” ( Philippines Herald , Jan. 26, 1962.)

—–

“The New York Times said editorially Friday ‘the new President of the Philippines has made a bold move in abolishing exchange controls and lifting many other governmental restrictions on economic activity.’

“The United States, the International Monetary Fund and private American banks are backing Mr. Macapagal.” ( Manila Daily Bulletin , Jan. 30, 1962.)

After six months of operation of the decontrol and socioeconomic program, what is the situation today? Do the results and developments show success or failure?

Dragoslav Avramovic of the World Bank, who was a member of the Economic Mission which surveyed the economic situation in 1961 and who is now on loan from the World Bank as economic adviser to the Philippine government has described the operation of our program so far as a “brilliant success.” Albert Mattera, the International Monetary Fund adviser at the Central Bank, declared on June 28, 1962 that due largely to determined economic leadership provided by the Administration, conditions have been created which now make the Philippines one of the best investment fields in the world.

Allow me to quote some recent assessments made by knowledgeable persons on the performance made in the implementation of the program:

“In a conference Monday with the technical staff of the joint legislative-executive tax commission headed by executive director A. Yoingco, Dragoslav Avramovic, World Bank executive who headed the bank’s economic survey mission to the Philippines last year, declared that the advantages of exchange decontrol far outweigh its disadvantages.

“If controls had been allowed to stay for one or two more years, the effect would have been disastrous for the country, the World Bank executive said.” ( Manila Daily Bulletin, July 18, 1962.)

“Dwight Allen, VP and Philippine and Southeast Asia representative of Manufacturers Hanover and Trust Co: ‘The Philippines went through the transition from a controlled to a decontrolled economy much smoother than anticipated and he was extremely pleased with the results.’” (Evening News, July 20, 1962.)

—–

“The decontrol program has been successful during its first six months of performance, in spite of present stresses and strains, Richard A. Meyjes, president of the Manila Chamber of Commerce, told the Pasay Rotary Club last Wednesday.” ( The Manila Times , July 13, 1962.)

“‘The investment climate in the Philippines is better than at any time in the recent past,’ U.S. Commerce department said in the current issue of its international commerce magazine.” ( Philippines Herald , July 23, 1962.)

It is our conviction that our program has fared very well, thus justifying the devotion that we put into the endeavor, the sacrifice made by the people and the hope that with some more sacrifice and cooperation from those concerned the economy will soon be moving in restored health towards progress for the country and a better life for the people.

What are the evidences of the successful operation of the program? They are many and they are virtually conclusive. Among them are the following:

(1) The international dollar reserves have risen from $96.6 million on January 19, 1962 to $141.90 million at the end of June, 1962. This performance is a feat considering that in addition, the Central Bank had reduced its obligations at preferred rates from $336.5 million to $119.28 million.

(2) Revenues have increased, averting an impending huge budgetary deficit for the fiscal year 1961-1962. During the six months under controls from July 1 to December 30, 1961, the government operated with a deficit of P98,039,939. During the period of decontrol from January 1 to June 30, 1962, expenditures had amounted to P538,479,574 and revenues to P656,898,199, or a surplus of P118,418,625, thereby overcoming the deficit for the first six months and netting an overall surplus of P20 million for the fiscal year. It is noteworthy that while the government operated on a deficit during the last 6 months of the past administration, by raising revenues and by judicious management of our expenditures, we had during the first six months of my administration a surplus of P118,417,625.

(3) Exports have begun to exceed imports. “During the first four months of 1962 under our full decontrol program our country enjoyed a balance of payments surplus position of $23.31 million, as compared to an unfavorable balance of $27.51 million covering the same period in 1961.” ( Central Bank Report , June 6, 1962.)

(4) There has been an increase in the rate of growth. “Overall production indices (1955-100) during the first quarter of 1962 for agriculture and mining showed increases of 3 and 18 per cent respectively over their levels in 1961.” ( Central Bank Report , June 6, 1962.)

(5) The value of the peso is now stabilizing at P3.90 to the dollar. At the time of decontrol in January 1962, the black market value of the dollar was P4.50. It was expected by observers that the peso might shoot higher than P5 after decontrol. Instead, the peso initially fluctuated between P3.60 and P3.93, and in recent weeks has been stabilizing at P3.90, prompting the Central Bank to report on July 18, 1962, that “the stability of the exchange rate has been beyond earlier expectations.”

(6) The international value of the peso has become stronger. At the time of decontrol, the peso was worth in Hongkong $1.21 Hongkong dollars. Now the peso is worth $1.47 Hongkong dollars.

(7) There has been no flight of dollars as might have happened if decontrol was not a sound course. On the contrary, more dollars have come into the country than had been remitted after decontrol. During the period of controls, there was a deficit in invisible transactions, whereas, after four months of decontrol, invisible disbursements amounted to $127.5 million as against receipts amounting to $163.7 million, resulting in a net receipt surplus of $36.2 million under decontrol.

Now it may be asked, if the decontrol and socio-economic program has been as successful as it is judged by the experts and by the administration, why have the prices of some commodities been on the increase? The answer is that such an increase was expected, that in fact the price situation is better than what was anticipated, and that the price reactions actually prove the validity and soundness of the program.

The administration anticipated the increase of the prices of imported commodities and of locally produced goods with large imported components under decontrol and knowing this we took positive steps to assure adequate supply of rice and corn to the people at low prices first through the Presidential Rice and Corn Committee and now through the Rice and Corn Administration. This was in accordance with the native psychology that as long as he has rice to eat, the Filipino can manage to get by and withstand temporary hardships.

In launching our program which seeks to offer a permanent solution to the problem of poverty of the masses, we were aware that altho the program would succeed, the people would pass through a transition period when the prices of imported commodities would rise, thus causing hardships to those who were accustomed to using such imported goods and who could not soon enough accustom themselves to using substitutes and locally produced goods. The prices of imported goods would rise because of the 25% increased tariff rates under the Laurel-Langley Trade agreement and because of the higher cost of importations with the increased peso value of the dollar.

The present problem of high prices of imported commodities is temporary pending the arrival of that stage during the progress of the socio-economic program when the increased quantity of goods and the increased income of the people will solve the problem of prices in a permanent and natural way. The objective in tackling the price problem is to minimize the hardships of the masses during such period of transition. In the meeting of the bipartisan Council of Leaders last July 19, I expounded on the administration’s view that the five-year socio-economic program was faring well in the attainment of its objective of solving the fundamental problem of underproduction; but that during the transition period it was necessary to join hands in helping the people to minimize their difficulties from high prices of imported goods. As a result, the Council agreed to take steps to ease the prices of milk, canned fish, medicines and canned meat.

I wish to express the appreciation of our people, as well as my own, to the NP top leaders for extending their cooperation to the administration in meeting the transitional problem of the high prices of imported commodities.; This is a good development in our political practices for which our people have reason to be happy. With the two parties working together to meet this problem, there is no valid reason why the situation cannot become satisfactory.

With the leaders of the two parties cooperating, the people can look forward hopefully that the prices of selected prime commodities will be satisfactory. The supply of rice at a reasonable rate is assured. Even before the Council of Leaders’ meetings, steps were taken which would insure an adequate supply of milk at reasonable prices and with the Council’s inclusion of milk in its activity, this item bids to become even more satisfactory. After the Council’s measures are put into effect, medicines, canned fish and canned meat should be within easier reach of the masses.

There is only one possible group that can throw a monkey wrench to the united national effort to minimize the people’s difficulties in the matter of prices—the thoughtless, uncivicspirited and avaricious price speculators who would seize every opportunity for increased profit without regard for the plight of others and for the welfare of the country. We shall also move to plug this loophole. With the aid of the proper public agencies and the Secretary of Justice, we shall identify these speculators and appeal to them or to those who have moral authority over them to extend their cooperation for the country’s good and for their own good. Should they not listen to persuasion and continue to ignore the public welfare, the Secretary of Justice has already my instructions to apply the law rigorously against them, including the President’s plenary power of deportation in cases of speculators who are foreigners.

The future of the people, therefore, is bright under the satisfactory progress of the socio-economic program and with the interim measures on prices of prime commodities, which may be said to be a joint Liberal-Nacionalista program. The leaders of both parties are doing their task. The people have heretofore acted magnificently and done their part. Because of the bright outlook for the future and the readiness of leaders from both parties to help, the people have reason to continue doing their part by adjusting themselves to the prices of some commodities, particularly the imported ones. They should learn to refrain from using imported goods which they cannot afford and instead use locally-produced goods. This will promote local production and the prosperity that we seek.

For their part, the dealers of locally-produced goods should not increase their prices. The dealers of imported commodities should refrain from raising their prices as best as they can as a gesture of cooperation with the administration and the people and for the ultimate good of the economy and themselves.

The first six months of the administration have been a period of stabilization, during which the successful operation of decontrol was established and the plans to support the socio-economic program have been completed. In that period, prospective investors, both local and foreign, have had time to prepare their plans and assure themselves of the fact that the country is back on the path of free enterprise definitely and for good. The month of July marks the beginning of development of actual investment in projects. The administration is ready to assist investors, who are prepared to go into any of the various and profitable investment fields under an atmosphere of freedom which has been ushered in the country.

The administration is ready to expand credit facilities to boost economic expansion. Only today, the Development Bank of the Philippines has reported that it has loaned P350 million for productive ventures. Bernardino Ronquillo of the Manila Daily Bulletin reports also today that with the impending establishment of three new commercial banks as well as a private industrial development bank with foreign support, there is forthcoming “definitely new money that will bolster the peso supply as well as the foreign exchange reserve.”

With the cooperation of all, the success of the Nation’s socio-economic program is inevitable after its auspicious performance in the first six months. Had we continued with controls, there would be no prospect today except continuing economic difficulties because controls encouraged imports, thereby helping foreign businessmen to the prejudice of local investors. With our decontrol plan in effect today, the benefit of profits has been reversed in favor of exports, helping the local producers. This boost to domestic production and local economic activities will inexorably result in more goods, more jobs, more income and a consequently higher level of living for the people.

From the standpoint of sound economic policy, through courage in launching such policy and devoted care for its successful implementation, our country is now moving in the direction of progress and prosperity. More than this material benefit, it must not be forgotten that we have restored to our people the precious possession of freedom. It is exhilarating not only to the Nation as a whole but to the individual as well, now that our citizens can go into business, travel anywhere and anytime, import what they wish and can afford, and do the things that they need to succeed and to become happy without having to secure a permit or license from bureaucrats. For our sleepless and anxious hours for making all these possible, it gives us satisfaction to feel that we have given our countrymen their priceless sense of liberty.

With free enterprise now safely established and considering the abundance of our natural resources which when properly organized and husbanded can support three times our present population, and with an administration that is resolved to maintain until the end its devotion to the nation’s economic growth under a regime of freedom, integrity and justice, we have ample reason to thank God Almighty that it is now in our own hands as a people to sacrifice and work hard together in order to attain and deserve the boon of a better life in freedom.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.