SPANISH-FILIPINO RELATIONS

I AM sincerely and deeply grateful for the generous words that Your Excellency has addressed to my person, words that I gather for my nation, the farthest of the lands of the Hispanic world, the last nation born of this great Spain but not, on that account, the least loving. On the contrary, in this world crisis that humanity is suffering, the Philippines sides with Spain in the forefront of the common fight against communism, determined, without doubting or wavering, without compromises of any kind.

As Spain was, under Your Excellency’s leadership, the first country in Europe and in the whole world to fight the battle against this evil of our time that is communism and vanquishing it in a fair field, so the Philippines was the first country in Asia that recognized the danger to liberty and human dignity of this scheme of lies, cheating, assaults and tyrannies known as the communist conspiracy eventually expelling it from the legally recognized political parties and dominating the revolt of the so-called Huks. This is one of the numerous bonds that unite our two peoples. Both of them have sampled the bitter fruit of Marxism and, having purged themselves of its poison, are now immunized against its contagion in the future.

What we can do as free and sovereign peoples within the framework of this same liberty and sovereignty is to help ourselves mutually to face the problems so analogous in our two countries, comparing notes, sharing the result of our experiences, and trying out solutions. We in the Philippines have seen, with admiring wonder, how, after the devastation of the Civil War, the plunder of the gold from the coffers of the Bank of Spain, the unfortunate diplomatic boycott, the exclusion from the Marshall Plan when there was greatest need of foreign help to raise the broken economy in the most cruel of wars, Spain has risen by its own efforts from the ruin and ashes of a war imposed by sinister international plots.

All this was achieved because Spain had the good fortune to find a self-denying leader who knew how to forge national unity by overcoming class and party struggles, holding down politics before the economic development of the nation, reclaiming vast areas of impoverished lands, planning and realizing great industrial complexes, turning the courses of rivers, reclaiming swamps, hollowing out mountains, parcelling together excessively small landholdings, engaging in reforestation, stabilizing its currency, redressing the balance of payments, raising almost from zero to P1 billion the foreign exchange reserves, in a word, bringing about the Spanish “miracle.”

Faced with the same problems as yourselves and in similar conditions, we wanted to verify personally the conditions and the results of the Spanish experience and we know that you will not begrudge us your collaboration so that we may be able to take full advantage of the fruits of the Spanish experience.

I am grateful and I accept, in the name of the Filipino people, the praise heaped upon the Philippines. I know that my country will receive with joy the generous words of the Caudillo and that they will be appreciated for what they really are: words of affection, words of encouragement of a loving mother to the child that wanted to carve out its own destiny and now occupies a place in the concert of free nations.

Unique in history is the case of the Philippines—a country that breaks the political bonds uniting it to the old mother country but retaining, in all its pristine vigor, the love that has united them. It so happens that the modern world regards with wonder something that foreigners find strange but which to Spaniards and Filipinos, is natural and ordinary: the rare spectacle of two peoples and nations—Spain and the Philippines—so far apart geographically but so closely bound heart and soul, by the same ideas and sentiments, religion and culture that it seems that, in truth, they form but one people, one nation, one yearning and one single aspiration.

What the Philippines is to Spain I have just seen with my own eyes. What Spain is to the Philippines a Filipino poet, well known in these lands as poet and declaimer, said more than thirty years ago: “En el cur so del tiempo, desenvuelto, tu, España, volveras. Que amor no ha vuelto? Presa en la red del propio bien perdido, seras un ave enforma de añoranza que va a volar, cuando la noche avanza, en direcion al solitario nido. “

It is not in vain that the word “poet” originally meant prophet. I assure you that the forecast of the late Manuel Bernabe was fulfilled long ago. Spain has come back and remains in the Philippines. Upon my word as a gentleman, I swear that, in these moments, Spain has a hidden altar in the heart of every Filipino.

Spanish and Filipino gentlemen, brethren: I raise my glass and invite you to drink to the health of the Caudillo of Spain for the greater glory of this blessed land and for the everlasting brotherhood of Spaniards and Filipinos.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.