Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the induction ceremonies of the Philippine Chamber of Industries

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel Fiesta Pavilion, November 16, 1962]

NEW DIRECTIONS FOR PHILIPPINE INDUSTRY

I CONGRATULATE the new officers of the Philippine Chamber of Industries whom I have the honor to induct into office this evening. I consider it a privilege to have participated in the installation of these distinguished leaders of industry and in this connection I recall that when I was making a bid for this great responsibility of discharging the task of seeking the solutions of the problems of our country and I felt it was essential to predicate our national effort upon a definite economic program, I engaged myself in assiduous economic studies and made it a habit to read the articles of many of you here. I read practically all the leading articles on economic studies and I recall distinctly that among the articles that I read there stood out as exemplary in their sense, in their learning, and in their intelligence the articles of one who is truly one of the authorities in economics in our country, your president, Hilarion Henares, Jr.

I would not be candid if I did not say that I had been very impressed by the elegance, the efficiency and the excellence of this affair conducted by the Philippine Chamber of Industries. I subscribe, President Henares, to your concept of industrialization and in undertaking this task of industrialization with government support and that should industrialists undertake the task with the same efficiency and same excellence that you have demonstrated in this affair, I am sure you and they will succeed for the social and economic progress of our country.

President Henares said that when the economy is sick you need a doctor of economics. I have tried to make studies in economics. I don’t know whether I am really a doctor but I received the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Economics and so in that line I shall do my best although I believe that among doctors now, doctors of medicine are more impressive than doctors of economics as shown by the fact that Mrs. Macapagal, a Doctor of Medicine, received more applause than I. You said that if the government is a doctor, you are the patient. Well, I say in turn that no matter how good the doctor is, unless he gets the cooperation of the patient, the chances of recovery are not high.

So I am glad that you have put behind our socio-economic program the support of the Philippine Chamber of Industries. Tonight I have listened with keen interest to the problems mentioned by President Henares, Jr. I shall give them the most serious attention and consideration that they deserve. But in order to insure that the ideas, the interest and the aspirations of the Philippine Chamber of Industries will be given the proper attention in our efforts in our country today, from hereon I shall make President Henares as one of my active advisers in representation of the Philippine Chamber of Industries.

I express my very deep appreciation of the honor you bestowed on me when you invited me to induct into office the new officers of your organization. It is a privilege to stand before you who are gathered with a noble purpose and with faith in your country and in your capacity to solve the problems of the present and to move forward to a brighter future. I hope that your faith will bring forth the light of progress for our people and dispel the shadows of yesterday’s moral decadence and economic stagnation.

I shall express ideas tonight on the “New Directions for Philippine Industries” under the present administration. The increasing vigor of your Chamber and its growing prominence in our business scene are indications that the mounting energies of our society are being directed towards the expansion and the creation of productive industries for our country. These energies, along with the talents and the vision of our industrial leaders and the skill and patience of our country’s workers, are among the most important assets we shall have in the years ahead, when our country—rejuvenated from the removal of controls—embarks on the new directions now emerging for our industrial development.

It is understandable that our businesses have paused momentarily for the past months in their normal functions of investing in the expansion of existing facilities or in the creation of new productive assets. This pause is an expected aftermath of decontrol. Following the adjustment of the exchange rates necessitated by the free market, long-term investors normally freeze their plans while waiting for the rates to stabilize and for stirred conditions to settle and adjust to the new patterns.

Now the pause has run its normal course; the new directions of profitability have emerged; the climate of a free market has set in to replace the old and unhealthy atmosphere of controls. The time has come to restore the rate of investments in industries to previous pace and to increase it in accordance with the step-up in the rate of capital accumulation in the private sector.

The machinery for the implementation of this program has been firmed up and has been picking up speed. It is now time therefore to define succinctly the stand of this Administration with regard to the industrial development of the country in the years ahead.

Let there be no doubt that the government, under its present leadership, places a high stake in the promotion of private investments, especially in industries that would process and diversify the primary products of our agricultural and mining sectors, and in industries that would increase not only our available supply of consumers’ goods but also the domestically-produced capital and intermediate products that are used by the makers of final goods. We seek to fill a vast and undeveloped gap in the structure of our economy: the gap between the production of primary products on the one hand, and the processing and packaging of imported goods on the other which we have witnessed in recent times. We seek, in the long run, to induce private investors into plowing their capital into industries that would supply the links in the projected national network of productive enterprises, industries which would diminish our dependence on imported finished goods and would increase our own supply and our exports of Philippine-manufactured products.

Consequently, the government’s policies will be oriented towards encouraging the private sector to achieve those aims as embodied in our Five-Year Program. Our preoccupations in the field of economic policy will be to induce, through various policy instruments, the establishment and growth of productive capacity in such basic areas as steel productions, through the projected Iligan and other projects which the government has agreed to support and assist, the fabrication of metal products, including the domestic making of machinery and equipment, both electrical and non-electrical; the establishment of basic chemical and related industries to reduce the importation of compounds, to increase the domestic value-added industries, like the manufacture of pharmaceuticals, and to establish an efficient fertilizer industry; the expansion of domestic capacity for cement and glass production; the increase in the capacity of our plywood and veneer manufacture, for which a profitable export market as you know exists; the increase in pulp-making facilities to serve the paper-making enterprises; the provision of necessary assistance to the textile industries; the promotion of the processing of food products; and the encouragement of related essential and basic industries.

These are among the high-priority ventures which the government will help launch by means of various policies in relation to our Five-Year Program. The enhancement of these industries through the measures which I shall enumerate shortly is founded on the following principles and postulates: first, that the government will exercise an imaginative but responsible use of monetary and fiscal policies; second, that the government will pursue an agricultural program to help insure a sufficiency of raw materials for the industries now existing and to be established in the future; third, that the government will coordinate the lending policies of its own financial institutions and follow a project-financing program consistent with its overall industrial policies; fourth, that the government will pursue a rational and integrated public works program to provide the private sector’s needs for roads and other transport facilities, power, irrigation and water control; and fifth, that the government will do its share of providing the necessary social services in the way of health facilities, education, extension, research, and related services to insure for ourselves a healthy and educated people, without whom no economic program can succeed.

There is a pressing need for increasing the rate of investments. Decontrol has removed the windfall advantage of merely processing and packaging, and has opened the way for investments in basic and intermediate industries. But the vigorous requirements induced by decontrol will call for new vision, imagination, and resourcefulness on the part of our entrepreneurs. This is the reason for the firm commitment on the part of the government which I hereby make to a definite, consistent and stable set of policies that would rid private capital of its timidity and positively encourage it to venture into industries of high priority. And I say that in the face of the exacting tests imposed by our newly-freed foreign exchange market, the incentives to be provided by public policy cannot afford to be hazy, hesitant, half-hearted, or haphazard; they must be, as they will be under this administration, substantial, clear, long-term, and most important of all, faithfully implemented.

In this spirit, I will not outline the policy measures of the government and mention some of the things that have been done to carry them out. Where necessary, these are to be embodied in amendments to existing laws or in new legislation. Where sufficient, they will be enforced through a revision of the administrative procedures of the executive branch of the government.

In these policies, this government respects the fact that private business is motivated by the prospective rates of return on its investments as matched against prospective risks and inconveniences. To be realistic—indeed, to be effective at all—the government’s incentive policies must operate on these critical variables either by improving the profit prospects, or by diminishing risks and inconveniences, or both. This is the philosophy behind the following measures.

First, partial or complete tax exemptions will be granted to new industries of high priority. The exemption will normally be temporary, but will be substantial in magnitude and long-term in duration to allow these firms a generous period of freedom from tax shares in their gross profits and in the value of their assets. This will also involve a desirable revision of the Basic Industries Act to exempt from tariffs and special import taxes the capital and raw material imports of only a number of basic and strategic industries rather than the all-enclosing and dispersed range of fields now mentioned in the Act.

Second, together with the exemption from customs charges of capital goods imports for high priority industries, tariff protection shall be given to the products of industries that need to be sheltered from foreign competition while in the process of attaining their most economical scale of operations. Thus, tariff protection will not be used as a crutch or prop for inefficient producers, but as a help for domestic firms to attain the size and the experience necessary to make them reasonably competitive with foreign producers.

As a general rule, tariffs as a policy instrument will be used with utmost flexibility. They will be selectively increased to protect local industries from undue competition of foreign products, and selectively decreased to facilitate the importation of intermediate products needed by local enterprises, and of essential final goods in short supply. The rates of different categories of tariffs will be determined on an industry-to-industry basis, and will be adjusted in accordance with individual needs for protection or import facilitation, as the case may be. In this connection, tariffs have been used to counteract the dumping of cheap foreign commodities into the local market. If a choice exists, this government will prefer to encourage those industries that need no protection.

Third, provisions will be made for the partial or full exemptions from taxes of profits that are reinvested by firms either in expansion or in new capital goods. Provisions will also be made for the carry-over of past losses into current profits for tax reduction purposes.

Fourth, although subsidies should not be a normal policy instrument, they will be given in exceptional cases where they will be deemed necessary.

And fifth, the government’s administrative machinery will be reoriented to assist rather than to impair the function of business. This refers, among others, to the improvement of machinery, parts, and materials used by our industries. This also refers to the processing of loan and license applications pending in the government offices.

In general then, the government seeks to increase the profit prospects and to reduce the risks and inconveniences involved in expanding our country’s productive capacity. Its search for legitimate revenues through taxes will not be conducted at the expense of the returns to the investments of high priority industries during their first few years of growth and operations. Even the government’s own revenue prospects can improve in the long run if its tax exemptions and related policies succeed in expanding the country’s industrial operations, which will provide a wider tax base in the future. In the meantime, its present revenue-collection should not jeopardize new investments or profit-plowback but should come from increased rates and more efficient collections from sources that can afford to absorb taxes.

Within the past few months, several concrete measures have been taken to afford reasonable protection to local industries from under competition from abroad. It may be relevant to mention the following in this connection.

Tariff schedules have been revised to shield our textile industries from the crippling rivalry of imported textiles. This protection, it is hoped, will give the industry sufficient leeway and elbow room to improve its own structural organization and render the quality and price of its product at reasonable par with foreign textiles.

Tariffs will be used ultimately as an instrument for improving the competitive position of domestic enterprises.

The government has also taken serious cognizance of the adverse effects on existing industries of certain subsidized importing policies of the NAMARCO. For this reason, this institution has recently frozen a plan to order a large shipment of certain products whose importation has severely impaired and reduced the output of local establishments producing the same goods. We have also acted firmly to curtail the dumping into our market of commodities sold to the Philippines at a price even lower than that prevailing in its own market.

These are some of the incentives we will provide to promote investments in new industries and the expansion or rationalization of existing ones. For the coordinated exercise of these policy instruments, we propose to utilize the Department of Commerce and Industry to serve, among other things, as a Board of Trade. As such, the department will make use of a wide variety or protective and inducement policies under its disposal and will exercise them in coordinated and consistent fashion.

In the meantime, the Department of Commerce and Industry is exercising all-out efforts to unite the various sectors of Philippine industry to find out their respective problems, and to help them solve such problems through the adoption of long-range perspectives designed to meet the challenges of the domestic market and the strategic overseas outlets.

Points of references in this connection which are being pursued with relentless vigor are the following:

First, positive inducements to industrial entrepreneurs;

Second, foreign market surveys and trade promotion activities in principal world markets and judicious trade arrangement with our major co-trading countries;

Third, a reorientation program for commercial attaches and consular officials;

Fourth, the encouragement of greater Filipino participation in our domestic trade, more liberalized credit facilities and more extensive support and patronage by government agencies.

I am sure that many of you are aware of the intensive activities being undertaken by the Department of Commerce and Industry, as adverted by President Henares, Jr., under the leadership of that official whom Philippines Free Press called “Macapagal’s Wonder Boy,” Secretary Rufino Hechanova. With continued support from your sector, I am confident that the Department of Commerce and Industry will contribute greatly to the success of the Socio-Economic Program.

As our industrial structure moves back from the finishing end and moves forward from the primary producing end to fill the gap in-between, the need for long-term equity and long-financing increases. So does the need for external sources of finance to supply the foreign exchange requirements of the new investments. This two-fold need will be met, to a considerable extent, by the establishment of the Private Development Corporation of the Philippines.

It must be recognized that a financial institution of this nature has long been advocated by the Philippine Chamber of Industries. I am happy to say that the work towards its early establishment has been proceeding with satisfactory results. The Corporation will meet the future needs of new industries by providing medium and long-term loans and equity and financing to such enterprises. And so may I say this, that it will assist in the expansion of the local capital market, especially for corporate securities, and promote a wide public participation in the ownership of corporate industries.

By providing such long-term capital as well as necessary managerial and technical services, this Private Development Corporation of the Philippines will be a vital force in the initiation, expansion and modernization of Philippine industrial ventures. Happily the Steering Committee of this Corporation has successfully negotiated for financial support from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and from the Agency for International Development. And so may I say that the members of the Chamber of Industries can justly take pride in witnessing the fruition of an idea that has been advocated and supported by the Philippine Chamber of Industries in this new project.

Given these incentives and provisions for long-term financing, we can count on the release of considerable energies from the private sector in the direction of new investments. But the government’s efforts do not end here. Many opportunities are bound to be overlooked by the private sector and investors may be unwilling or unable to finance the feasibility studies leading towards profitable projects. This is an important area in which the government can be an imaginative catalyst. Its role in project promotion is, basically, to identify opportunities, to prepare feasibility studies for each of the most promising ones, to look for means of financing the study on the survey as well as on the pilot stage, and to “sell” these projects to investors and financial institutions.

Much of the initial work in project promotion is being done at the present by a team of World Bank experts who are now in the Philippines in relation to specific projects to be undertaken by public and private sectors working very closely with the vital agency of this administration, the Program Implementation Agency, which is headed as you now know, by one who is now being regarded as “Malacañang’s braintruster” Secretary Sixto Roxas Jr. A parallel effort is also being made to establish a body for advertising abroad the diverse investment opportunities existing in the Philippines for both domestic and foreign capital. I have also directed the preparation of legislative proposals to make the incentive policies I have outlined part of the firm statutes of this land.

In brief, we are now deep in our effort to promote our country’s productivity through an acceleration of the rate of industrial growth. Our efforts in the field of policies, of financing, of public and private project promotion, are all imbued with the philosophy that the government cannot hope to succeed by a series of disconnected, incoherent, piece-meal pretenses of trying to encourage industrial enterprises; it can be effective under present circumstances, only if it does a host of things at once. The incentives it offers, through tax privileges and protection, must be impressively great to be attractive; the financing facilities it helps to obtain must be substantial; and its project promotion work must be vigorous and persistent. Only in this fashion can it generate a truly favorable climate for the robust flourishing of free enterprise system.

I say this because in conclusion I would like to say that free enterprise, after all, does not mean that the government should stay out of the way. Free enterprise means that the government should literally pave the way for the progress of private industry. It means a fruitful joint effort between the government and the country’s industrialists and businessmen; the businessmen as the doer and the government as the helper, in the task of developing the nation’s resources, providing jobs to our workers and increasing the flow of goods and services needed by our people.

As the leader of our country’s industries, the officers and members of the Philippine Chamber of Industries are builders of our economic progress, and it is therefore to you that I pledge the entire resources of my administration in the common task of building a great nation where our people can truly enjoy the blessings of democracy and open the gates of a better life to all our countrymen.

Thank you and God bless you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.