Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the Launching Ceremonies of the 1963 Red Cross Fund Campaign and the Opening of the Red Cross Centenary

[Released on January 14, 1963]

Non-Partisan Relief

I HAVE always made public my personal appreciation of the services rendered by the Red Cross, having been, in many instances throughout my career in public service, a witness to its efficacy as an agency for our people’s welfare. I am thankful, therefore, for any opportunity afforded me to share with our countrymen and our friends the inspiring message of mercy and compassion which we associate with this great humanitarian organization.

This year the world celebrates the 100th anniversary of the Red Cross movement. The celebrations will honor the memory of Henry Dunant who was chosen by destiny to give practical expression to this concept of human relationships. Originally intended for the aid of the wounded in battle, the Red Cross today takes within its merciful scope every form of human suffering. More, from the very beginning an instrument for peace, it is today a power for peace. We recall how the Red Cross founder was the first recipient of the Nobel Prize for Peace. Not long ago, the same prize was awarded to another man who made the cause of mankind his personal cause—Dr. Albert Schweitzer, the missionary of the Congo. When Dr. Schweitzer was asked what was the philosophy behind his life which he devoted to works of mercy and compassion, he answered in three simple shinning words, “Reverence for Life.” If today, I were asked what was the philosophy behind the Red Cross, I would borrow from Dr. Schweitzer and reply, “Reverence for Life.” He could as well have been speaking of the Red Cross when he said “Reverence for Life,” for in no other instance could we find a word more candid, more practical, more an unequivocal expression of reverence for life than the blood bank, disaster relief and all the other Red Cross services.

The Red Cross seeks to protect life, to place life above the importunings of disease, suffering and misfortune, above and beyond the narrow restrictions of nationality, color, creed and ideology. That is the Red Cross. This year the Red Cross completes its first century; it is not its last century. It will last for as long as mankind will, as all causes that embrace the well-being of man do last.

There have been many concepts of human relationships that came upon the earth during these one hundred years. The Red Cross is one, but others have come and gone as ephemeral fads, or as earth-shaking catastrophes that have scarred mankind. Concepts that sought to destroy what is good and beautiful and true in man, concepts that sought the enslavement of man, concepts which sought to trample the dignity of man, concepts which mocked the humanity of men, all these failed to outlive the century because, anything that works contrary to the well-being of man essentially works against itself, and therefore works towards its own destruction. At times concepts like these may appear to flourish. At times they may appear to triumph. But the time is inevitable when they crash with resounding finality, never to rise again.

The Red Cross in its final analysis is nothing more than one man helping another man, reaching out in everwidening circles to become groups of people helping other people. This is the gift of Henry Dunant to mankind, the movement we know today as the Red Cross. Men since the beginning of time have sought to give it form, and many have succeeded in giving it concrete expression, enriching it with the example of their lives, commending it to the acceptance of other men. The lives of Henry Dunant, Florence Nightingale, Clara Barton, Father Damian, Aurora Quezon, remind us of this. Thus it is that today we offer the Red Cross in praise and in gratitude to the Divine Mercy of the Almighty, and hold before us the example of Henry Dunant who, born to wealth and alien to misery, heard the challenge of the wounded and the dying after the Battle of Solferino, and founded the Red Cross in response to this challenge. Each day we are confronted by the great and small challenges of life. How we respond to these challenges affect not only our own but other lives around us.

It is opportune here to borrow anew from the wisdom of Albert Schweitzer when on the occasion of the birth anniversary of Henry Dunant, he said: “The Red Cross has become a greater and more powerful organization than its founder ever dared dream to be possible. It is even more than this. It represents, in our troubled post-war world, the clear fact which every human being is called to feel, to think and to act with that compassion and love which lie deep within his own nature, and this also applies to all nations which in themselves are associations of human beings. It vividly brings this ideal to our minds, to us who know but are unfaithful to it. It is forever encouraging us to a better sort of world than that one we live in. We owe, therefore, a profound gratitude to the one who lit such a beacon in our present darkness. It is for us to see that it is not extinguished.”

We are gathered here today precisely to see to it that this beacon shines brighter than ever, that this movement advances further still in our times. It is my privilege as President of the Republic to declare open the 1963 Red Cross fund campaign.

In our country, the Red Cross renders an ever-expanding service. Under our Administration, it will be more so because of our view that even in a country like ours where partisanship is acute, relief should be untouched by political or partisan bias. The government’s main relief agency, the Social Welfare Administration, has reduced the partisan factor in the distribution of relief on occasions of calamities. However, we should strive for the concentration of relief facilities in completely unpolitical and unpartisan and thorough humanitarian agencies. The Philippine National Red Cross is the ideal national, non-political and humanitarian agency which shall be the cherished haven of our people in times of disaster and misfortune. Towards this end, I pledge the full support of my Administration.

I urge all citizens and residents of this country, as well as all associations and organizations to help actively in the fund campaign which we declare open today, by giving generously of their means, time and effort to realize the aims and purposes of the Philippine National Red Cross. There is no nobler effort for any official or citizen than to participate in the operation of the Red Cross and in contributing generously to its fund. A strong Red Cross in this country is a strong link in the chain of Red Cross societies which girdle the globe, one chain which, through all this time, has helped immensely in uniting men, in the face of strongly divisive influences.

I hereby authorize all national, provincial, city and municipal government officials and school authorities to accept for the Philippine National Red Cross, fund-raising responsibilities, and urge them to take the initiative and active leadership in their respective communities.

For my part, I wish to present my humble contribution to the 1963 Red Cross fund campaign in the amount of P1,000.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.