Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On the 5th anniversary of the Social Security System

[Released on September 1, 1962]

SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEM

TODAY is the anniversary of the Social Security System. It is a fitting occasion for rededicating ourselves to the philosophy that inspired the establishment, five years ago, of the System, and for examining once again its social and economic significance in our society. In spite of the considerable skepticism which greeted its birth, and of the many problems and deficiencies from which it has been suffering during its growing years, we can take pride in the Social Security System as one more manifestation that society has the responsibility of protecting its members from economic want and insecurity, which includes the duty of providing for those who are disabled from taking care of themselves.

The extent of such a responsibility, specifically as exercised by the Government, has been the subject of a running controversy in the history of social thought for the past two centuries: among those who advocate a system of complete individualism and laissez-faire on the one hand, those who stand for a centrally directed society on the other, and those who place themselves in the wide range of views in between. In practice, the extent of the government’s hand in social welfare has depended on national temperaments and tastes. While government-sponsored medical care is accepted as a fact of life in England, it has of late been a matter of intense political debate in the United States. As for us Filipinos, it has been said that in times of unemployment or disability our best form of social security is our relatives.

Whatever truth may be contained in that jest, it remains a matter of history that our society has rejected both extreme positions of complete laissez-faire and complete centralization. While we uphold a system of free enterprise as the most conducive to our national growth, we also have a rich heritage of welfare legislation and institutions to protect the poor, the weak, the less endowed, and to safeguard the rights of the laborers, the farmers, the sick, the aged, the disabled. Rightly do we revere President Manuel Quezon for his inspiring leadership in championing the cause of social justice. Rightly, too, do we pride ourselves in having adopted during the past half century a series of enlightened legislative acts to protect and enhance the welfare of the working man.

We must, however, recognize that our society’s capacity to make such provisions depends on the general productivity of our economy, and that an underdeveloped economy is severely limited in its ability to care for those of its members who for some reason are temporarily or permanently unable to fend for themselves. This is a timely occasion for setting our views in proper perspective and for reaffirming my Administration’s determination to pursue a vigorous and consistent set of policies to accelerate our country’s economic growth. For our people’s stake is only secondarily in welfare and relief measures; their primary and most crucial stake is in increasing, to the utmost extent that price stability will allow, the future capacity of our economy to provide in abundance those goods and services that make for a healthy, free and decent life, blessed not only with the basic necessities but with the finer amenities that modern life has to offer. It is when we have banished poverty and ignorance and our society has provided jobs and incomes to all those willing and able to work that our social welfare legislations and institution will enhance their meaning, their value, and their effectiveness in fulfilling their noble missions.

These remarks do not by any means belittle the present worth of such institutions as the Social Security System; on the contrary, they stress it. The Social Security System can in fact be a potent instrument in fulfilling both functions of providing relief benefits as well as contributing to that most critical aspect of economic growth: capital formation. I should like to deal briefly with each of these aspects.

The birth of social security in the United States during the agonies of the Depression in the 1930’s was a reflection of the growing attitude that the wage-earner was not to be exposed to the impersonal workings of the market mechanism without proper policy guidance of the mechanism itself and without protecting the worker against the loss of income through the loss of employment. The protection was also extended to cover such non-market contingencies as sickness, old age, and various other forms of disability. The appeal of the old free-wheeling, each man-for-himself doctrine had been shattered; in its stead grew the strength of the philosophy that the state must assist in protecting its citizens from the afflictions of contingencies beyond the individual’s control, and that in the provision of economic security to the worker both employer and employee must work as partners.

This is the very same principle underlying the Social Security System of the Philippines. It prevails on the employer to help provide for the worker’s future needs, and on the employee to save for those needs and to develop a sense of self-reliance. Its progress since it modestly started functioning in 1957 has been impressive. It has paid out a cumulative total of more than 13 million pesos in death, disability, sickness and retirement benefits, covering more than 700,000 employees and more than 41,000 employers. Its investments now add up to more than P189 million of which P27 million are in housing loans.

The mention of its investments should underscore the fact that the SSS is not only an instrument for the social amelioration of its participants but is one of the institutions providing an important requirement of our future economic growth. The task of increasing our nation’s productive capacity depends on how much capital we can muster from domestic personal and business savings, from taxes, from foreign loans and grants, and from the expansion of domestic credit. The vulnerability of a country like ours to inflationary pressures prompts us to direct much of our search for investible capital to non-inflationary sources. In tapping such sources of savings, financial institutions like the SSS can and should play an increasing part. In its five years of operations, the System has already proven itself an effective agent for mobilizing the small individual savings of a large number of sources and collect them into one large pool of investible funds. By actually investing and lending those reserves not needed for current operations and payments, the System is in a positive way of contributing to the urgent task of increasing our national productive capacity.

In both of its operations—the payment of benefits and the marshalling of savings for investment—the Social Security System shows a great promise of even greater successes in the future, especially under the able management of its present officers. They have set a number of ambitious and laudable targets for the future, such as the expansion of the System’s insurance coverage, the establishment of unemployment benefits, and the improvement of the management of the whole operations.

In these tasks the SSS can count on the wholehearted backing of my Administration. There are a number of points, however, which I should like to make. The activities of an important financial institution like the Social Security System, as of various other entities having to do with the improvement of life of the common man, cannot be divorced from the larger tasks of promoting the whole country’s economic growth. They are interrelated; they are inextricably linked. The goal of expanding the coverage of our social insurance system is praiseworthy in itself, but will be far easier and more meaningful if our economy can manage to generate additional jobs every year to absorb more and more of our unemployed laborers. Unemployment compensation, which again was a product of depression-oriented thinking, and which today is a stabilizing force in industrialized countries subject to the ups and downs of the business cycle, assumes a different context altogether in an economy in our own stage of development, where unemployment is not quite a cyclical but a chronic or structural phenomenon. I urge that a thorough-going analysis be made of all the implications of unemployment compensation in the Philippines, its applicability, its workable forms in our setting, and its possible effects on the economy.

The problem of unemployment compensation must be seen in the light of the larger problem of wiping out unemployment from our society through investments in various projects and industries.

We have come to a vital decision-point in our history. This Administration has been acting and will act to execute our people’s decision to tackle the chronic problems of our society at the roots. We can no longer afford to waste any effort nor time; nor can we delay in giving the motion of our economy a definite, positive and consistent direction. This Administration is now in the process of drawing up a systematic strategy for hastening our country’s development; we are departing from the haphazard methods of the past. We are ripe for change; we have among our people the necessary talent, the drive, the imagination, the persistence, the qualities of business and social leadership to carry out our national resolve that poverty and unemployment are social evils with which we shall no longer live with but which we shall seek, through a massive national effort, to eliminate. We cannot overemphasize now, and we shall stress again and again, the enormous tasks that await us, and the heavy social responsibility we all share in forming for ourselves and our children the good society, a society abundant with the needs and amenities of life and the opportunities for cultural, intellectual and spiritual enrichment for each and all of us.

We have chosen this occasion to dwell on the urgency of pursuing the large goals of our society and of viewing our own roles in terms of those goals. This is because we celebrate today the anniversary of an institution which, during its fledgling years, has demonstrated the vital part it plays not only in providing for the needs of the sick, the retired, the disabled, and the survivors of the deceased participants in our social insurance system, but also in helping to fuel the engines of economic growth by pooling small savings into large investments. To the SSS I wish more success, and to its officers I give my congratulations for a job well done and my wishes for further success in their management of one of our society’s proud creations.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.