Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the Inauguration of the University of Mindanao

[Held at Marawi City, November 18, 1962]

THE UNIVERSITY OF MINDANAO

I AM HAPPY to be with you today at the inauguration of the University of Mindanao and the installation of Dr. Antonio Isidro as the first president of this only state university in the south. My visit to the University of Mindanao in this new frontier of opportunities is a concrete reaffirmation of my faith in the bright future of this island and in the significant role that this University will play in the task of nation-building.

In the midst of untapped natural wealth and opportunity, the entire country is faced with one grave problem— to insure for every citizen a decent livelihood and a fair standard of living so that he can enjoy the blessings of democracy. And so we witness the paradox of misery in the midst of plenty. A widening gap between the rich and the poor exists as few live in abundance while the vast majority of our people wallow in poverty, disease and ignorance. This situation, I will not permit to continue under my administration. Every Filipino is entitled to have a little more roof to shelter him from the rigors of the elements; a little more shirt to cover his back; a little more food every day to keep him alive and working; a little more money for his children to get the education that will make them better citizens and leaders of the country tomorrow.

We owe it to the common man to give him his due. Under the New Era no man or child will be allowed to die of starvation in a land of plenty; no citizen shall be beholden to any man in the pursuit of his happiness and prosperity.

Today, I pledge to the common man the fulfillment of his hopes and dreams in a New Era of economic prosperity, and epoch where he will find his chosen place in decent society, participating in the national effort and enjoying the economic bounty due him within the framework of democracy. Only when the common man is given his share in the economic bounties of this nation, only when he is provided with the opportunities for growth and the means that would enable him to combat the evils of poverty, ignorance and disease and wipe out these breeding places of communism, only then can we hope to strengthen our democratic way of life and insure the stability of our nation.

Motivated by deep interest in the welfare of the common man, I have adopted as the cornerstone of my administration the Five-Year Integrated Socio-Economic Program which I submitted in my first address on the State of the Nation to the First Session of the Fifth Congres early in January 1962. The ultimate goal of this program is “to insure that domestic production, augmented by imports, shall be adequate to provide for the needs of our growing population.” It aims to provide an adequate means of livelihood for the Filipino nation.

As an educational institution supported and controlled by the government, the University of Mindanao shall open its gates to the youths from all walks of life, rich and poor alike. It shall be non-sectarian, open to children of all creeds and persuasions. The University of Mindanao is a school that is common to all, because it must be part of the birthright of every Filipino child.

In more ways than one, the Mindanao University is an answer to a need—a compelling need to provide the Filipino youths with equal opportunities for learning. For while it is true that the government has established, and continues to establish, schools as part of the national educational program, most of these centers of learning are concentrated in Manila and other cities. Consequently, thousands, of our young men and women who live in remote areas such as Mindanao, find the cost of higher education, even of vocational education, far beyond their reach. Thus, they are denied the opportunities for advancement, for developing their God-given talents and capacities.

But the efforts of the government, no matter how determined and intensive, cannot bring about full economic and social development of the country. The government, with its limited resources, can only do so much. Our people, who constitute the nation’s greatest potentials, must respond to the challenge of our common responsibility, and they can be expected to perform their share of the gigantic task if they are equipped with the professional and scientific training and the cultural knowledge that true and responsible education can offer.

Before I close, I will avail of this opportunity which is as propitious as any to acquaint you with the Administration’s project to establish a Labor University, which is now being implemented by Secretary of Education Alejandro R. Roces. This proposed university not only demonstrates the Administration’s desire to gear education to the development of our nation but to provide equal educational opportunities to the children of our less well-situated countrymen, the legion of our humble wage-earners.

I need not express to you why I have a deep and abiding concern for the children of our less fortunate countrymen. Suffice it to say that I was born poor, myself. In my childhood and early youth I suffered the agony of want, and had it not been for the God-sent benevolence of a philantrophist, I would not have enjoyed the privilege of finishing college education and accepted, eventually, the challenge of serving my countrymen.

With the cooperation of the people and support of the government this institution will transform this region from a land of promise to a land of fulfillment and self-realization. It is my fervent hope that with the University of Mindanao, our program for increasing prosperity will succeed where others have failed. To bring about this New Era, I pledge anew my support for the accelerated growth of this region and for the progress and development of the University of Mindanao.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.