Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the inauguration of the Fil-American Youth Center

[Delivered in Olongapo, September 15, 1962]

OPPORTUNITIES OF THE PRESENT AND CHALLENGE TO THE FUTURE

IT is a sincere pleasure to be with you today at the inauguration of the Fil-American Youth Center of Olongapo. This center is a practical symbol of the fruitful cooperation between Americans and Filipinos and should serve to foster cordial relationships between our two peoples here in Olongapo through enlarged social contacts and cooperative projects designed to strengthen Fil-American friendship. I must say that your sense of timing is quite a joyous one.

Of late, as you know, we have taken steps to rediscover the well-springs of our native culture. We are emphasizing our heritage as an Asian People. We have projected abroad the image of the Filipino through our songs and dances, through our literature and other arts. In the process of asserting our national identity, we have taken time to reassess our relationship with other peoples, seeking similarities where they existed, and clearing barriers where we could. At the same time, we have clearly defined our stand in matters which affected our national interest and security.

It is inevitable that in the course of this task of self-discovery, we should undergo moments of disappointment, particularly in our relations with other countries, including the United States. This is part of the process of finding our foothold as an independent State and of rediscovering our soul as a nation. This is a task that necessarily involves national self-assertion, the recognition of our national identity and the maintenance of our national self-respect.

In this process of national self-discovery, there has been no intention to exacerbate Philippine-American relations. Our aim has been to strengthen these relations on the basis of mutual respect, regard and affection so that, in future, we can maximize domains of cooperative effort for mutual benefit and minimize the occasions of needless misunderstanding. It is to the credit of the American people that they have viewed our sentiments with sympathetic understanding and without rancor and have taken immediate steps to rectify an obvious wrong.

Recent events have brought to light the core of Philippine-American friendship. In any meaningful relationship, as that which exists between the two countries, there are bound to be areas of divergent viewpoint. It is the prerogative of free peoples to subject their relationships with each other to sober analysis in order that their ties may become stronger and firmer and adverse factors removed in the clear light of mutual understanding.

Perhaps the real significance underlying the building of this Fil-American Youth Center in Olongapo lies in the reassertion of the vitality of our special relations with the United States. Within the confines of this Center, you will have the opportunity to know one another better, to share experiences, to work and play together, and to demonstrate that differing backgrounds are no hindrance to the spiritual affinities that bind you together. Here you will learn to live by the principles of democracy and liberty which is our most precious legacy from the American people. You will learn that the essence of true freedom lies in the right to ask questions and to give answers—even the wrong answers. Together, as you map out ways and means to give meaning and substance to your association, you will discover that there exists a very real need for the continued friendship between our two peoples. They have need of each other and their continued cooperation is necessary for the freedom and security of both of them and of the peoples in this part of the world. So long as the sense of responsibility and so long as the understanding and willingness to understand one another remain fresh, there can be no valid reason why our friendship with the United States cannot grow in depth and strength. The crucible of war in which this relationship was tested has often been cited as a lasting proof of Fil-American cooperation. Perhaps we can look back less at the past and concentrate more on the opportunities of the present and the challenge of the future.

This relationship has been subjected to the harsh light of critical scrutiny. We have been accused of playing too docile a role, and we have also been accused of excessive self-assertion. The truth may be somewhere between the two extremes. The best rule for us to follow is, simply, to be ourselves, to do what we conceive to be in the best interests of our country, our friends and allies, regardless of the cost.

Olongapo is unique in one respect. It is a pilot plant—a demonstration center for the practice of Philippine-American cooperation. Here, in the grind of daily life, the two peoples have to learn to live and work together as friends and neighbors. Yours is a continuing experiment in good neighborliness.

I am aware that the members of the U.S. armed forces here in Olongapo have speedily and often come to the help of the community in its hour of need. I know that you are all grateful for this, and that, in turn, you will continue to show to them the hospitality which is truly a part of our way of life.

Let Olongapo, and this Center in particular, give proof to our two nations and to the world that Americans and Filipinos can order their relations on a basis of fraternal consideration and mutual respect, for their mutual beneficence and the common good. I have no doubt that you will rise to this challenge and prove this thesis to be right.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.