Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the First Conference of Filipino Diplomats and Consuls

[Delivered at Malacañang, January 9, 1962]

TALK TO FILIPINO DIPLOMATS AND CONSULS

I AM INFORMED that the first conference of Filipino diplomats and consuls, together with the counselors and other ranking officials of the Department, has just been held. The Vice-President and concurrently Secretary of Foreign Affairs is to be congratulated for convening you, which act was as timely as it was unprecedented.

Many of you know of my deep interest in the foreign service. I was a foreign service man before I went into politics. In my first term in Congress, I authored and sponsored the Foreign Service Law (R.A. 708) to establish a career foreign service.

In recent years, the Foreign Service Law was put to naught by a legal ruling that it was not mandatory. This has resulted in the political spoliation of the foreign service and the near destruction of the career system.

Under this Administration, the Foreign Service Law will be enforced vigorously to restore and strengthen the career foreign service. This will mean a diminution of the presidential powers. However, in the spirit of the new era of dedicated public service, I shall be ready to give up some of my prerogatives for the good of the people.

I have taken the steps to insure the success of the Administration’s program of safeguarding the career system in the foreign service. I have selected as the leaders in the foreign affairs department the best among our available cabinet materials, namely Vice-President and concurrently Secretary of Foreign Affairs Emmanuel Pelaez and Ambassador and concurrently Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs Salvador P. Lopez.

It is absolutely important that a new spirit of discipline, dedication to the public service and the national interest shall prevail henceforth in the home office and in all our foreign service posts. We depend upon you and your colleagues to take the lead in giving impetus to this spirit. We shall depend upon you to uphold wherever you may be assigned the dignity of the Republic.

Aside from re-establishing and safeguarding the career foreign service, you must provide concrete assistance to the economic and other domestic policies of the Administration. You must play an increasingly effective role in world affairs, in general, and in the defense of freedom and the preservation of peace among nations, in particular.

The Administration will do everything in its power to improve the life, enhance the dignity and enlarge the freedom of our people here at home. We shall expect you who are our representatives abroad to exert your best efforts to promote these goals in the international field.

I fervently wish you success in this mission. In the successful discharge of our respective shares in our joint and common responsibility to our country will lie the attainment of our people’s aspiration to a life of decency and prosperity in freedom.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.