BONIFACIO AND THE UNFINISHED REVOLUTION

Ang paggunita sa ika-159 na kaarawan ni Andres Bonifacio ay nagbibigay-daan sa atin upang muling suriin ang kanyang buhay, mga adhikain, at ang kanyang papel sa pagtatatag ng ating bansa. Itinatag niya ang Katipunan, isang lihim na samahan na naglalayong makamit ang kalayaan mula sa pananakop ng mga Espanyol sa pamamagitan ng rebolusyon. Ang kanyang pagkabayani ay hindi mapapantayan, ngunit ang kanyang kuwento ay puno rin ng trahedya at kontrobersya.

Bonifacio’s vision for a free Philippines was radical for his time. He envisioned a nation founded on the principles of equality, justice, and self-determination. However, his leadership was challenged by internal conflicts within the Katipunan, particularly the rivalry with Emilio Aguinaldo. This ultimately led to his tragic death, a subject of much debate and historical revisionism.

Maraming historians ang nagtatalo kung ang pagkamatay ni Bonifacio ay isang resulta ng political intrigue o isang kinakailangang hakbang upang mapanatili ang pagkakaisa ng rebolusyon. Regardless of the circumstances, his death remains a painful reminder of the divisions that plagued the early years of the Philippine struggle for independence. Ang kanyang mga ideya, bagama’t hindi ganap na naisakatuparan noong kanyang panahon, ay patuloy na nagbibigay-inspirasyon sa mga Pilipino hanggang sa kasalukuyan.

The Philippine Revolution, though ultimately successful in overthrowing Spanish colonial rule, remained unfinished in many respects. The social and economic inequalities that fueled the revolution persisted even after independence. The promise of a truly just and equitable society for all Filipinos remains a goal that we continue to strive for today. Bonifacio’s legacy serves as a constant call to action, urging us to complete the revolution he started – a revolution for genuine freedom, justice, and national unity.

Kaya naman, sa pagdiriwang natin ng kanyang kaarawan, hindi lamang natin dapat alalahanin ang kanyang kabayanihan, kundi pati na rin ang mga aral na natutunan natin mula sa kanyang buhay at mga pagkakamali. Let us honor his memory by continuing to fight for the ideals he cherished and by working towards a Philippines where the promise of a better future is within reach for all.

WE PAY homage today to a common man whose uncommon vision and heroism catapulted him to unusual heights of glory and fame. This great Filipino—Andres Bonifacio—triggered the first massive movement that sought to emancipate our country from political, social and economic servitude and to give her a place of dignity and honor unfettered by colonial rule.

The ceremonies taking place today, marking the climax of the Bonifacio Centenary, recall to our mind the crucial period in our history when the fate of our beloved nation dangled precariously between prolonged bondage with its concomitant miseries, and a revolution with all its risks and pains. We recall today—even as we mourn the death, just a few days ago, of a great American President—the life of a common man who led the nation, long conditioned to the evils of colonial rapacity, toward political stability and self-rule.

The period which placed Andres Bonifacio in the saddle of national leadership was indeed trying and crucial. Centuries of colonialism had enabled a foreign power to establish a powerful hold on the country and determine its destiny. So tight was the colonial grip on the Philippines that it seemed any effort to free the nation was an impossibility.

The strong opinion against a libertarian movement was not only vehement and discouraging but fundamentally logical. Opponents of the revolution argued that, pitted against well-trained and experienced enemies, the Filipino insurgents with their bolos and bamboo spears, would end up as human sacrifices in a mad and suicidal venture. It was not strange, therefore, that the Great Plebeian and father of the Katipunan was haunted by the grim fear that the predicted annihilation of the Filipino revolutionaries would become a reality.

The ominous tension of the period broke up with the discovery of the Katipunan on August 19, 1896. Consequently, the painful and agonizing task of deciding that war had to be waged, fell on the shoulders of Bonifacio. The delicate situation demanded first-class leadership; there was no time to vacillate, no time to hedge. And the great visionary knew this. He realized that any further delay in the revolutionary program would result in unto sufferings for his fellowmen, the countless deaths of Filipinos without the benefits of defense. He realized quite clearly, too, that any disruption in the war time table would bring about more uncertainties. And so he had to unite his men. He had to provide the necessary leadership, to lea revolution during the darkest hour of the country. Any other person with less determination, with inadequae leadership qualities, without the rare gifts of a visionary, would have chosen to shirk from a war that could not be won from the point of view of all intellectual presumptions.

Bonifacio chose the bitter course of national resistance, and on that fateful day of August the 23rd, 1896, the historic Cry of Pugad Lawin reverberated throughout the country. From the subdued whispers of the revolutionists, the movement flared up into a deafening and stirring cry for freedom.

Faith in the common man, in the ability of a people to break centuries-old chains of bondage, was never so eloquently demonstrated as in the revolution initiated by Bonifacio. If our forefathers, under the inspired leadership of Bonifacio, had nothing but bolos, bamboo spears and other crude implements for weapons, they were sustained by their faith in themselves and their own courage.

Today, in our troubled times, we feel the resurgence of the same hope and faith that sustained the Filipino revolutionists in their struggle for freedom. Although the circumstances today are different from the circumstances obtaining during the revolution, the ends sought are inextricably intertwined with the past struggle to emancipate the people from the throes of poverty, disease and ignorance.

The revolution waged by Bonifacio and his valiant comrades did not end in the battlefield. Its success was just the beginning of more work ahead, of broader and more complicated problems that called for clear understanding of responsibilities. Freedom from political domination was only one of the fundamental aims of the movement. As expounded by Bonifacio, Jacinto and the other leaders of the revolution, equally important and dominant were the objectives of the movement for social and economic emancipation. The Revolution culminated in our winning political freedom, in our unshackling ourselves from the political domination of a foreign power. But the Revolution did not end there. In fact, it has not ended. To this date we are continuing this unfinished revolution, waging it no longer in the battlefield but in the social and economic front—a revolution that is peaceful, without bloodshed, the prime objective of which is to lift our people from the morass of stagnation and dormancy to a life of prosperity, peace and plenty.

We are aware that today, as in the days of Bonifacio and the Katipunan, there are stirrings of skepticism, of doubt, of uncertainty in the ability of the present proponents of socio-economic development to succeed. But these are the same seeds of doubt that were sown and allowed to germinate during the troubled days of the Katipunan. Against all odds, against overwhelming opposition and prophecies of failure, the movement launched and guided by Bonifacio succeeded. It was able to turn the tide in its favor, so that in the end the prophets of doom and disaster were shamed and humiliated. Armed with nothing but unshakeable courage, unwavering faith in his people, and a far-ranging vision, Bonifacio demonstrated that the Katipunan, under his leadership, could succeed. The events bore him out for the movement succeeded; it led to the liberation of our country politically; we obtained freedom from colonial bondage.

But political independence is far from enough It is not enough that we have become a sovereign nation, a country with a national identity. It is not enough that today we have the Filipino Flag waving proudly under Philippine skies to proclaim that we are free at last. The true meaning, the real essence of independence is rooted to something which is more fundamental—the happiness, prosperity and contentment of the people. And this can only be achieved and realized if our people are uplifted socially, economically, and morally.

It is the problem of social and economic development — the essence of freedom—which is one of the enormous problems that our Administration is committed to solve. Consequently we launched, immediately after we assumed the Presidency, a massive, aggressive five-year integrated socio-economic development program, a bold and ambitious program of action designed to provide economic and social betterment for our people, particularly those who are in the rural communities who constitute a majority of our population. Signs of the successful implementation of this program are becoming evident everywhere now that the groundwork has been laid, and we are confident that history and circumstance will work together to demonstrate to the whole world that we Filipinos could succeed in this endeavor because we have an abiding faith in ourselves and in our capacity to shake ourselves from the shackles of poverty.

An eloquent expression of this Administration’s desire to institute and generate socio-economic development is the Land Reform Law. Notwithstanding rampant prognostications of failure and outright doubt, we launched this bold program of land reform in order to abolish once and for all the last verges of colonial tenancy system in our country, and to liberate small tenants from a life of perpetual vassalage and subservience to their landlords. We admit that this measure had been met with unpopular and even hostile public opinion fanned and kindled by certain vested interests, but the project had to be pushed through because small Filipino tenants had to be emancipated from years of poverty and misery.

Side by side with this massive socio-economic program is our drive for moral regeneration. We believe that morality is one of the cornerstones of a good society, consequently, we have made the development of moral integrity an integral portion of our over-all program. A people that is socially and economically strong must also be morally upright.

Today, my countrymen, as we observe the 100th birth anniversary of Andres Bonifacio, we recall to mind the Revolution he led so ably and valiantly. That revolution has led us to political independence, but our stature as a sovereign nation still remains circumscribed by the persistence of centuries-old conditions that prevent us from the fuller enjoyment of our patrimony.

The revolution of 1896, in a sense, remains unfinished. We have yet to achieve freedom from the shackles of an economy beset by inimical landlord-tenant relationship, which hinders us from exerting the full measure of our talents and energies. We have yet to achieve freedom from the darkness of poverty, disease, and ignorance. We have yet to achieve the primary conditions that would inspire and encourage our people to assume attitudes of purposeful determination, to participate actively in the dreams of our leaders, and to roll up their sleeves and dedicate themselves to a more active and voluntary share of nation-building.

Our unfinished revolution concerns us as individuals and as a people. It should stir us one and all just as the Spirit of 1896 stirred Bonifacio and his Katipuneros. Only then can the hope for the common man may become a reality.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.