Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines During the induction of officers of the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines

[Delivered on September 17, 1963]

THE FINANCIAL RECONSTRUCTION OF PHILIPPINE INDUSTRY

MORE THAN a year and a half have passed since the present Administration took over the responsibility of handling the country’s problems and guiding its future. They have been eventful months. Decisions and actions were taken, some unprecedented and even bold, but always with an eye to what is good for the Nation now and in the future. There may be serious differences of opinion as to the correctness of some of our decisions and actions but I assure you that there should be no difference of opinion that right or wrong, they were made for the loftiest purposes. There was absolutely no selfish, much less self-aggrandizing, objective and the sole motive and objective underlying every single decision and action was the prosperity and well-being of our country and people.

It is with gratification and appreciation to you leaders of the business community that I recall the enthusiasm generated by our policies and actions, although there might have been some apprehension to the personal interests of some individuals whose privileged position under the discarded system of controls might be threatened by the restored era of free enterprise and fair competition. It is our fervent hope that the initial enthusiasm in the business sector that met the launching of our policy of free enterprise has not diminished and that there have been no valid causes that should cause it to diminish.

To the Administration, this is a vital point because the success of free enterprise depends on the attitude and effort of the business community in the private sector.

Since we assumed office, we have been maligned, at times cruelly, but we trust that this attitude of malignment towards us is not generally shared by the business community and that it is realized that considering that no administration is infallible and correct in all its actuations, in the balance sheet between right and error, the outstanding and indubitable fact is that the Administration has deliberately, as a matter of basic policy, done its utmost to be helpful to the business sector to the point that the Administration has been willing to risk and jeopardize its political position in its paramount desire to be helpful to the business community to which economic growth is entrusted in free enterprise.

We need only to cite one reminder to support our helpful attitude towards the business sector as a matter of basic policy on the part of the Administration. This concerns a choice between the exercise of power and the rendition of service to the business community and to our people. At the time we took over the Administration, the President had in his hands the power of control over foreign exchange and imports. Had we chosen to retain that power, which we could have done with justification by withdrawing only part of it, we could have dictated on who were the businessmen to receive dollars and who were not, who were the newspapers who could receive newsprint and who would not and who were the citizens who could travel abroad and who could not. Power-wise, we would have had more power over business and businessmen than otherwise.

Yet we had no hesitation in relinquishing that power because it was our conviction that it was good for business and it was good for the country. Ironically, in relinquishing the power, we enriched by the millions certain business interests who now slander us with epithet of dictator. By the cancellation of license for the purchase of newsprint, we likewise bolstered the freedom of certain newspapers whose pages are now full of slanderous attribution of dictatorial power upon us. These newspapers have even slandered the business community by criticizing the comparative lack of criticism towards the Administration on the part of business leaders and attributing this to fear, which in plainer language, means cowardice. I know that the business sector needs no defenders because you are perfectly capable of defending yourselves from unwarranted criticism. I would like to express my view, however, that if the business leaders have been less critical of the Administration than others, it is not because of fear, much less of cowardice, but it is rather because, unlike others, the business sector does not have such a short memory as to forget that in abandoning controls and restoring free enterprise, the Administration has not shown lust for dictatorial power but on the contrary has such faith in the vitality inherent in the freedom and initiative of the business sector that the Administration was willing and happy to give up enormous power in order that the growth of the economy and of the country will be entrusted to the freedom and initiative of the business community.

On this occasion we therefore reaffirm our faith in the freedom and initiative of the business sector as the prime movant of the economic growth and prosperity of our country with the government providing only the encouraging, guiding and assisting participation. At the same time, this is an occasion for the private sector to be reminded of this their paramount responsibility in the economic development of the country. With strong conviction, the Administration has long made up its mind to place in the private sector the main responsibility for the economic progress of the country. The private sector, through its organized agencies like this Chamber, should now make up its mind or firm up its resolve on whether it is prepared to adequately assume this responsibility. It would be unfair to our people for the business sector to watch the Government allocate to it the vital responsibility for economic growth without adequately discharging its responsibility and without providing the necessary cooperation and effort to make such an allocation of responsibility a success. This is the challenge that faces the private sector today as we assess after one year and a half the progress made and the outlook for the future in the implementation of the nation’s socio-economic program founded on free enterprise.

In the spirit of faith in the freedom and independence of the private sector, I have received with caution the report from the Central Bank authorities advocating the need for temporarily tightening credit in order to keep our monetary situation under responsible control. Representation has been made to me of the truism that inflation is a plague that inflicts a million distresses; it strikes right at the budget of the common man and corrodes the very stability of the foundations on which our economy must stand. We are reminded that we are one of the few developing” countries that have renounced inflation as a way of life; we are one of the few developing countries that have won, before the world, a place of honor for having always maintained a reasonable stability while striving after growth. As a developing country, our hallmark has always been a healthy combination of energy and prudence. Because of our energy, our economy has grown at a rate that is one of the highest in Southeast Asia; because of our prudence, our country has succeeded in maintaining that growth within the healthy bounds of financial stability.

In accordance with this spirit of preserving our own stability, certain credit restrictions are proposed to be imposed. The increases in money supply are reported to have been of such a magnitude as to signal the need for cautious retrenchments for the sake of preserving that orderly climate without which we can hardly pursue our long-range program of socio-economic development. It is urged that our present monetary situation calls for a careful slow-down in the rate at which our money supply has been increasing. The pause is said to be necessary now, but it will not be extended a day longer than necessary. The credit situation is pledged to be relaxed the very moment the economy can productively absorb the impact of new money. We are told that as it were, it is necessary to simply pause for breath, for the sake of our financial health, and that transition calls for the highest type of business statesmanship, and a spirit of cooperative understanding among our people.

While accepting the validity of these representations, and in accordance with the Administration’s basically helpful attitude towards the business community, I have conveyed a suggestion to the Central Bank authorities to examine the proposed credit restriction more carefully and to suspend their contemplated action. In consonance with the basic policy that economic growth is the prime responsibility of the private sector and not that of the government, if it will help to arrive at a wholesome solution to this credit problem, the Administration would be willing to restrict its spending rather than restrict existing credit to the private sector.

In addition to this, in order to be of continued help to the private sector in the matter of credit and capital availability for economic growth and expansion, I am glad to announce that the Administration has adopted a program, on which we shall dwell in the remainder of our remarks, for injecting new strength and new vigor into our existing high-priority industries that have been financially distressed in the aftermath of decontrol. This program consists in mobilizing the resources at the command of the government to assist existing Filipino industries in the urgent task of effecting their financial reconstruction.

Let us review briefly the setting in which this financial reconstruction program for existing Filipino firms has been deemed by the Administration to be necessary and advisable. To set the program in perspective, we shall go back into a bit of recent history.

As you are all aware, we have inherited today an industrial sector whose character and structure were influenced deeply and pervasively by the period of exchange controls. Because of the peculiar profitability of having access to cheap dollars, many of our manufacturing enterprises were established on thin foundations of equity capital and made their profits by a liberal use of short-term credit for financing large inventory turn-overs and sales of products made from imported materials. They were thus able to keep themselves going by keeping a minimum of equity capital and rapidly using short-term funds.

This climate, of course, yielded considerable profits for certain classes of manufacturing and trading enterprises that cropped up during the period. But these profits were attained at high costs to the economy. The major manifestations of these costs were the progressive depletion of our foreign exchange reserves during the period as well as a clear misdirection of substantial investments toward fields which the market would not normally support and which largely counted on the profits provided by the undervaluation of the dollar. Under such an atmosphere, it was inevitable that the capital structure of these concerns was tailored to the loose requirements of the prevailing cost and profit conditions rather than to the strict standards of financial soundness that ordinarily prevail under a free market. Hence, the slim capital base and the high debt superstructures characterizing the finances of these ventures. These arrangements kept a good many enterprises alive and profitable for as long as the cost of the dollar was suppressed at a low rate. But when, for reasons which you know, we abolished the system of exchange controls, those firms that were built on unsound financial foundations found themselves exposed to the rigors of the free market and discovered, to their own distress, the weakness of their capital structures.

The need for a special refinancing assistance is clear and conspicuous. The thin capital resources and the rapid turn-over of short-term credit are no longer sufficient to meet the increased operational requirements imposed by decontrol. The rise in the price of foreign exchange to its market level has placed some enterprises in a kind of awkward financial squeeze. This is true especially for those that tied up short-term credit in fixed assets and could not subsequently use it to meet day-to-day operating requirement?. One effect, therefore, of decontrol is to drive home the absolute need of committing an adequate amount of equity to an enterprise, and supplementing this by a carefully-conceived debt structure of long and short-term loans, combined in the proper proportions.

The resulting insufficiency of funds from which some businesses now suffer has resulted in some kind of a vicious circle. The higher operating requirements plus the difficulty in raising more funds have resulted in a restriction of production levels way below existing capacity. This means that there exists a substantial amount of installed capital which is under-utilized. This in turn results in higher cost of finished products and thus a restriction of sales, which compound the difficulty of raising funds. Quite significantly, it also means that some of our industries are foregoing the clear and promising prospects of competing in export markets where they could hold their own if they could only operate at full capacity.

There is another telling lesson that the lifting of controls drove home on all of us. While in the past, even the maintenance of inefficient and under-full-capacity operations could result in rewarding premiums because of the built-in profitability of importing, the same types of operations will not be able to withstand the rigorous conditions of a free enterprise economy. The rewards now will accrue to the well-managed and well-financed enterprise rather than to those that enjoy the privilege of dollar allocations.

Those ventures that were sheltered by controls are pretty much in the same situation as natural organisms that are born, raised and nursed under artificially-induced conditions and then are exposed to the normal forces of nature. It is to assist these businesses that the large-scale refinancing program has been conceived. The program aims at helping them readjust themselves to the now-normal market conditions generated by decontrol. Now that their protective shelter has been removed, there is an urgent need to help them attain that inherent soundness and achieve that level of efficiency and operations necessary to keep them strong and competitive under a free market.

Among these institutions are certain high-priority industries that definitely stand in need of assistance in the way of financial reconstruction. I wish to emphasize that the refinancing program is aimed as support of the Administration’s policy of keeping the control and management of our economic affairs substantially in the hands of our own Filipino citizens. Unless we take positive measures to rescue certain high-priority industries from their distressed financial conditions, they will be gasping for assistance from whatever source. In effect, a good number of firms may resort to selling part or all of their capital to foreign corporations out of a desperate desire to bail themselves out of their sheer starvation for funds.

We have, of course, announced in the past that we shall always welcome the participation of foreign capital in our nation’s development, but preferably through the medium of joint ventures, of joint investments in new projects and new enterprises. We conceive of the role of foreign capital not as one of taking over existing industries from Filipino hands but of teaming up with Filipinos in the launching of new ventures. In keeping with the fundamental precept laid down by the five-year socio-economic program that the economic development of the Philippines is a responsibility primarily of Filipinos, this Administration is pledged to assist our nationals in maintaining the ownership and control of enterprises that are already existing and going, and which were launched by dint of their own daring and their own labors.

We shall not let the present distress of existing industries become an occasion for surrendering their control and ownership to foreign enterprises. We shall not let the weakness of their present financial structure cripple permanently their competitive position. We shall not let their present condition last long enough to lead to their dissolution or liquidation. These industries represent a substantial amount of investments made by our people, and this Administration will exert its utmost efforts to help restore their viability and strength by means of a refinancing assistance program. This, in essence, is the aim of our program for the financial repair of certain meritorious industries.

How will the refinancing program be carried out?

One of the premises underlying our socio-economic program is the firm intent of this Administration to use the lending institutions of the government explicitly as instruments for supporting the development of the most strategic private projects. Specifically, we intend to utilize the investible resources of such institutions as the GSIS, SSS and DBP for strengthening the financial foundations of existing industries, for expanding present enterprises, and for developing new industrial ventures. On many occasions in the past, we spoke of the directions into which we are pushing the development of new projects. Today, we are concentrating our attention not on expansion or new development but on the refinancing of present firms. There is a simple economic rationale behind such a program. We cannot conceive of directing resources towards the promotion of new ventures without first helping to bring to full and efficient utilization the investments in ventures that are already with us.

Let us then go through a brief summary of the elements of the refinancing program which we have adopted. Basically, the most urgent need of Filipino business is not simply for more funds as such but for more long-term resources. On this basis, we are setting aside out of the investible funds of the government’s financial institutions a sizeable special fund to be used exclusively for refinancing certain high-priority industries. This support will take principally two forms. The first is assistance in bolstering their equity by means of subscriptions to preferred shares in deserving and meritorious enterprises. The augmentation of their capital will not only put these firms on a sounder foundation but will also increase their capacity to negotiate for additional long-term and short-term loans both from domestic private institutions as well as from foreign lending agencies. The second way in which this special assistance will be given, will be in the form of long-term loans. This will help in releasing a good amount of short-term credit for use as working capital.

The injection of long-term financial assistance to some high-priority industries will result in the full utilization of their presently unused capacity, in the reduction of costs, and in an increase in the competitiveness of their products not only in the domestic market but in the still-untapped export markets for Philippine-manufactured products. By such a judicious program of assistance, we hope to exploit the export potential of our industrial enterprises and to start thereby a long-range campaign to shift the relative composition of our exports away from primary agricultural products and into intermediate and finished manufactured goods.

There is still another fundamental innovation which we hope to introduce into the financial habits of our country. The main basis for the grant of future financial assistance by the lending institutions of the government will be the viability, the soundness, and the potential profitability of a project more than the amount of collateral that the borrower can present. Our past pre-occupation with collateral has been a restrictive factor in our development. It served to deny the benefits of financial support to projects which could have well been a dynamic enterprise but which for insufficiency of collateral could not command enough credit from our lending agencies. We are moving away from these obsolete habits. There is no reason, for example, why a loan should not be granted to an existing firm which by the productive use of that very loan can increase its domestic and export sales and thereby generate the resources by which to repay their obligations. There is no reason why the very productivity of the borrower should be considered an inferior form of security than such collateral as real estate. There is no reason why he who owns more should deserve a loan more than he who can produce more. By a shift of the lending policy of the major public institutional suppliers of long-term funds, we hope to make the maximum productive use of the investible funds in the hands of the Philippine government.

The benefits of the refinancing program will be reserved for those firms that are willing to meet our assistance halfway. They must be earnest, for example, in putting their own house in order by adopting more rigorous standards and procedures of management. They must exert a good measure of effort to raise more capital from their present owners or from new stockholders. They must show a capability of pushing their enterprises towards a stage wherein they can justifiably assume the posture of sound and profitably-run institutions. All the elements that insure the viability of the concern must be present in order for it to qualify for refinancing assistance. We shall give special priority to those manufacturing industries that show a promise of vigorously entering the export market and introducing high-quality Philippine manufactures in foreign centers of trade.

The government and the private sector are partners in the task of economic growth and progress. You in the private sector are the senior partner; the government is the junior partner. As the junior partner, the government under this Administration will play its role with integrity, hard work and enthusiasm. As the senior partner, you in the private sector are called upon to do no less to the end that business in general will face a future marked by the growth of its strength, the strength that emerges from a happy convergence of business dynamism and government guidance and assistance.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.