Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At a conference of officials of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines and the Federation of Chinese Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines

[Delivered at Malacañang, January 23, 1962]

APPEAL FOR DECONTROL SUPPORT

I ACKNOWLEDGE with deep appreciation the public offer made by the Chinese community, through its leaders, to help in making the Administration’s economic program succeed.

Two days ago, the Administration put into effect genuine decontrol. Availing of your offer to help, the Administration seeks your assistance in promoting the success of the decontrol program.

Your help will be valuable due to your substantial position in the trade business which affects prime and other commodities, particularly in keeping prices from going up and, instead, in enabling the prices to go down at an early time.

The Administration seeks your help because it believes you are in a position to extend it. This is justified because of the attitude of the Administration of giving opportunities to all the inhabitants of the country, citizens and foreigners alike, to have a just share in the benefits derived from the national economy.

The Administration is ready to continue with this policy of according equitable opportunities to both citizens and foreigners in the belief that both have a stake in the soundness of the national economy. Pursuant to the policy of encouraging foreign investments in joint ventures with Filipino investors, there are bound to be more opportunities for foreigners engaged in economic activity than there have been in the past.

This opportunity for foreign investors exacts a corresponding obligation from them to assist in promoting the success of our economic program, particularly during crucial times such as the present transition from a controlled economy to a system of free and private enterprise. Your assistance is, therefore, a necessity which the Filipino people will appreciate. Such mutual effort between Filipinos and foreigners, which gives proper regard to the common interest, will go a long way towards the prolonged enjoyment by all the inhabitants of the country, of the bounties that accrue from the economy.

I trust that by failing to extend your assistance at this hour of need, you will not compel the Filipino people and their chosen leaders to take effective steps which may fall short of the close collaboration that has heretofore existed between our citizens and yourselves in the operation of the Philippine economy, but which would become unavoidable for the protection of the national interest.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.