Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines On hatred in a democracy

[Delivered at the Manila International Airport, December 16, 1963]

HATRED IN A DEMOCRACY

MRS. MACAPAGAL and I thank you for this warm welcome that you have extended on our coming home. We are happy to be home after discharging one of the international responsibilities of our country. As your representative in the funeral rites of John F. Kennedy, President of the United States, we bring home to you the appreciation of the American people expressed through their new President, Lyndon B. Johnson, that once again in a moment of national anxiety, the Philippines, through the highest representative of our people, was at the side of the United States in consonance with the historic and extraordinary ties of friendship between our two nations.

Present at the funeral ceremonies were heads of states and governments from the four corners of the earth, including American allies in Europe such as President Charles de Gaulle of France, Prince Philip of the United Kingdom, President Heinrich Luebke of Germany, Queen Frederika of Greece, and King Baudouin of Belguim. There were heads of states from American allies in Africa, including Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia. There were heads of governments from American allies in South America. From Asia, it was fittingly symbolic of the unexcelled ties of friendship between America and the Philippines that the highest-ranking dignitary from Asia among governments allied with the United States was the President of the Philippines.

My visit to America in her hour of sorrow could well be of benefit to our own people. The death of the great American President, John F. Kennedy, has aroused a national sentiment echoed in all parts of the globe, against the campaign of hate which was directed at President Kennedy and which moved the hand that struck him to a premature death at the height of his leadership. It is now realized in America and elsewhere that such a campaign of hate and the acts of violence generated threaten the very survival of democracy itself. If because of a campaign of hate and the acts of violence that it breeds, the President of a country, because of the demands of his personal security, is no longer free to move around in order that he may properly discharge his duty as the highest head and leader of the country, then democracy lessens its value and efficacy, and perhaps even end in its destruction.

In his funeral oration for the late President Kennedy, Chief Justice Earl Warren deplored the campaign of hate that led to the murder of the President of the United States in the following words:

“If we really love this country, if we fervently want to make this Nation better for those who are to follow us, we can at least abjure the hatred that consumes people, the false accusations that divide us and the bitterness that begets violence.

“Is it too much to hope that the martyrdom of our beloved President might even soften the hearts of those who would themselves recoil from assassination, but who do not shrink from spreading the venom which kindles thoughts of it in others?” ( Washington Post , November 25, 1963)

Former Vice-President Richard Nixon likewise called on all Americans “to pledge ourselves to fight this tendency of hatred and violence.” ( AP , November 25, 1963)

The Washington Post , in an editorial, pointed out that this campaign of hatred and violence threatens democracy itself.

“Since freedom extends to all men, unless and until they are convicted of crime through a fair trial, must we reconcile ourselves to the slaughter of Presidents and Governors by deluded terrorists?

“Is this the Achilles’ heel through which our free society may be destroyed? Will it force us severely to curtail freedom and to restrict the movement of Presidents? Will it, on the other hand, enable assassins and the apostles of violence to plunge the Nation into chaos?

“Beyond this is the stark truth that we have been so enamored of the luxuries of freedom that we have neglected its disciplines.

“All these areas of social failure are closely linked with the perpetuation of hate and violence.

“What concerns us most is the fact that the tragic consequences fall upon all of us. No member of a free society can escape the consequence of lingering elements of despair and terror because he may not be directly responsible for them.

“President Kennedy’s death demands a new perspective on this national burden of violence. The anguish of this experience should enable us to see that all who prize freedom must share in knitting tighter the bonds of understanding, brotherhood and mutual helpfulness.” ( Washington Post , November 25, 1963)

While in the United States, I held conferences with American officials including the new President, Lyndon B. Johnson, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Undersecretary Averell Harriman, Ambassador Adlai Stevenson, General Douglas MacArthur, Governor Nelson Rockefeller and other American officials. Likewise, I conferred with UN Secretary-General U Thant and other foreign leaders. After my talks with American and Asian leaders, I decided that it would be of great benefit to our country and for the ideals which we uphold, to return via Africa considering that the additional time and expense of returning via the Pacific would be minimal. I will make a report of my trip to our people in a radio-TV speech tomorrow. So I will not dwell now on my trip to Africa except to say that the benefits to our country and its ideals which I hoped for exceeded our expectations.

May I also say that if the foreign visits availed of in the return from the trip to the United States were motivated by other consideration than that of duty, we would have visited countries which are noted for the opportunities they offer for leisure and comfort and to which I have standing invitations by their governments. Instead, I devoted the time and expense to visiting countries in Africa, which in the parlance of international relations are regarded as “hard posts” because in the discharge of my duty as President, it is our desire to always place the national interest and the public welfare above personal convenience and comfort.

On the way home, it also became necessary to go to Bangkok to express the condolence of our people over the death of the Thailand Premier, Sarit Thanarat. In the same manner that we condoled with the American people over the death of their President in view of the extraordinary ties between the Philippines and the United States, a similar act of good will in Bangkok was necessary because of the exemplary ties of friendship between Thailand and the Philippines.

I shall only mention one more matter and I shall be through. In many countries, the cost of living has become a preoccupation of the people. While the cost of living in the Philippines is comparatively less than in most countries of the world, we owe it to our people to attend to this problem in a decisive manner. I urge the members of the House of Representatives and the new Senate to give special attention to this problem of stabilizing the prices of prime commodities, for which I am ready to do my part, in order that our people shall have confidence in the ultimate prosperity that we seek for them in our five-year socio-economic program under free enterprise and thus bolster their faith in the cause of democracy and freedom.

I end with the appeal that as it is now the endeavor in America, similarly, for the survival of democracy in our land, let us put an end to campaigns of hatred from all sides. In the true spirit of freedom, let us disagree not as enemies but as compatriots and brothers. Let us contemplate each other and each other’s actions not with hatred and animosity but with fraternal esteem and tolerance. Let us seek the good of our people not through the consuming fires of hatred of each other but through the fruit-bearing flowers of love for our people and their welfare. Let us inculcate as an inviolate element of our democratic society the noble truth that service to others flows not from hatred but from love.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.