Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the State Dinner in honor of His Excellency, Heinrich Luebke President of the Federal Republic of Germany

[Delivered at Malacañang, November 18, 1963]

PHILIPPINE-GERMAN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

WE ARE INDEED fortunate to have with us tonight distinguished visitors from Europe. His Excellency Dr. Heinrich Luebke, President of the Federal Republic of Germany, and Madame Luebke have honored us with their visit to the Philippines. On behalf of the government and people of the Philippines, I extend to them warmest welcome.

The development of the Filipino nation is, to a certain extent, parallel to that of the German nation, which grew out of the union of the small kingdoms in Western Europe. Before the coming of the Spaniards, the Philippines was a territory composed of several realms ruled by datus and rajahs . Today, the governments of both nations function in accordance with the precepts of democracy and share identical goals, that of realizing the popular aspirations for spiritual and material well-being. Those aspirations are being achieved by both peoples politically, economically, socially, and what is most important, peacefully.

The cultural relations between the West German and the Filipino peoples have been one of the most fruitful international collaborations. For the past few years, the two peoples have been able to cooperate in the establishment of a cultural exchange program under which cultural groups and students are exchanged between the two countries. These exchanges have helped strengthen the social and economic bases of the two nations. The Filipino people are grateful for the enthusiastic cooperation of the West German people during the centennial celebration in honor of Dr. Jose Rizal, the pride of the Malay race.

I recall with pleasure the official visit which Mrs. Macapagal and I made to West Germany in 1960 when I was Vice President. We were not only treated with consummate hospitality but I could discern a new interest in Philippine economic affairs. Economic Minister, Dr. Ludwig Erhard, now Chancellor, came out of a month-long convalescence from illness, to honor with his presence the reception for me on the occasion of which we discussed Philippine economic conditions and problems on which he evinced much interest. My visit to Germany was preceded by the German Trade Mission to the Philippines, the members of which have maintained their activities in promoting expanded economic contacts between Germany and the Philippines.

I am one of those who believe in the future of Philippine-German economic relations. The Philippines strives for industrialization and Germany is the most industrialized country in Europe. The Philippines also seeks economic relations with more countries aside from the United States in view of the approaching termination in 1974 of Philippine-American special economic relations. Due to German industrialization and to her espousal of democratic principles and lack of ambition for political and economic domination of other nations, many Philippine political and economic leaders contemplate with favor the rich prospect for Philippine-German economic relations that could be extensive in scope and of considerable profit and benefit to both countries.

Indeed, the Philippines and Germany have auspiciously embarked upon a broad program of economic cooperation, the framework for which is embodied in the technical assistance agreement between the two countries and exemplified by the capital aid of 40 million German marks committed by the German government to the improvement of our inter island shipping.

On the private sector, tremendous strides have been made over the last two years toward intimate Philippine-German collaboration in commerce and industry. Such progress is reflected in the marked improvement in the volume of Philippine-German trade, and underlined by new commercial and industrial enterprises jointly launched by Filipino and German nationals.

It is noteworthy that technical assistance projects have been favorably considered by the German government in the pursuit of its program of technical assistance for the Philippines even while the agreement is awaiting ratification by the Philippine Congress. We are gratified that the capital aid scheme is being pushed through with vigor by the German government. These evidences of goodwill and friendship have been noted by our people with deep appreciation. We might pride ourselves on the fact that the capital aid and technical assistance programs are both keyed to the socio-economic development program of the administration.

Thus, the historical and ideological ties that bind our two peoples have been considerably reinforced by the bonds of economic cooperation and trade that go a long way toward imbuing our common way of life with muscle and sinew. The Philippines and Germany are, in a deep and abiding sense, not only old friends but allies in the cause of democracy and freedom.

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, I, therefore, invite you to raise your glasses and join me in a toast to the continued good health and success of His Excellency, Dr. Heinrich Luebke, President of the Federal Republic of Germany, as well as to the happiness and prosperity of the German people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.