Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the 54th Annual Convention of School Superintendents

[Delivered in Baguio City, April 18, 1963]

THE ROLE OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN ECONOMIC PROGRAM

COMPETENT observers have pointed to the fact that our progress in education has been advancing farther than our economic progress. We acknowledge that this fact was one of the factors that persuaded us into placing emphasis on the formulation and implementation of a socio-economic development program at the inception of our Administration. In doing so, we anticipated that in due time, we would seek to bring to bear the blessings of our advanced educational progress to assist in the advance of our economic program. The time has now come when we must increasingly gear our educational system to the requirements that would promote and insure the success of our blueprint for economic progress.

It is, therefore, gratifying that you have chosen as the theme of your annual convention this year “The Role of Public Schools in Implementing the Socio-Economic Program of the Administration.” It is our hope that you will not limit your discussions during the convention to the food production phase of the Program, but will examine its other aspects. The socio-economic program has to be viewed by you in its entirety, otherwise the program will not have the vitality and validity that it should show in your work as administrators of our school system and educators of our youth.

It is desirable that there be not only concurrence among all the elements of the program, but also that these elements be impelled to purposive and decisive action by some central, dominating force. This program of our Administration being an integrated socio-economic pattern of development, if we are concerned with the realism that is the program we should even be more concerned with the dynamism that should animate and pervade it. And dynamism has to do as much with moral and spiritual as with physical and material forces.

On this basis, we ask for a more vigorous support on your part of our socio-economic development program not simply on its phase involving food production but on all the other components of the program as well.

More than a year ago, on our assumption of office, we elaborated on the twin major problems that confront this country—the need for moral regeneration and for a faster rate of economic growth. We also announced our determination to resolve those problems to the end that we might build the economic and social progress that has become the imperative demand, the insistent right, of all our people. With due allowance to the view of our detractors, we feel that we have kept faith with that determination. We now renew our pledge to let no divisive or degenerative influence deter us from the maximum fulfillment of the goals which our Administration has set for the lasting well-being of our people.

We need the cooperation of all men of good will in our effort. We need your unstinted cooperation. In the task of moral regeneration, we can think of no better group that can best exemplify the meaning of morality than our teachers—125 to 130 thousand of them daily unfolding the minds and inspiring the hearts of 4,500,000 school children throughout the length and breadth of our land. In this connection, it is well to stress the truism that morality is not merely taught; that it is best acquired and best appreciated when caught. Moral standards—moral principles—should become the possession of our teachers not by compulsion from without but by choice from within. Indeed, where these standards or principles are concerned, the compelling motive of our teachers should be, not necessity, but spontaneity—spontaneity born of the realization that the highest and, in effect, the most practical truths in life are moral truths.

We would be lacking in candor if we did not point out that there have been instances that have created an unfavorable impression about the rectitude of some of our school teachers and school officials, which we trust has now subsided. Among these instances were the cases of school teachers who participated in irregularities in order to obtain required civil service eligibilities or the cases of school officials who have engaged in the undesirable practice of receiving gifts consisting of chickens, food, and other things from teachers and prospective teachers. We urge that measures be taken to eradicate completely these practices because they are a blot to the noble name of the school teachers and their superiors. These practices encourage and abet gift-giving, bribery and corruption and are contrary to the duty of school officials and teachers to set the moral example for their pupils and for the community and are contrary to the moral regeneration which we must all work together to achieve for our people.

We ourselves believe in the capacity of our school teachers for an upright life to the extreme of personal sacrifice. I had an elder brother who was an elementary school teacher assigned to the barrios of our hometown before the war. With the meager salary of school teachers at that time, he supported his wife and six children. Although it was difficult to support such a big family with his meager salary, he never resorted to any improper means to increase his income or to lighten his load, and he stuck to his rigorous code of uprightness and living strictly within his salary to the extent that when he got seriously sick, he was unable to provide for the medicine that he needed to recover with the result that he died in line of duty as an upright, hard-working, and sacrificing school teacher.

The experience and death in line of duty of my brother had such a strong impact on me that it has produced in me equally strong and lasting impressions, the first of which is that with the proper leadership and encouragement, our school teachers and school officials are the most upright, hardworking and sacrificing public servants in our government.

Among the various components of our Nation and national life, there are vital ones although all have their varying importance. We have had occasion to point out that among these vital ones are our armed forces or our soldiers because they safeguard our security and democracy and they offer even their lives in the service of our country and in the building of our Nation. It was in this conviction that in our Administration, we have bolstered the morale of our armed forces, raised the salaries of its enlisted men and officers and provided a program of better housing for the soldiers and their families.

We say now that side by side with our soldiers as a vital component of our Nation and not inferior to them are our soldiers in the battlefield of peace in the education of our children—the school teachers who are second to none in noble service to our country and in the building of our Nation. We say, therefore, that as we took measures to give recognition to the prime role of our soldiers in our democracy, we are equally prepared to formulate measures to give also due recognition to the prime role of our school teachers in our democracy in the rearing of good citizens and the future leaders of our Nation.

I am myself a product of our public schools and a handiwork of our public school teachers. Belonging to one of the poorest families in our country, I could afford only and barely education in the public schools from the primary grades to liberal arts which I completed with unspeakable hardships at the state university. Having thus obtained completely my foundational education from public schools, I thereafter managed to go on in my career until I became the President of our country. We, therefore, submit my case as an exhibit of the incalculable service of our public school teachers in our democracy, which is so efficacious as to be able to perform the miracle of rearing and moulding the son of one of the very poorest families to become president and highest leader of the Nation—a fact which establishes beyond doubt that the maintenance of our democracy, the strengthening of our Nation and the lasting well-being of our people lie in their highest essence in the hands of our hard working, dedicated, patient and sacrificing public school teachers.

Another strong and lasting impression that I carry to this moment about our school teachers is that despite the salary increases that our school teachers and school officials have received, especially during the first LP administration, they are still underpaid, hence efforts should be exerted and means should be formed to increase further the salaries of our school teachers and school officials.

Still another strong and lasting impression that I bear to this moment is that our school teachers are entitled to better hospitalization facilities in cases of sickness and to other benefits that are commensurate to their lifelong service of hard work, uprightness and sacrifice. We hereby direct Secretary Roces to formulate and recommend concrete measures to us to provide for better hospitalization and necessary benefits for school teachers for adoption and implementation.

We have recommended to Congress the enactment of a school financing measure that would assure adequate revenue to meet once and for all the annually recurrent problem of extension classes and lack of school buildings. It seeks to provide for a school tax of P2.00 to be constituted exclusively into a school fund. It is our hope that with the enactment of this measure, we shall not only be able to provide with regularity and adequacy the extension classes and school buildings but enable the government to increase the salaries of school teachers.

We are gratified that from a survey made, our people are disposed to pay this special school tax, knowing that it will be used exclusively for the education of our children and will not be used for any other purposes, much less for graft and grafters. The public support for this tax proves once again that our people will go to any length of sacrifice for the proper education of their children, and indeed, our people are ready to undergo sacrifice provided that such sacrifice is for the economic and social progress of the country and provided that their leaders in the government show that their government officials and leaders also sacrifice themselves for the good of the country and not sacrifices the good of the country for their selfish interest.

Reverting to our program of moral regeneration, a situation conducive thereto is possible only where the general atmosphere of the community or country has been cleansed of corrupting elements. This is the reason for our crusade against dishonesty and venality in the government service and against the subtle and insidious wiles of vested private interests that would dare impinge upon our social conscience. We ask you, superintendents of schools and the teachers under you, to participate in this crusade and by participate, we mean—by actual deeds rather than by empty declarations.

To endorse the campaign without practising what it preaches is to condone a moral vacuity—and this we will not tolerate. We ask you to set the correct moral tone in all your actuations in your respective divisions. Do this earnestly, energetically, courageously. In grappling with any festering moral maladies, there should be no half-way measures.

Now let us turn to the other problem—that of hastening the tempo of our economic growth. We are glad that our public schools are giving increasing attention to work education and vocational education, and are otherwise gearing their goals and activities toward the economic development of the country. In all the underdeveloped or developing countries—and the Philippines, unfortunately, still falls under this classification—there is enlarging appreciation of the fact that the compulsions of economics have to underscore and underwrite all educational plans and policies. It is the realization of this inevitable interaction between these two great fields of endeavor in the life of a people which have led an educationist and expert to advocate what they call “an increase in the economic viability of the educational system.” As we said on another occasion, this simply means increasing the capacity for production of the educational system in terms of real, indispensable, and unequivocal services to the people.

In respect specifically to food production by our school children, the figures raise very sanguine expectations. For the academic year 1960-1961 alone, the public schools realized from school and home garden projects, including animal projects, a record production of approximately P65,000,000. We are impressed by your objective to get each school child to credit himself annually with at least P20 worth of produce. With 4 million children, not to mention their teachers under our public school system, this could mean a total of almost P100,000,000 a year. Plan and labor so that you will achieve this magnificent goal at once, and if there is anything I need to do to help you, let me know for I will give you my full backing.

Another specific field in which you can measurably contribute to our economic development is in the promotion of cottage industries. One phase of our program is a massive development of home industries through the NACIDA in order to materially help in meeting the grave problem of underemployment and unemployment and to constitute as an important segment of our industrialization program. We urge you to give the fullest assistance and collaboration to the NACIDA which we have instructed to avail of the experience and know-how that you have developed in this field with distinction.

Still another field in which you can assist invaluably in our program is by disseminating the correct facts, information, and perspective regarding our economic effort. You and the teachers under you are the intellectual leaders in our local communities throughout the country. Information coming from you carries weight, prestige and credence to our people. Ours being a free democracy, we have an opposition that systematically seeks to debunk and undermine the endeavors of the Administration for the sheer sake of opposition. As true and impartial guardians of our democracy, you can serve the people and our program by merely stating the facts and presenting the correct perspective in the localities where you serve.

We should ask you in your tasks to guard against any enthusiasm of the “ningas-cogon” type. If nothing worthwhile in this world is achieved without intensity of efforts, so can nothing really lasting be accomplished without persistence and continuance. Our interests and energies in the activities of our positions or professions must be of the sort that lasts.

We ask you also to avoid any duplication of activities. Genuine economic growth, if it seeks ever-increasing productivity, steers clear of any direct or indirect dispersal and wastage of human effort.

We need not dwell on the other phases of our Administration’s socio-economic development program—which by now, especially because of the series of seminars for key government officials held everywhere in the country—should be familiar to you all. We need not dwell on the other activities of the public schools—to cite but one instance, the training of skilled manpower for our farms, fisheries and industries— which can serve to advance the purposes of the program. Through Secretary Roces, we are ready to listen to whatever plans or proposals you believe should come to our attention,

It remains for us to say that, if we insist on moral regeneration, it is to the end that our people can walk erect, and work well, in an atmosphere relatively rid of fraud, relying only on the strength of their talents and the tenacity of their spirits to pursue the aspirations they devoutly desire. If we desire a faster rate of economic growth, it is to the end that our people, a sizable segment of whom have for long been shackled to virtual economic serfdom, will come by just returns for their labors and in time see the dawn of a better day for themselves and their families. If we want our integrated socio-economic program to succeed, and succeed it must it is not for ourselves but for our people—the people to whom we are united by indestructible bonds of devotion and dedication to duty, the people whose united wish is our paramount work and will.

The public schools constitute our most expensive social service. For Fiscal Year 1962-1963, the appropriation for them is P436,126,830—representing approximately one-third of the total expenditures of the national government. It is precisely because public education is our greatest investment that our people have the right to expect from it the greatest possible returns. This poses for you more than a passing challenge. We are confident that you will not fail our people.

If it is necessary to shift emphasis in our educational work, if it becomes essential to revise the educational system itself, let us not hesitate to do so. We agree with Ruskin that education does not merely mean teaching individuals to know what they do not know, but it means teaching them to behave as they do not behave, to act as they do not act, in the vibrant light of the stern realities of their day. Our educational system in the Philippines must accordingly conform to the changing times and be continually responsive to all urgent demands—be these demands intellectual, moral, or utilitarian. It must inevitably have its anchorage in our faith in the common people, in our obsession for their welfare—and should ever seek to give to our beloved people and their children, such training as will imbue them with the values and virtues of right, dignity, and honor, and otherwise prepare them to face the future not only with a stout sense of confidence but with a spirit at once free, creative and virile.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.