Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the graduates of the First Training Seminar, Land Reform

[Delivered on October 24, 1963]

THE MOBILIZATION OF MANPOWER FOR LAND REFORM

IT IS MY privilege to congratulate the graduates of this, the first training seminar ever to be held in preparation for the launching of our land reform operations. In every sense of the word, the group I address today are the pioneers of an unprecedented undertaking. The program embodied in the Agricultural Land Reform Code is much more ambitious and much more comprehensive than any other land reform program ever attempted in our history. Its objectives cut deeply into our established social institutions; its underlying philosophy calls for fundamental changes in our agricultural society; and the resources it needs to carry out its aims are necessarily massive. I daresay that this land reform program will be the deciding factor on whether our country will rise to heights of prosperity in the future or whether we shall forever be burdened by the deadening weight of agricultural stagnation.

The land reform program represents the most important aspiration of this country today. It is an indispensable element of our country’s development, and even of its long-run economic survival. I wish to emphasize before this group that while the rewards of success will be great, the costs of failure will be unthinkable. This defines the magnitude of the challenge that faces the government in implementing this program. It also defines the magnitude of the responsibility which men like you will bear as you carry on the operations of the program in the fields. This particular program was born of our impatience with the string of failures that characterized the programs of the past. Our task is not just to prevent it from going the way of its predecessors, but to make of it a triumphant success.

This also defines the decisive importance of properly organizing ourselves for the tasks ahead. Effective organization, or the lack of it, can make or break the land reform program. Social reform begins at home: before this government can place itself in a position to provide the requisite leadership for improving the lot of the Filipino farmer, it must first properly organize the agencies responsible for implementing this crucial undertaking. This is why we have placed a high stake in the preparatory job of the Special Committee on Reorganization of Agencies for Land Reform, which has been assigned the duty of designing the administrative machinery, determining the manpower requirements, and identifying the financial resources necessary to insure the success of our land reform operations.

The Agricultural Land Reform Code, we believe, substantially contains all the elements that must be provided in order to make the program succeed. But a well written law by itself cannot produce success. Its success depends on the men behind its implementation, from the highest executives all the way down through the supervisors to the field operators, and even to the accountants and clerks. It also depends on the outlook they have towards their mission and the effectiveness with which they cooperate with one another in fulfilling that mission. There is absolutely no place for petty bickerings or divisive personal conflicts among the people who will man the posts of the agencies engaged in land reform. The tasks ahead of us call for nothing less than the highest type of statesmanship among all the personnel of these agencies. It is the people, not the law, which can translate the Land Reform Code into a social triumph for the farmer. Success is the achievement not of statutes but of men.

I should like therefore to take this occasion to lay down certain major policies that will guide and govern the organization, the personnel, and the procedures of all the agencies engaged in the various aspects of land reform.

The first policy we shall follow will be to stay clear of the proven failures of the past, particularly in the matter of organization. One of the sad experiences of the government in attempting to put into effect the agrarian programs of the past was the fact that the operations of the participating agencies were in no wise coordinated with one another. They did not represent a single, unified program of action, but a series of loose and independent departmental programs, which were not always going in the same direction, and indeed were often working in conflict with one another. Even the different bureaus within a single department have been known to ignore each other in their plans.

Thus, irrigation programs were not interlinked with agricultural extension programs or fertilizer distribution programs; the provision of credit to the farmer for these operations was never tied up effectively with supporting technical assistance to insure the productive use of the loan; the settlement of farmers were often in the form of pure physical transfers from one place to another, rather than the creation of complete communities, with all the facilities necessary for a viable human society. The wastes and even the miseries associated with this pattern of uncoordinated operations are social costs which our own land reform program must avoid.

This it can do by properly integrating all the agencies engaged in land reform. This involves a repudiation of some established stereotyped notions that have ruled over government organizational structures and procedures in the past. What it demands, first of all, is the effective consolidation of the five agencies directly assigned by the law to the implementation of the land reform program, and second of all, the integration into the operations of the program of all the agencies not explicitly mentioned by the law but which by the nature of their functions are significant to the success of the program.

As you know, there are five principal agencies given explicit mandate by the law to carry on various aspects of the land reform program. These are the Land Authority, the Land Bank, the Agricultural Credit Administration, the Commission on Agricultural Productivity, and the Office of the Agrarian Counsel. But the law also provides an integrating element for the operations of these five agencies. This integrating element is the National Land Reform Council. While in form there will be five institutions engaged in the implementation of the law, in substance there will be only one decision-making body, and therefore one program of operations to be carried out by the five. All the programs and policies will be forged in the National Land Reform Council. Whatever the regional councils and local project teams implement will be in accordance with one plan. Thus, every individual field personnel should always consider himself not as a member of the Land Authority or the A. C. A. or the Land Bank, as the case may be, but of a team whose work transcends the formal division of institutions and is subject only to the authority of the National Land Reform Council. The Council will be the sole forum for the threshing out of differences among the five agencies; what should emerge from the Council, and carried down to the field, are unified plans, programs, and policies. The personnel of individual agencies should see their role not as that of fulfilling the tasks of his individual institution, but of carrying out the job ultimately of the Council.

The five agencies, therefore, represent only a functional division of labor rather than a division of outlook. They shall not be watertight compartments but organic parts of one consolidated body.

In addition to these five agencies, there are several other existing agencies within the government whose work is directly related to the implementation of the land reform program. These are the Bureau of Animal Industry, the Bureau of Plant Industry, the Bureau of Agricultural Economics, the Irrigation Division of the Bureau of Public Works, the Presidential Assistant on Community Development, and the Irrigation Service Unit. These agencies are being instructed to orient their functions to the requirements of the land reform program; in other words, to consider themselves as an integral part of the forces which we are now mobilizing to fulfill the mission of the law.

The first major policy we have thus laid down so far refers to organizational structure and procedures. The second policy, which is equally important as the first, refers to the allocation of personnel.

According to the law, the personnel of the previous agencies that have been absorbed by the five bodies created by the Agricultural Land Reform Code should first be reassigned before new personnel are recruited. As of now there are nine thousand of these personnel who are eligible for assignment to one of the five new agencies. The overriding policy to be followed is this: each man will be assigned to a position for which he is best suited by background and by qualifications, regardless of where among the five agencies this position may happen to be. At the moment, these nine thousand people constitute one personnel pool, and they will presently be allocated among the five agencies. Their past positions and their past institutions will not in any way serve as a compelling element on their new assignment: what will matter most is their suitability for given positions anywhere among the five agencies. For example, if a previous ACCFA employee is found suited for a surveyor’s position in the Land Authority, he will be assigned to that position; if a previous accountant in any of the previously existing agencies is discovered to have the potentialities as a financial analyst in the Land Bank, he will be assigned to the Land Bank. The most important consideration is not that of previous titles or designations, but that of giving each man the opportunity to be at his best.

We are, therefore, cutting across organizational boundaries in the matter of personnel reallocation. The same will be true of our policies on salaries as well as on promotions. A uniform salary standard will be followed by the five agencies, so that one man will receive the same compensation as another man in another agency if they are both engaged in the same type of work. The same principle that govern personnel promotions in any one agency will govern promotions in all of the five. Moreover, in keeping with the policy of placing the most suitable men in the most suitable positions, the promotion of personnel will not be confined to individual agencies. Rather, inter-agency transfers will be a normal feature of the operations of these five institutions. Thus, there will be nothing to prevent a financial assistant in the Land Bank from being promoted to the position of a credit supervisor in the A.C.A. This policy is consistent with the philosophy enunciated earlier in this address: The policy that the formal lines separating these five organizations will not act as a barrier to their consolidation into one operating organism.

My dear graduates, I have taken this occasion to lay down the major policies which shall be followed in the organization of our agencies for land reform. These policies are imperative to the task of tapping the maximum capabilities of the people who will man the operating posts of the whole land reform program. They are also vital to the task of insuring that the government will be properly organized for the massive tasks ahead. I personally would like every man to submerge his personal inclinations and interests to the overriding requirements of making the land reform program succeed. I hereby personally appeal to everyone of these personnel to dedicate himself entirely to the mission that all of us are pledged to fulfill.

In this mission, the graduates of this first training seminar for administrative management will carry a special responsibility: the responsibility of leadership, of giving the proper guidance and impetus to the men who will be working under your supervision. I wish you God’s blessings in your work. The land reform program is a solemn responsibility which we all share, a sacred debt which we owe to our farmers and to the generations that will succeed us. Let us be conscious of this responsibility and vindicate the government’s desire and capacity to lift from the tenant his centuries-old burden, to increase the income of our rural families, to increase productivity of our farm, and thereby to promote the long-run prosperity of our country.

Congratulations again, and Godspeed.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.