The Economic and Development Authority's (EDA) mission is to serve as the primary planning and coordinating agency of the government in formulating and implementing comprehensive and integrated economic, social, and regional development plans and policies. Ito ay upang matiyak ang patuloy na pag-unlad ng bansa at pagpapabuti ng buhay ng mga Pilipino. Specifically, the EDA is tasked with the following functions: (a) To advise the President on economic and development policies; (b) To coordinate the activities of the various government agencies involved in economic and social development; (c) To conduct studies and research on economic and social problems; (d) To formulate plans and programs for economic and social development; and (e) To monitor and evaluate the implementation of economic and social development plans and programs.  Ang EDA ay nakikipagtulungan din sa mga pribadong sektor at mga international organizations upang makamit ang mga layuning ito.  Through effective planning and coordination, the EDA aims to achieve sustained economic growth, social equity, and regional balance.  Layunin din nito na magkaroon ng isang masagana at makatarungang lipunan para sa lahat ng Pilipino.

IT IS BOTH a distinct honor and a genuine pleasure for me to welcome on behalf of the Government and people of the Republic of the Philippines, the distinguished delegates to the ECAFE Special Conference on Asian Economic Cooperation. May your brief stay with us be not only fruitful but also pleasant.

It is hardly necessary for us to stress the exceptional importance of the work that you are about to initiate. Important problems affecting the lives and welfare of over a billion Asians await your decisions, and this may well mark a new course in planning the development of the ECAFE region.

The Special Conference on Asian Economic Cooperation marks a distinct milestone towards cooperative action among Asian countries in their efforts at economic development. It is indeed fitting and proper that this conference, which will decide whether the concept of regional economic cooperation will be transformed into dynamic reality, has been convened in Manila where it was originally conceived during the 19th ECAFE session held in March of this year.

We are now in this conference pursuant to Resolution No. 45 (XIX), adopted by the Commission in its 19th session, to seek and adopt measures that would accelerate the growth of economic cooperation in the ECAFE region. It is high time, I believe, that the developing countries in this part of the world exert joint and determined efforts to speed up the economic development of the region. Specifically this can be achieved by expansion of nondiscriminatory trade among the countries of the region through the removal of quantitative and exchange restrictions, the strengthening of our export trade with developed countries through joint action in the marketing of our primary exports, and by the development of the untapped resources, technical knowhow and manpower skills in the region.

This is the challenge that faces this assembly. You are called upon to draw a workable action program which will hasten the development of economic cooperation in the ECAFE region, on the basis of the report submitted by the Preparatory Meeting. Your primary responsibility, therefore, is to work out a course of action that will enable our people to enjoy the fruits of economic advancement at the earliest possible time.

Essentially, we are after strength . By strength we mean the possession, by our nations individually and as a community, of an effective capability to provide our peoples with the things that answer to their need and their clamor for a better life through higher standards of living. We are abundantly blessed with people and with natural resources but we are confronted a huge and monumental task of making our peoples productive and of utilizing our resources for the satisfaction of our people. We are all determined to banish poverty, ignorance, and disease—but we cannot help but be overwhelmed by the sheer enormity of the task.

This is why we have chosen to band together; this is why we are here today. This gathering is a testament of our firm belief that our countries within the ECAFE region can attain individual strength only if they strive for collective strength. There is no other way. As single countries, partially isolated from one another and from others by the confusing entanglements of trade restrictions, we are crippled by our own limited markets. As suppliers of a limited range of raw materials, we fail to consolidate our policies and exploit whatever strategic advantages we have; instead we have always presented a fragmented posture before our better organized buyers in the more advanced regions of the world. And as consumers we have failed to patronize each other as much as we should.

The growing trend towards the formation of regional trade groupings and their proven efficacy in the continents of Europe and South America make it imperative for us to explore the possibility of solving, through joint action, our common economic problems. The record of cooperation in the region provides sufficient inducement for us to exert greater efforts toward the adoption of more positive regional action in the development of trade and industry. We have but to review our accomplishments in the fields of trade promotion, industry and natural resources development, economic development, transport and communication, tourist promotion and technical assistance to convince us of the wisdom of continuing and expanding jointly our economic endeavors.

The consolidation we seek is one that would strengthen the whole ECAFE region internally, and one that would fortify its position externally vis-a-vis the rest of the world. By breaking down the needless barriers that exist between our individual countries, we can expand our now fragmented markets into a region-wide market and serve as one another’s buyers as well as one another’s suppliers. We have come to realize that political boundaries do not define the meaningful economic units on which to base the policies and the development plans for the region as a whole. That this is now recognized by us is dramatically shown by the Mekong River Project. Here is a river basin, here is a valuable resource that cuts across the political boundaries of four countries but offers itself as an excellent natural base for a multi-purpose development project that, again, transcends the political individualities of the countries involved. In this connection, may we also point to the modest achievements of cooperation exemplified by MAPHILINDO and the Association of Southeast Asia (ASA).

It is this record of achievement in collective action that enables our tireless and dedicated Executive Secretary, U Nyun, to speak with such determination and conviction of the need for new arrangements to speed tip the progress of economic cooperation in the ECAFE region.

These developments are concrete examples of what can be achieved if we stopped considering our political fences as economic fences as well. There is no reason why political individuality should be cause or occasion for economic isolation. The distinctness of our nations, of our governments, of our political systems, and of our cultures need not—and should not—serve as barrier to that solidarity that makes for economic strength. Even at this stage, our countries have a wide range of consumer goods to trade, industries to absorb the raw materials we sell, and capital equipment and technical know-how to help one another expand and diversify our agricultural and industrial output. But the building up of our regional strength by means of expanded trade and investment requires the facilitation of trade and distribution, and the facilitation of transfers of equipment, of technical personnel, and of finance among our individual countries. This is the rationale behind our present collective search for measures that would be mutually beneficial to our economies.

However, cooperation alone cannot be regarded as a panacea for all our economic problems. Collaboration is not the sole key to economic prosperity. It is an illusion to hope that it is so. Much more depends on the share each member is willing to contribute to collective enterprise; and the achievement of this regional solidarity may mean that eventually, some countries will have to face the understandably difficult decision of foregoing existing privileges.

As I mentioned earlier, there is another type of strength that we seek to develop. I shall call it our negotiating strength vis-a-vis the rest of the world. In spite of the triumphs we have achieved, there are still certain lingering and disturbing vestiges of our past colonial history from which we have to make a final and complete break: we are still, in some sense, at a disadvantageous position as suppliers of raw materials to the world’s industries. As suppliers of certain strategic raw materials, our countries have engaged in ruinous competition with one another, in contrast to the cohesiveness and organized strength of our buyers abroad. Our very fragmentation constitutes our negotiating disadvantage.

There is a clear need indicated for the consolidation of our bargaining position with regard to the critical primary commodities that we produce. This consolidation requires, among others, the orderly harmonization of our production, distribution, and pricing policies, in order to strengthen our position as sellers and to avail of the best terms of commerce by which we, as a group, negotiate and trade with our customers. In the light of our status of being-less developed than our trading partners abroad, we cannot afford to weaken our posture by splintering ourselves into small units when we come to the bargaining table to face our well-organized friends.

Over the years of our close association in the ECAFE, we have acquired a wealth of information and experience which can carry us through towards the realization of the objectives of this association. Our objectives are clear, although the implementation may be difficult. However, I trust, that when confronted with a particularly difficult and perplexing problem, when hopes of compromise appear dim, you will recall the spirit of cooperation and amity which has ruled in previous conferences. I am sure that, imbued with kindred sentiments, you will be able to face your task with renewed confidence and enthusiasm.

Moreover, I feel confident that, on account of the developments that have led to this conference, we can expect this session to be successful and fruitful. I wish your conference the utmost success, and leave with you the sincerest hope that your discussions will eventually lead to concrete and lasting accomplishments.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.