OUR FRIENDSHIP IS LOYAL AND SINCERE

MRS. MACAPAGAL and I are highly honored by this splendid testimonial dinner offered by His Excellency, the President of the United States of Mexico. I wish to offer my thanks to the Mexican Government and to His Excellency in behalf of my people and my humble self.

Excellency: the itinerary which you have followed in your present trip to the far regions of the East is fast approaching its end, and pretty soon you shall return to the warmth and affection of your homeland. Undoubtedly you shall carry with you as cherished treasures the memories of the receptions and the honors rendered to your illustrious person and to the great people that you represent in the various countries which you have visited.

Somehow, I nurse the hope that the spontaneous cordiality shown to you by the Filipinos will occupy a proper place in your memory. I use in this instance the word cordiality in its purest meaning, as something that comes from the bottom of the heart—for such is the cordiality felt by my people for the Republic of Mexico and its President. And it comes not only from the great historical affinities which I had the opportunity to mention some days ago but also from something that is essential in the soul of the Filipinos.

During your brief stay amongst us, it is impossible for Your Excellency, who is justly praised for his keen analytical mind, not to have gotten a glimpse into the very soul of our people, and not to have realized that devotion and loyalty are two of their innate qualities.

You may be sure, Mister President, that when the Filipino places his trust and offers his friendship he does so without reservations, and he pledges his honor and his life in the defense of that trust and that friendship. Flaming is our tropical sun, but not more flaming than our loyalty to friends. Limpid are the waters of our rivers and seas but not more limpid than the sincerity and frankness with which we deal with our brothers. Our treaties and agreements are devoid of such reservations and ambiguities as those which commonly tend to obscure the real meaning of international commitments. The Filipino soul was aptly described by the prince of Filipino poets, the great Guerrero, when he sang of

...our muses with negroid hair and an innocent soul like the soul of children.

Allow me then to tell Your Excellency that the friendship offered by the Philippines to Mexico is loyal and sincere, and is entirely free from any selfish motive. That friendship carries with it the pledge of our national honor.

Let me finish, Mister President, by reiterating that my country considers a high honor this state visit of the Chief Executive of Mexico, and that it wishes with all its heart the complete success of the mission which has taken you so far from your native land where the lofty Orizaba, a brother to our Mayon, symbolizes the warmth of the affection of the countless millions of Mexican citizens who have placed upon Your Excellency their fondest hopes for the future.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.