Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before the American Chamber of Commerce at its 43rd Anniversary Dinner

[Delivered at the Manila Polo Club, July 12, 1963]

AMERICAN-PHILIPPINE COLLABORATION IN PHILIPPINE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

I CONGRATULATE the American Chamber of Commerce on the 43rd anniversary of its founding and earnestly hope that it shall continue in the vigorous pursuit of its objectives.

You are no doubt aware that this Administration is engaged in a vigorous implementation of an integrated five-year-socio-economic development program which was launched a year ago. To attract foreign investment, to induce it to assist Philippine capital in the economic development of the Philippines, is a principal objective of this program.

In this connection, may I venture the statement that the relationship between the United States and the Philippines is one of the most beautiful in the annals of mankind. For over forty years under its tutelage, the United States intensified the love of our people for freedom and free way of life. Philippine democracy and the Philippine Republic today are thus a handiwork of America. Considering this background, as our nation is now engaged in widening the ramparts of liberty from the political field to the economic field by endeavoring to help our people attain freedom from want and hunger, and finding that in this effort we need the assistance of foreign investment and capital, we trust that it shall not be a cause for jealousy on the part of other foreign countries that we acknowledge in candor and I so declare this evening, that in desiring foreign capital, we are partial and have preference for American capital.

To the Filipino people, economic development is not a matter of improving upon the comforts of their lives. Economic development to us is a matter of survival. The affluence enjoyed by a conspicuous but minor segment of our metropolitan society cannot conceal the ugliness of the poverty that depraves the bodies and the minds of our overwhelming majority.

Contemporary history is dogmatic in its lesson that where a people is confronted by a problem of this nature and magnitude, those who assume the responsibilities of national management are constrained to a choice of either two alternatives.

One is to subject all economic activities to the jurisdiction of public power which becomes the prime instrument of a forced development. Many underdeveloped countries have already given the world the pattern of this choice.

The other is to nourish and to rely upon the energies of private enterprise as the impelling force of voluntary economic improvements. My Administration is uncompromisingly committed to the latter, and has reversed a trend to which years of exchange controls were unmistakably committing the direction of public policy.

I recall vividly those anxious days when twenty-one days after I assumed office, I discarded the system of controls which had been in force for the previous twelve years in order to decontrol and restore free enterprise. They were anxious days because the action of decontrol was taken under the worst conditions in which such far-reaching measure of economic reform could be undertaken. The conditions were not auspicious because the Government was in a state of bankruptcy. The International Reserve situation was, in the words of Governor Cuaderno of the Central Bank, in extremis, with $101 million recorded in the Central Bank books but with existing obligations $341 million at the preferred rate, a situation which was compounded in its gravity by the prevalence of graft and corruption.

Now that the decontrol program has manifestly been a success, I will disclose the considerations which moved me to effect decontrol under these conditions. Two fundamental considerations motivated my action. The first was the consideration that our resources which are capable of supporting 100 million population as against our present population of 30 million people are so abundant that our economy would certainly fare well under any circumstances, and if worse comes to the worst, in spite of bungling on the part of our political leaders. The second consideration which moved me to decisive action was the conviction that among all the traits of our people, good and bad, the outstanding one is their adherence to freedom which amounts to a passion. This is the one quality of our people from the dawn of our history which was later intensified by our association with the United States. If there is any thing that the Filipino desires above all else, it is freedom: if he has freedom, he can bear unfavorable circumstances, and with freedom he feels that he can achieve anything. Relying upon the implications of this conviction, I decided that whatever adverse circumstances there were, if my Administration restored freedom to our people as the means through which to seek their economic and social progress, they could not possibly fail. Now I have reason to lift my eyes to Almighty God in thanks that by the success, which experts have described as amazing, that has been attained in the operation of our decontrol program, I was proven to be correct in my estimate that our people will not exchange freedom for anything, and provided that the liberty they love so much is kept secure in their hands, they will conquer any obstacle and any adversity in order to attain a better life in liberty for themselves and their posterity.

Now, therefore, that the Philippines has her feet firmly set upon the path of freedom and democracy as the avenue through which to seek economic development and social progress, I venture the view that free enterprise in the Philippines is going to stay within the foreseeable future. Considering this fact, which insures political stability that is so rare in this part of the world, and considering the rich and abundant resources of the land, I feel justified in making the rightful claim that the Philippines is and shall be for quite a time to come one of the best investment fields in Asia and possibly throughout the world.

I said before that the historic relations between the United States and the Philippines have been one of the most inspiring in history. During the period of American stewardship, the United States intensified our passion for liberty, thereby strengthening our system of democracy. She recognized our independence in 1946 after having effectively tutored us in the democratic system. But while the boon of American tutelage was far-reaching, there were certain requirements of economic and social progress which time did not allow to be accomplished by the end of American rule.

Among these was an effective land reform which would redeem the Filipino common man who tills our farms not only from political but from economic bondage as well. On this very day, after 29 days of intensive and extensive deliberations, the two Houses of the Philippine Congress finally enacted what has been overdue for centuries—a land reform bill that will set free the tenants from the shackles of social and economic bondage.

In this connection, I will avail of this occasion to make a disclosure. During the deliberations on the War Damage Bill in the American Congress, we eyed with interest the idea of Senator Fulbright to place within the authority of the Philippine Government a portion of the proposed payments after the satisfaction of the overwhelming number of claims. Recognizing that it was the responsibility of the United States Government to make a decision on this matter, we nevertheless prepared a plan, should the Senator’s proposal materialize, to use whatever amount from this American act of bounty would be disposable by the Philippine Government for the purpose of a land reform program. Apart from the usefulness of such a step in meeting the current problems of the country, it was part of our intention to give an opportunity to the United States that had been so altruistic to our people to continue her partnership with us in the shaping of an effective Philippine democracy by promoting economic democracy through participation in land reform even after giving us political democracy through the grant of independence.

It appears, however, that this noble concept which we formed may not materialize. Even so, although this opportunity placed within the reach of the United States to complete, before the bar of history, her construction in the Philippines of both a political and economic democracy, there is another vast field in which American leaders and individuals, both in government and in the private sector, may continue the noble work of America in the establishment of a virile democracy in this part of the world. That field is economic development in which the Philippine government is today engaged through the formulation and execution of its integrated socio-economic development program in a setting of free enterprise.

In the contemplation of the collaboration of foreign capital, particularly American capital, in our economic development, the first consideration that draws attention is the concept of a joint venture between domestic and foreign capital. There are two extremes of thought which have sought to delimit the area of public debate on foreign investment. One is the view which holds that genuine economic progress of the Filipino people may be achieved only through a nationalist policy of exclusion. The other, no less extreme, is the view which holds that Philippine economic progress must necessarily rest upon a national policy which does not declare a preference in favor of the legitimate aspirations of its citizens.

My Administration rejects both extremes of thought and anchors its policy on foreign investments upon the following declaration of principle which we submitted to Congress last year:

‘”While we uphold that the principal responsibility for development should belong to Filipino citizens, who must be the principal determinants as well as the chief beneficiaries of Philippine economic progress, we at the same time caution against the type of radical nationalism and nationalization measures that deter the coming of foreign assistance in our economic development. We must be sincere in attracting foreign capital to invest in productive enterprises in our country in joint ventures with Filipino businessmen and must show this sincerity not in words but in deeds.”

Accordingly, we pledged to implement—

“A set of policies and measures to provide guarantees to foreign investors in particular lines of investments, principally mineral exploration and heavy industries such as iron and steel and basic chemicals, together with an official declaration of preference for joint international business ventures with substantial Filipino capital and management participation.”

On this occasion, graced by the American community, we feel that we are in the company, not only of welcome guests to our land, but of intimate friends. We look upon this audience as one that is sympathetically sensitive to the legitimate aspirations of the Filipino people and whose collective attitude is contained in the apt counsel of a former president of this Chamber, Harold D. Carl, whose instruction to you as reported in the July 1962 issue of the Journal of this Chamber I quote as follows:

”The American community has had a very long and unique association with the Filipinos, outstanding in the foreign relationships of the American people. For a long time, the conduct of relations between us was primarily the function of the officials who were sent here from Washington. But as time progresses, it becomes more and more apparent that the relationship will, from the American side, fall more and more upon the American business people here. It therefore becomes a problem of the American business community to keep itself alert to and aware of the aims and objectives of the Filipinos. We must be critically constructive; we must be willing to assist.” ( Journal of the American Chamber of Commerce , issue of July, 1962, “The Chamber in Action.”)

It is essential, indeed, that foreign investment, in a politically independent but underdeveloped economy, assume a form that removes it from the malicious gossip of its detractors who never tire of voicing the obsessive fear that foreign investment seeks to control rather than assist a developing economy.

This is not so, and all indications suggest that foreign investment has now recognized the context in which it must operate in independent countries and has, accordingly, reoriented its policy to one which, without abdicating the profit motive, is designed to assist rather than dominate, stimulate rather than exclude, the energies and capital of its new-found environment. It is a policy that reflects a motive and a desire of foreign investors to share the fruits of their activities with such local capitalists of the host country who manifest their willingness to participate in a common venture.

“Not to control but to stimulate”—this is the social conscience, the spirit of mission which American capital, seeking outlet for its pioneer energies, brings to the new frontier of underdeveloped economies. It is a social conscience which fully responds to the needs, preferences and aspirations of underdeveloped but independent nations.

Hence, while not prohibiting the operations of wholly-owned foreign subsidiaries in the Philippines, our program has declared an official preference in favor of “joint-international ventures with substantial Filipino capital and management participation.” Because a wholly-owned subsidiary, by necessary implication, admits of no local investment participation, profits derived from business activities in the host economy, must inevitably be remitted, totally and completely, abroad, leaving nothing to such local investors who may have been willing to participate in the undertaking, but whose offer to participate has been declined. It leaves an image that breeds distrust and suspicion among local capitalists and lends itself to the charge of being instruments of selfish exploitation. The concept of a wholly-owned subsidiary reflects a policy of exclusion in reverse, directed by the guest against the very nationals of its host.

It is therefore with gratification that we learn of the decision of the Shell affiliates last year to open their capital structure to the participation of domestic investment. As the Industrial Philippines in its issue of September 1962 proudly reported—

“Filipino investment in the three Shell companies in the country—the Shell Co. of the Phil. Ltd., the Shell Refining Co. (Phil.) Inc., and the Shell Chemical Co. (Phil.) Inc.—is the largest single Filipino investment in local petroleum refining and distribution. It amounts to P30,600,000.”

Our Administration considers this move a significant one and which we earnestly hope will serve as a precedent for others to follow.

For in the ultimate analysis the lasting assurance that the hospitality extended by a host economy to foreign investment will not be revoked, that it will not eventually assume the ugly form of a nationalization proceeding, is one that springs from the goodwill generated by a mutually profitable partnership between local and foreign entrepreneurs. Where the host country begins to feel that local capital has been deliberately denied equitable participation by foreign investment in activities conducted within the national economy, the natural reaction is bound to be one of national resentment which often translates itself into either nationalization or expropriation measures.

This is the lesson which we can draw from two critical areas of economic activity in the Philippines today. One is the mining industry. The other is the retail trade.

The mining industry was pioneered by the entrepreneurial boldness, capital, skill and initiative of American enterprise and was founded upon the vision of its Haussermans, the pertinacity of its Petersens, Mitkes. Cadwalladers and Marsmans. This industry, from its inception, however, was conceived by its founder in the nature of a joint undertaking between domestic and foreign capital, and no one can say that both came out poorer in the bargain.

It is noteworthy that the mining industry, as one that has been developed by the joint undertaking of Filipino and foreign capital, was spared from the lash of the postwar nationalization sentiment that eventually affected the retail trade where an alien capital was felt to have deliberately conspired in relegating Filipino entrepreneurs to a minor role, if not exclude them altogether.

Today, alien capital has been barred from the retail trade. This is not so in the case of mining where the goodwill that was born from a sense of local investment participation gives assurance that foreign capital shall always be welcome in this particular area of economic activity.

A comparative study of the national response to these two areas of business venture, the mining industry and the retail trade, is valuable in the lesson that it gives.

In the case of the nationalization of the retail trade, it is further significant that same was certified by no less than the late President Magsaysay whom no one can accuse of having been an ultra-nationalist. But even a leader of such liberal and tolerant temper as he was could not resist the tide of an aroused national sentiment that was directed against an alien capital because it gave to the public an image of a type of investment that sought to dominate a segment of our economy.

The Philippine response to the basic fact of the retail trade, prior to its nationalization, is no different from the reaction which the American people would surely have if they were to wake up one day with the discovery that their mining industry has fallen into the hands of French investment, or that their steel industry is under the control of Italian syndicates, or that their banking business has [alien under the dominance of Israeli financiers.

We have accordingly postulated the role of government and foreign investment in Philippine economic development upon the following principles stated in our integrated program:

“The principal responsibility for development belongs to Filipino citizens. They must be the principal determinants as well as the chief beneficiaries of economic progress. At the same time the Filipino will welcome all foreign assistance that does not wrest from him his supremacy over his own economic affairs. The new Administration is pledged to see that all such assistance shall be treated with justice.

“The role of the government is to create a favorable environment for and to assist private business in the performance of its rightful task of developing the country and its resources, to provide guidance and inducements, to protect nationals in their legitimate aspirations and to ensure the just treatment of foreigners who provide assistance to nationals in the establishment and operation of business ventures in the country.”

The second consideration regarding the collaboration of foreign capital in our economic growth is that our Administration is undertaking all possible steps to create and maintain a climate where private enterprise can thrive in ultimate fulfillment.

In further implementation of this policy, our Administration initiated negotiations for sale of the government’s interests in various enterprises, such as the textile mills of the National Development Corporation, the Manila Hotel, and the Cebu Portland Cement. Only recently, in an address before the representatives of the private sectors, we committed the Administration to the sale of the government-operated bus lines in Luzon. Our Administration seeks to confine the role of government in economic development to a planned program of public investment for the maintenance, establishment, and expansion of those physical facilities which private enterprise cannot be expected to undertake by itself but which are essential requisites for its own growth and expansion.

This type of government planning to which our Administration is committed should not be confused with a desire to interfere or compete with the normal functions of private enterprise. It is rather intended and designed to create “the favorable climate necessary for investment, as evidence of a strong social link, in a community aware of the requirements of development.” It is this climate which establishes the necessary inducement for foreign participation in our economic development.

Already, visiting bankers, businessmen and industrialists have been unanimous and articulate in their enthusiastic judgment of the new investment potential of the Philippines.

In assigning to private enterprise primary responsibility for the economic development of the Philippines, our Administration has charged it with a critical mission. In the context of a world divided between two diametrically-opposed ideologies competing for the faith of peoples in every underdeveloped economy, the normal function of private enterprise assumes a new dimension. It becomes vested with a public and social responsibility. It is now imperative that private enterprise measure up to the faith which sustains it. To fail in this, it risks the penalty of oppressing alternatives to which we are witness in the neighboring regions of the world where poverty found renewed hope in the precepts of a different society.

In concrete terms, this means that private enterprise must now assume principal responsibility as main provider for an unemployed labor force of 1.5 million, increasing steadily at the rate of 350,000 a year, not to mention providing full employment for the millions of those that are now underemployed. It must assume principal responsibility for raising the submarginal living conditions of the great majority of our people to one befitting the dignity of human beings. Private enterprise must now muster all the ingenuity that it can command to open new and additional avenues of employment, of production and economic opportunities. This is the magnitude of its task, measured against the magnitude of our economic deficiencies.

To foreign investment, the task of assisting private enterprise develop the economy of an independent country, should provide stimulating challenges.

Upon the actuation particularly of American investment in this country will, in no significant degree, hinge the success of our national venture, and the character of the relationship between our two peoples.

Indeed, our Administration sees no real impediment to an accelerated entry of foreign capital in the Philippines today. The rate of return on investment here, not to mention the tremendous growth prospect of the same, favorably compares with that existing elsewhere. We are aware that there is an abundant surplus of capital in the United States which only now is beginning to be conscious of the tremendous opportunities that exist outside its national boundaries.

On our side, we now have every right to look to American capital for needed and full support of our economic program. We have, through the Parity Ordinance, the Laurel-Langley Agreement, the abolition of controls, the restoration of full initiative to private enterprise, the systematic campaign against graft and corruption, taken far-reaching measures to accommodate the conditions of American investment. These constitutional and administrative concessions should now provide us with the necessary basis for expecting from each other the fulfillment of our respective roles in the magnificent task of erecting the structure of Philippine economic development.

Together, we have a rendezvous with the progress of this country that shall, through our enlightened collaboration, become a strong Philippine Republic—strong and free politically and economically—that can contribute effectively to the building and preservation of a system of freedom and justice in this part of the world.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.