Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the “Centro di Azione Latina”

[Delivered in Rome, July 7, 1962]

BROTHERHOOD OF THE SPIRIT

I ADDRESS myself to you as brothers, because ours is a brotherhood of the spirit, the strongest of relationships. We are separated from each other by vast continents and limitless oceans, but Latinity is a concept which springs from the soul and unites us as if we are brothers living under the same roof. And the truth is that, although we belong to different races, like Romulus and Remus, we have been suckled at a breast of a common Latinity.

This occasion has a special significance for me and for the people I represent. The host at this reception is the “Centro Di Azione Latina,” and this edifice is the Casa de la America Latina. The Philippines, as you know, is the furthest outpost of Latin civilization; indeed, it is the only outpost of Latin civilization in the whole, vast and populous continent of Asia.

“As a former colony of Spain, named in fact, after one of the great Spanish kings, Philip II, the Philippines has sometimes been described as a Latin American country which happens to be located in Asia. This is why I feel quite at home in this Casa de la America Latina.

The soul of the Filipino is like a roof with three windows. The first looks out on the world of Asia; the second, on the world of Latinity; and the third, on the Anglo-Saxon world. Through the first window flow all the innate and inalterable influences of race and geography that make us Asians by birth and origin. Through the third window have come the latter day influences that make for the physical comfort and material wellbeing of man.

It is the presence of the second window, the window that opens on the vast, beautiful, and eternal world of Latin civilization, which makes the Philippines and the Filipino people rather unique. For in my country, inhabited by an Asian people whose racial and cultural roots go deep into the subsoil of the Oriental spirit, have met in marvelous confluence the two major streams of western civilization, the Latin and the Anglo-Saxon. And of these two, it is the Latin that has left a deep and imperishable imprint on the Filipino soul, particularly in the vitally important realms of social customs, law, and religion.

The Philippines may thus be considered as a foreshadowing of what all mankind may in the end become: united by the achievements of the human genius and by their common enjoyment thereof, inheritor of the best that mankind has thought and accomplished, regardless of race or geography, since the beginning of time. It is in this spirit and with this vision that I greet you in the name of the Filipino people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.