NEW BOND BETWEEN GERMANY AND THE PHILIPPINES

LET ME thank you in behalf of Mrs. Macapagal and of my own for this delightful and sumptuous dinner. We regard this occasion as a testimonial of friendship and goodwill toward us and the Filipino people.

During your visit, you have impressed us with the warmth of your dignified personality, your sense of humor, and the massive intellectual penetration that you have displayed over a variety of state matters of domestic and international import. Likewise, Madame Luebke has charmed our people with her graceful friendliness, candor, broad knowledge and mental endowments. Abundant evidence of the friendship and admiration you have won for yourselves and your country is visible on every hand. So while your visit was brief the delightful memory of it shall be long and ineffaceable. Your visit and the impact of your personalities have contributed to the forging of a new bond between Germany and the Philippines.

It may, in fact, be said that your coming to the Philippines has brought about a new era of vast understanding and promise in German-Philippine affairs, particularly with respect to economic cooperation between our two countries, the basic structure of which has been happily established in the German-Philippine agreement on technical assistance and the German capital aid for Philippine interisland shipping.

Your statesmanlike pronouncements on the struggle against communism and Sino-Soviet imperialism, which have uniformly underlined our common stakes in the ideological conflict that continues to engage the energies of peoples the world over, have served to reinforce the ties that bind your people and mine as free men. I fully share your hope that Germany and the Philippines may continue to give a good account of the rule of law to which our nations are wedded to the end that, at their respective exposed positions in the struggle between democracy and communism, they may contribute steadily and increasingly to the ultimate triumph of our common way of life.

We take heart, Mr. President, from your generous assessment of the progress we have attained in the fields of education and public health, and we wish to assure you that the Filipinos are cognizant and appreciative of the help your government has extended to us in such fields. The scholarships you have granted to Filipino students, the training program you have instituted for the benefit of Filipino trainees, the aid German foundations have given to Filipino students and professionals, and the means you have provided for educational and cultural research have contributed significantly to the sum total of such progress.

In the implementation of our Five-Year Program, we shall place great reliance on the help of friends such as Germany, availing to the utmost of the benefits of German technical know-how and capital. In this regard, it should be stressed that the crowning virtue of German capital and know-how is that they are free from the taint of imperialism.

We have reached a point in German-Philippine relations where we can look back to the past with satisfaction and pride and look to the future with keen anticipation and confident hope.

I invite you to raise our glasses to the health of President and Madame Luebke, to his conspicuous achievements, to the enduring happiness and well-being of their great people, and to German-Philippine amity and understanding and partnership.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.