Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines Before Emergency Employment Act (EEA) Supervisors

[Delivered in Baguio City, October 17, 1962]

WAR ON UNEMPLOYMENT

THE completion of this first training course for field supervisors marks the first significant stage of wide-ranging programs which the Emergency Employment Administration has mapped out for itself. This training course and the others to follow are the preliminary steps towards translating the Emergency Employment Act of 1962 into a program of action.

To you who have successfully completed this training course, we offer our congratulations and our thanks for your willingness to participate in the projects which the EEA will launch in the near future. We are happy to note that you devoted a major portion of your training course to a study of the Five-Year Socio-Economic Program which we have adopted as the principal blueprint of our Administration. We are also happy to note that the spirit and the content of this whole training course were oriented towards the objectives and the requirements of the Five-Year Program with which the provisions and the mandate of the Emergency Employment Act are in general agreement. It would be appropriate, therefore, to take this occasion to restate and to set in proper perspective the relations between the emergency employment scheme and the over-all aims of the socio-economic program.

In launching the socio-economic program as the long-range and permanent solution to the problem of poverty, we realized that it would take an appreciable period of time before the fruits of the program shall be harvested in the form of increased and adequate jobs, income and goods, which are the elements of prosperity. This transitional period between poverty and prosperity would arise not only from the time required for the making of necessary investments but also from the stabilization of climate of confidence in the new setting of free enterprise after over a decade of uncertainty, timidity, and confusion in the discarded controlled and graft-infested economy.

During the interlude, it was necessary to reassure the people that the program of progress in freedom would work out in order that they would maintain their faith in the economic effort and bear with fortitude the continuing difficulties attendant to the interlude. Towards this end, we formulated two transitional measures. The first was a rice and corn program that would insure to the people their staple food at prices within their reach. Thus a new Rice and Corn Administration was established not only to assist in formulating a permanent solution to the problem of rice insufficiency but also to assure during the non-harvest period an adequate supply of the staple at prices within the reach of the masses. The most difficult period of the non-harvest period being now over, we are now in a position to state with satisfaction that our rice and corn program has succeeded where the previous Administration had failed last year. Under the previous Administration, despite importation of rice valued at P30 million, at this time of the year, rice was selling for P2.50 and P3.00 a ganta, if you could find it. Now under our Administration, although we do not resort to rice importation, rice is in abundant supply in the country, selling at from P0.85 to P0.95.

Let me avail of this opportunity to extend to RCA Manager Jose Feliciano and his staff our congratulations and the gratitude of our people for doing their crucial task splendidly to the everlasting credit of our Administration, which has shown that in the same manner that in the first year of our regime, we have successfully handled the perennial problem of rice scarcity, we shall be able to handle completely and successfully the other problems of the country.

The other transitional measure that we conceived was to provide immediate employment to our unemployed to supplement the long-range endeavor of private enterprise in providing permanent job opportunities under the socio-economic program. For this purpose we established the EEA which is the counterpart of RCA in our transitional rice and corn program. The fact I would like to state is that as the RCA has performed splendidly its crucial task, I entertain no doubt in the fulfillment of my hope that you in the EEA will duplicate the performance of the RCA and prove the EEA is in fact as sterling and good if not better than the RCA.

The question which we seek to answer here is this: how does the emergency employment program fit in with the over-all aims of the five-year plan? There are two aspects to the answer. The first is that the projects in the pipelines of the Emergency Employment Administration cover some of the areas which the five-year program considers most vital to our country’s economic growth. These projects involve the preservation, restoration, and judicious exploitation of our natural resources, the construction of essential public works infrastructure, and the development of the skills of our manpower. The Emergency Employment Program seeks to mobilize government funds in order to tap the ranks of the unemployed and to provide them with productive jobs in those areas where the potential benefits are bound to be immeasurable, such as forest conservation, agricultural extension, youth conservation, cottage industries and land clearance, not to mention the many other projects to be covered by the EEA’s regional, provincial, and district programs. Besides providing many of our unemployed citizens with modest sources of livelihood, these programs will let the country benefit from the exercise of the skills of their otherwise idle hands.

The second aspect of our answer concerns the respective horizons of the Emergency Employment Program and of our Five-Year Socio-Economic Plan. The present scheme for providing emergency employment must be seen as part of a larger and more comprehensive picture of what we are aiming at in the long run. In the long run, we aim to create those conditions under which a high level of employment would be a matter of normalcy rather than of emergency. In the long run, we strive to transform our economy into a system that generates jobs out of its own vitality rather than by means of emergency measures. Permanent employment sustained by an active economy is much more desirable than emergency employment sustained by public expenditure programs. Emergency measures are by their very nature temporary in duration.

But even as we proceed from this point to the full and vigorous implementation of the Emergency Employment Program, we shall also proceed to translate the targets of the Five-Year Socio-Economic Program into reality by stimulating a steady stream of public and private investments. Even as we push this Emergency Employment Program towards the worthy achievements it aims at, we shall also be working to stimulate production all around and to build a strong industrial economy where jobs will be plentiful and where emergency employment measures will be largely unnecessary, for in the last analysis no country can live permanently on emergency. While emphasizing that this present employment program, of which you are part, deserves the full support of the Congress and of our Administration, it has of necessity a limited time horizon. It cannot be a permanent philosophy. Our permanent philosophy, our long-run aim, is to make a high level employment a normal state of affairs and not a matter of emergency.

The number of jobs generated by the economy every year depends on the rate it expands its productivity, and we can increase production only by increasing investments. This is the hard core of the Five-Year Socio-Economic Program to attain that rate of investments which would increase our gross domestic product at the target annual rate of six per cent on the average for the next five years. In quantitative terms, this means that an average of 16.1 per cent of gross domestic product must be channelled into gross domestic investments annually and, of the total estimated requirements in fixed investments, the government should be able to contribute about one-fourth while the rest would come from the private sector.

The government’s share of fixed investments would take the form mostly of essential public works and related developmental projects. Part of these are now entrusted to the EEA for implementation. But the task of investing in production and of thereby providing employment to the people belongs mainly to the private sector. Economic development is the primary responsibility of private enterprise and not of government. The prospect of attaining relatively full employment for our country in the future depends on the aggressiveness with which private business invests in increasing the productivity of our agriculture and to a large degree on our manufacturing, mining construction, transportation, and service industries. For this reason the five-year program calls for the formulation of monetary fiscal and commercial policies designed to make it highly attractive for the private sector to invest in the country’s productive capacity, particularly in those areas which by virtue of the people’s needs enjoy a high priority.

The part of the government and the role which the Emergency Employment Administration now shares in fulfilling is that of providing a proper milieu in which private enterprise would flourish to provide the infrastructure, the guidance, and inducement and protection which our businessmen need in their efforts to develop our country’s resources. The projects of the Emergency Employment Administration of which you shall act as field supervisors, are part of the government’s efforts to build the proper bases necessary for the growth of enterprise. How far you may ask have we gone in the implementation of our program? What have we done these past ten months by way of translating our promises into performance?

When our people awarded us the mandate to guide our nation we found our nation stricken, fast sinking into economic stagnation and moral bankruptcy, buffeted on one cheek by graft and corruption and on the other by weak and confused leadership. We found its wealth being sucked by a few but powerful blocs of speculators who believe that acquisitiveness is an ideal and that Mammon is God. We found its strength being sapped by parasitic public officials and dissipated in pursuits without purposes, in undertakings without cause. We found a prostrate nation crying out for relief, for rehabilitation, for a return to the old and almost forgotten values of honesty of simple living, of hard work. of commensurate reward.

Finding this situation, the Administration immediately undertook a two-pronged drive to get our program of government going and with it our country moving to the path of real progress, real justice, real equality, of opportunity for all.

The first part of the drive was aimed at building a climate to ensure against the recurrence of graft and corruption, of questionable speculations and destructive business practices. It was aimed at demonstrating to those still adhering to the practice of abilidad and hand-greasing that this new Administration will not allow anyone to profit through chicanery, through the exploitation of our masses.

By taking drastic and speedy action against some of the more notorious economic bandits in our midst, I believe we have succeeded in driving home the message that we stand four square for equal opportunity to all and against any form of less-than-moral machination, whether in business or in any other field of human endeavor.

Many have raised their voices against these measures, but we believe that strong vital government action is necessary to the successful prosecution of any emergency program. In our drive, we are neither against the rich nor promoting class war. On the contrary, we want more of our people to become rich through honest toil and legitimate means. We are only against those who become rich or seek to become rich; firstly, through corruption of public officials; secondly, through misuse of public office; thirdly, through misuse of political power; and fourthly, through violation of our laws by enriching themselves through these illegitimate means. These types deprive the hard-working decent citizens and the common people of fair and equal opportunity to advance or to become rich, thereby weakening our democratic system and preventing rapid and general progress. We shall be friend and helper to all our people, rich or poor alike, who strive for wealth and livelihood through fair means and hard work. But those persons, rich or poor, alien or citizen, who manipulate themselves into ill-gotten wealth through the aforesaid roguish means, are not only our adversaries but are enemies of the people, whose evil power we shall resist and seek to overcome on behalf of our people in order to establish conditions of equal and fair opportunity for all citizens in our democracy.

The essence of our reform effort is to make democracy a vibrant one in our country by establishing not only a government of and by the people but a government for the people, that is, a government that does not allow its benefits and the wealth of the land to be cornered by a privileged few but a government that makes those benefits and wealth effectively available to all the people. To bring this about, it is our duty to ensure that no man is so powerful to be above the law and no citizen is so weak as to be denied his rights accordingly.

We are resolved that under our Administration, whosoever shall trample upon the law, no matter how rich, influential, or powerful, shall not be so big as to be beyond the toll and penalty of the law. Likewise, we shall not allow that any citizen shall be denied his right or be done an injustice on account of his poverty and hereby assure such an oppressed citizen that we shall place all the facilities of the state to uphold his right to prevent or rectify the injustice against him.

It is in this inspired national endeavor that the Emergency Employment Administration has a major part to play, and as field supervisors, as employment technical and fiscal and supply officers for the projects to be launched by the EEA, you will be in the forefront of all this effort, laying the groundwork at the grassroots level for the country’s future growth, custodians of public funds, as recruiters of the men to be employed in these projects, and as the immediate commanding directors in charge of seeing that the work gets done. You carry a vast responsibility on your shoulders for which you shall earn the gratitude of the nation. With proper performance of your duties when these projects begin, you shall be placed in immediate command. The success of these enterprises will depend on you. You must perform your tasks with nothing but the public interests in mind. Let nothing in your work serve the selfish political interests of any individual or any group but only the long-run interests of our people. As a whole, let us refute in practice the accusations of skeptics that this programs will degenerate into an expensive political instrument Let us prove in practice that this Emergency Employment Program is one designed to vindicate itself by giving the unemployed a chance to participate in the urgent task of nation-building.

We are at a cross-road in our history to safeguard our freedom from communist slavery. We are beholden to make democracy work as an implement for the attainment of a better and happier life for our people. The tenure of our Administration is the opportunity to make a decisive beginning in this critical endeavor, because we in the Administration recognize the nature and gravity of the task and have grimly resolved to consecrate ourselves to the crusade. Indeed, we are engaged in a crusade.

You have not only joined the EEA, which is a vital agency of our historic movement; you have joined a holy war for a real democracy that can succeed in reducing poverty in this undertaking. Nonchalant and routinary ways of work are not acceptable in your assigned parts. It will require of you initiative, energy, dedication. In truth, the work will require fortitude and sacrifice. In congratulating you and wishing you Godspeed, I mutter the prayer that you will be equal to the exciting demands of the peaceful revolution that we have set into motion because the reward is infinitely gratifying, being nothing less than a secure Filipino nation living abundantly and happily in the ways of freedom.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.