Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At a diplomatic reception tendered in his honor by the Chiefs of Asian Diplomatic Missions

[Delivered in Rome, July 9, 1962]

OUR TWO MAJOR TASKS

MAY I thank you, first of all, for honoring my wife and me with this splendid dinner.

On various occasions since my arrival in Rome, I have referred to the fact that the Philippines, by a rare coincidence of history, has met the two main streams of Western civilization—the Latin and the Anglo Saxon. What makes this confluence of civilization unusual is that it occurred, not in Europe or in America where these cultural streams have often met, mingled or collided, but in a distant land of Asia, the Philippines.

The uniqueness of our historical experience, however, arises from the fact that the Filipino people have been able to conserve the basic Oriental cast of their personality despite prolonged exposure to the powerful cultural influences of the West. The accretions, additions and embellishments from without have not altered the innate qualities of heart and soul nor the fundamental mould of temperament and character that make the Filipinos an indubitably Asian nation.

We refer to our history without invidious pride. Nations, like individuals, are what they are by reason of events in the distant past which they have no power to change. But if I refer to our experience it is because I believe that we are approaching a point in history when the continued survival and progress of the numerous millions of Asia may depend on judicious acceptance of the best disciplines and highest values which the West has to offer. In order to survive and prosper we must learn to engraft quickly on the ancient tree of Asian civilization the fresh young branches of western science, knowledge and technology.

Today, when nearly all of our peoples in Asia have achieved their liberation from Western domination, two tasks impose themselves upon us. One is to make our national independence meaningful in terms of a better life for our peoples. Another is to address ourselves to the task of achieving a just and fruitful reconciliation with the West. We must meet in a friendly spirit every effort that the Western powers are prepared to exert in order to erase the past record of injuries and humiliations, and to build their relations with us on new foundations of dignity equal rights and mutual respect.

I believe that, regardless of the differences that may exist among our Asian countries on the political, economic or cultural plane, we can in the future best ensure the improvement of the life of our peoples, as well as their security and survival, first, by rediscovering new sources of strength within our own nations in cooperation with each other and then by trying to evolve new and mutually beneficial modes of cooperation with the West.

In the spirit of this common purpose, may I invite you to join me in a toast to the continued health and success of their Excellencies, the heads of state of China, India. Indonesia, Pakistan, Japan, Thailand, Nepal, Korea, Viet-Nam and Ceylon.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.