Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At a State Dinner tendered in his honor by President Ayub Khan

[Delivered in Karachi, Pakistan, July 11, 1962]

THE PHILIPPINES AND PAKISTAN

On my wife’s behalf as well as my own, and in the name of the Filipino people whom I have the honor to represent, may I express to you our deep gratitude for the warm welcome you have accorded to us upon our arrival in your country and for the pleasure of your company at this splendid banquet.

I have taken the invitation that has brought me and my party here and the warmth with which you have received us as expressions of the genuine friendship which the Pakistani people have for the Filipino people. For my part, I have accepted your kind invitation in order that I may convey in person the admiration and friendship which my people feel for Pakistan—this great nation that had achieved its freedom and independence through the wisdom and patriotism of that immortal statesman, the inspired Quaid-I-Azam, Mohammad Ali Jinnah.

I am particularly happy to be here at a time of significant developments in the history of Pakistan as well as of South and Southeast Asia in general. The world is well aware, Mr. President, of the far-reaching improvements that are being wrought in the life of the Pakistani people through the reforms which you have instituted on all levels—political, economic, and social. By reasons of these reforms, a new surge of hope, endeavor, and achievement is felt in all aspects of the national life. At the same time, through effective measures of administrative reorganization, the relentless struggle against graft and corruption, and the judicious restoration of constitutional government. Pakistan is being put back on the road of practical democracy, economic advancement, and social progress.

Pakistan and the Philippines belong to a new Asia that is beset with many problems and surrounded with many difficulties and dangers. The major problem is how to bring about a better life in larger freedom for our impatient and rapidly increasing populations. The principal difficulty is how to bring our Asian countries together into closer and more fruitful forms of cooperation for their mutual benefit. And the clear and present danger is posed by an aggressive and hostile ideology from outside against which we may hope to protect ourselves only through the bold, effective, and determined collective action of the alliance to which our countries belong.

We are thus united both by the identity of our major problems and by the purposes we share. We are united also, I believe, by our disappointments and our unfulfilled expectations.

Now that most of the nations of Asia have achieved their liberation from western colonial domination, they suddenly realize that political independence is nothing unless it is used effectively as an instrument for the improvement of the life of the people. We realize also that unless this economic and social progress is achieved and translated in terms of the daily life of the people, a ruthless and tyrannical ideology is certain to take advantage of the situation to mislead the people and defraud them of their liberty. Finally, we have come to understand that, in the end, we must rely mainly on the energies of our people and on the resources of our land, together with the cooperation and assistance of loyal and friendly allies, to create the necessary conditions for our national progress and development.

Mr. President: I have heard of the massive programs you have launched for a happier and more prosperous Pakistan, and I have come to see them at first hand. I have also heard of some of your preoccupations concerning foreign affairs, and in particular, about problems of bearing on our collective security, and I trust we shall have occasion to have a useful exchange of views about these. But, above all, I have come in the hope that together we may discover or initiate new modes of cooperation between our two countries in the pursuit of common ideals of justice, freedom, and democracy—ideals to which our two countries are jointly consecrated, as members of SEATO, members of the United Nations, and as two likeminded states belonging to this teeming and agitated continent of Asia.

May I invite you, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, to drink with me to the continued health and success of His Excellency Field Marshal Mohammad Ayub Khan, President of Pakistan, and to the prosperity and security of the people of Pakistan.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.