Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the cornerstone-laying ceremony for the Manila Hospital

[Delivered on September 11, 1962]

HOSPITAL FOR THE POOR

THIS afternoon will mark the start of a tangible effort on the part of the City of Manila and the National Government for the materialization of a long-needed, long-sought for hospital for the residents of this City, which was a pet project of the late Mayor Arsenio Lacson. This is a suitable occasion to pay tribute to the wisdom and foresight of Mayor Lacson, to his deep concern for the welfare of the city population, especially the poor. He had plans to improve the lot of the masses in the City. He fought hard and long to implement his plans. One of these was the construction of city hospitals that would be adequate to serve the medical and hospital needs of the city residents. I am also happy to congratulate Mayor Antonio J. Villegas, Vice-Mayor Herminio Astorga, the city councilors, the city officials and others who have contributed their share to make this project a reality.

On this beautiful site, against the panoramic view of’ Manila Bay and its famous sunset, will rise a hospital that will be truly for the poor. It is to be hoped that the indigents will have this hospital and its complete modern facilities open to them at all times and for free. This is a project that supports the Administration’s commitment to work for the upliftment of the masses, and to give to the lower social and economic strata of our people, a fair and equal chance to share in the enjoyment of the bounties of our country and the facilities within the capability of the government to provide.

Manila with its teeming and fast-growing population does not have, as it has never had, a hospital of its own since it was founded nearly 400 years ago. There are four national hospitals in the City: The Philippine General Hospital, North General Hospital, Maternity and Children’s Hospital and the San Lazaro Hospital. The facilities of these hospitals, which are supposed to be opened to all the people from all parts of the country, are not even adequate to meet the requirements of the city residents. There are private hospitals, it is true, but their free bed facilities are insignificant.

Concomitant with the fast growth of the city population are problems that concern the very health of the people. Eighty per cent of the City’s population is indigent. The maternal, infant and total mortality or death rates of Manila are still high, compared with other cities of the world. Respiratory and gastro-enteric diseases together, take an annual toll of almost 3,000 human lives in the City. In 1961, out of the total deaths of 9,017 in Manila, 38 per cent or 3,380 died without the benefit of any kind of medical attendance at all. Financial inability to pay for medical services, medicines, transportation to the hospital and the acute shortage of available free beds contributed to these still big percentage of deaths without medical attendance. In illnesses, tuberculosis alone accounted for 7,961 cases registered for the year 1961; diarrhea enteritis for 9,078 cases. Most of these people especially from the slums of the City just manage to treat their ailments at home because no hospital beds are available; many others with chronic diseases have to wait for days and even weeks for admission to a hospital. I am told that the four national hospitals in the city are constrained to refuse hundreds of patients every day for lack of bed space. The pitiable conditions in the overcrowded corridors of the Philippine General Hospital and in the Maternity and Children’s Hospital point to the serious problem of hospitalization in the City. The Philippine General Hospital, even with its 897 free beds has 40 to 60 extra beds daily in the corridors of its emergency ward alone. It appears that some 1,000-2,000 patients each month of the year are refused admission in the North General Hospital and that 100 surgical beds of this same hospital are always filled up by traumatic and emergency cases— shootings, stabbing, motor vehicular accidents, etc. Other elective surgical cases such as those needing brain surgery, herniotomy, appendectomy, etc., are often refused admission for lack of bed space.

The move of the City of Manila to construct and operate its own hospital is the answer to a critical need. The project deserves not only the appreciation of the city population but also all encouragement and support from the national government. I am interested in the success of this project because it is along the avowed objective of my administration to bring the government closer to the people and make it sensitive and responsive to the problems and needs of the low and poor masses. We are intensifying our national efforts in helping the poor by bringing the prices of rice and other commodities within the reach of the poorer consumers. We are leaving no stone unturned to minimize and erase unemployment. As we implement the Administration’s Five-Year socio-economic program that aims at more production and more income for our people, we should not deviate, and we have not deviated, from our other and equally important objective of providing our people with more free education and more free medical care and hospitalization facilities.

Again, we commend the officials of the City of Manila and the Manila population for this very laudable project. As we look toward its early completion, we hope that more efforts to really help the needy and the poor will be launched in the near future not only in the City of Manila but also in all cities and towns of our beloved country. We are confident that with the cooperation of good citizens, it will not be far when all our people will enjoy the blessings of peace, security, health and prosperity.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.