Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the National Assembly of Pakistan

[Delivered at Rawalpindi, July 15, 1962]

TOWARDS ASIAN UNITY

IT IS BOTH an honor and a pleasure to appear before this National Assembly of Pakistan. It is an honor for anyone to speak before the representatives of the people, and I appreciate it all the more because I happen to be the first foreign head of state to be accorded this privilege. It is a pleasure because prior to my elevation to the Presidency of my country, I was a member of our legislative body for two terms of four years each. Although we have a Senate, I did not pass through the Senate; I rose directly to the Presidency from the House of Representatives. I, therefore, feel at home in your Legislative Assembly, and more than that, I feel a certain personal attachment to it. Indeed I would say that so far as I am concerned, next to being President, the best public position is to be a member of the Legislative Assembly.

I was elected President of the Philippines in our last election, by direct vote of the people, although I was an opposition candidate and assumed the office for a term of four years last January. This is my first foreign trip since becoming Chief Executive, and since I could spare enough time to visit only one Asian country, I chose Pakistan as the Asian country to visit.

Having stayed in Pakistan for five days and being due to leave tomorrow, I came to know more intimately your President who has gained renown outside Pakistan as a great military leader who became even greater as a statesman. I hope that I am not committing a breach of tact but I would indeed be lacking in candor if I did not state, after knowing Ayub Khan more closely, that Pakistan is fortunate to have, at this time of its history, a leader imbued with tested patriotism, statesmanship, vision and ability in statecraft of the highest order which are tremendous assets in bringing about the prosperity, security and happiness of the Pakistani people and in winning a distinguished place for them in the family of nations.

It must be a national gift of Pakistan to produce great leaders during crucial periods of its history. I say this because your Nation produced one of the immortals of mankind in the quest for the liberty and building of nations. I refer to Quaid-i-Azam Mohammad Ali Jinnah, the Father of Pakistan. It became my singular opportunity the other day to be the first foreign head of state to lay a wreath in homage to him beneath the future dome of the mausoleum that is being erected in his memory in Karachi. It is remarkable that both the Father of Our Independence, Manuel L. Quezon, and yours, Quaid-i-Azam, suffered and died from a similar ailment in which the health of the body is sacrificed to the vigor with which the spirit .pursues its ideal. Among countless events in the absorbing life story of Quaid-i-Azam, I recall at this moment the time when, after becoming aware that he was gravely ill and feeling that he had completed his task of achieving the independence of Pakistan, he told his doctor, “It does not matter whether I live or die.” Here are words of selflessness which are profoundly inspiring, embodying as they do the great precept that what counts in this life is accomplishment of a noble mission so that in the execution of that mission, even life itself is nothing any more. This expresses a sublimity of spirit that stands as an earnest admonition not only to subsequent leaders of Pakistan but to leaders of other nations including my own, so sublime indeed that all those who would venerate the memory of Quaid-i-Azam, whether Pakistanis, Filipinos, or leaders and citizens of other lands, can do him honor worthy of his greatness only by living and acting in accordance with his creed that service to country must be above every selfish purpose, above life itself.

On the face of it, it would appear that Pakistan and the Philippines are worlds apart, with such divergent features that they appear to have little in common. But in spite of differences between our countries and peoples— if we go deep enough into the essence of our lives, if we set both our countries in the context of the vital problems that our people are facing—we find that conditions of life in Pakistan and in the Philippines are so singularly similar. For they are nothing but conditions facing two nations, both former colonies, that have been thrust onto the stage of independent existence in a rapidly-changing world. Our similarities are far more important than our differences, and because even our differences underline our natural fundamental affinities, it is a challenge to both our countries and their leaders to harden these affinities so that we can move together, first, to advance our goals of raising the level of living of our people, secondly, to promote our security, and thirdly, to help in the shaping of a better Asia and consequently of a better world.

My stay in Pakistan has enabled me to realize also the potentialities of Pakistan-Philippines friendship and cooperation in their mutual interest. Competition between friendly nations is axiomatic. But in the case of our countries it raises more than routinary possibilities for the advancement of our national interest and the good of the world. The Philippines has generally good relations with other nations in Asia and the rest of the Free World but considering that both Pakistan and the Philippines belong to the United Nations, the SEATO, the Colombo Plan, the Bandung Conference and the Asian-African group, that our two countries have quickly concluded a trade treaty and cultural agreement, which we do not yet have with other countries including the United States, and that no political differences exist and have existed between our two nations, I state only the truth in asserting that Pakistan-Philippine relations are among the best in world.

I have stated as the first objective of Pakistan-Philippine amity the attainment of higher levels of living for the masses of our people. Our efforts in this direction are so far gratifying.

I need not elaborate on our respective efforts in this field because they generally follow the same lines. We are engaged in a mighty and almost frantic effort to become self-sufficient in our basic needs, even to produce the little comforts and luxuries of life that our people have begun to crave. Within our limited means, our governments are striving to extend to the masses of our people the blessings of modern education, medicine, adequate housing, decent employment and social welfare. Our nations are exerting great efforts to negotiate the big leap to moderate industrialization and, to increase our productivity and wealth, we aim to make sure that wealth is as equitably distributed among the population as is possible in a free society. Our Governments have also embarked on a program of agrarian reform through which we try to redistribute the vital commodity, which is land, in more equitable proportions.

These national objectives are embodied both in the second Five-Year Plan which the Government of Pakistan is now implementing and in the Five-Year Socio-economic Program which my Administration is now pursuing. Both these programs have strikingly similar targets and goals.

What is important, however, is that with the exceptionally friendly relations between our two countries, we should endeavor to find ways and means compatible with our own interests to help each other in our development efforts. We have an existing trade agreement; what remains is to make more effective use of it. You produce good jute products; we need these and could buy more from you. We produce plenty of sugar; you could buy more of this from us. What is needed is active exploration of possibilities for mutually beneficent dealings. For instance, I inspected your security printing plant in Karachi and found it to be an excellent and efficient one. We have no security printing plant, and our currency and other security documents are printed in England. Now, in the spirit of our exceeding amity, and until we acquire our own, I see no reason why we should not have our currency and other security documents printed in your plant here in Pakistan instead of in the United Kingdom.

I have cited as the second objective of Pakistan-Philippine amity the maintenance of essential safeguards to our security. This involves consideration of the United Nations and of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) of which both our countries are members.

As the record will show, Pakistan and the Philippines are both strong supporters of the United Nations. Philippine support for the world body is so abiding that in 1950, although our national finances were in a precarious state we sent a military force to support the UN police action in Korea. Before I left Manila on this trip, despite the fact that I needed every dollar to support the currency reforms that my Administration has instituted, I directed that we purchase $750,000 worth of UN bonds in order to enable that organization to continue its operations. We support the United Nations because, in spite of difficulties that it has encountered, it is our conviction that for small nations, it remains the ultimate best hope for peace and security. There is one principal essential for the stability and success of the United Nations which must be observed by all peace-loving states, whether big or small. And this is that the United Nations must be fully utilized for peaceful settlement of disputes arising among its members. To this end, decisions and recommendations of its principal organs must be respected and faithfully implemented. This is a principle which Pakistan and the Philippines jointly support not only as logical foundations for their national interests but to promote the establishment of a system of law, justice and morality among the nations of the world.

In SEATO, Pakistan and the Philippines are two of the three Asian members, together with Thailand. We in the Philippines believe in the necessity, utility and efficacy of regional security systems, like the SEATO, NATO, CENTO, and Rio Pact. Until such time as the United Nations becomes strong enough to maintain international peace and security, regional organizations which are organized with the sanction of the world organization are essential interim agencies for the protection of nations against aggression. Like the United Nations, these regional arrangements may at times seem ineffective, but like the UN itself, they have served to provide valuable safeguards to the safety of the member states of the Free World as a whole.

As regards SEATO, it is my view that it had helped to stabilize peace and security in the Asian Pacific Area before the current crisis developed in Laos and Viet-Nam. Though we may both be fully satisfied with the effectiveness of SEATO in dealing with the Laotian crisis, this does not cancel the deterrent record of SEATO during the previous five years. I submit that SEATO retains its potentialities for providing protection to its members for the maintenance of international peace and security.

At the present moment, there are United States troops in Thailand, both countries being members of SEATO. While it is not certain whether the presence of these American troops in Thailand has the sanction of the SEATO machinery, the fact remains that the two SEATO members have acted together in the same manner as to serve the objectives of the Manila Pact. While the details will have to be worked out, I submit the general proposition that SEATO has been of value in the past, that its infirmities are not valid ground to despair of its performance, and that it is a challenge to the resourcefulness and statesmanship of the leaders of the member states to find and agree on means to make SEATO a more effective agency than in the past for safeguarding the safety of Pakistan, the Philippines and other countries whose security and stability are essential to the progress and prosperity of their peoples.

Finally, I believe that Pakistan-Philippine amity can be a vital force in the shaping of a better Asia.

Asian countries emerged from the long night of colonialism completely isolated from one another and seeing each other, as it were, for the first time. Economically, the agricultural economies of Asian countries had been closely dovetailed with the industrialized economies of the metropolis. Culturally, the elite of Asia felt a closer kinship with the ruling power than with one another. They were more familiar with western philosophers than they were with the thinkers of other Asian countries.

Now, emerging almost at the same time into the world of sovereign states, our nations of Asia have need to be united. We are faced with problems common to underdeveloped nations of trying to telescope the process of industrialization within a few years, the problem of reconciling our ancient traditions and habits with modern technology, the problem of winning the race with a fast-expanding population, the problem of achieving a rapid economic progress while, at the same time, preserving civil liberties, the problem of readjusting the great masses of our peoples from the old, comfortable familial and tribal relationships to the strange, new world of corporations and industry, the problem of international economic competition. These are problems of such magnitude that nothing short of a concerted effort will bring solution. We are faced by the same danger. Over all of Asia hovers the threat of an ideology which the largest nation in Asia and Soviet Union are endeavoring to impose upon the world. United in its problems, Asia must find unity in their solution. Western Europe has dramatized the value of the unity in the spectacular success of the European Economic Community, the Common Market, which the United Kingdom is on the verge of joining, towards which Spain, Portugal and Scandinavian countries are looking with interest, with which the United States may make common cause. Similar groupings in various degrees of unity have been started in South America, in Central America, among former French West African colonies, in Southeast Africa. There are movements towards Pan-African unity and union. In Asia some such kind of unity is called for if we are not to be left behind. Indeed, some regional groupings have been started.

Asian nations, together with new African states, adopted common principles and took a common stand on various issues in the historic conference in Bandung in 1955, a conference of which Pakistan was a co-sponsor and the Philippines a participant. The Asian-African group in the United Nations, now numbering nearly 50 members, has become a potent force in the deliberations of that body. A step toward an Asian union is a loose group known as the Association of Southeast Asia, composed of Thailand, Malaya and the Philippines. The significant feature of ASA is that it is composed exclusively of Asian nations.

Asia must be united if it is to safeguard its interests and have its influence felt in the world. The world has need of Asia, not so much for material things but rather for our spiritual values and ancient heritage. God has made peoples and regions different in order that each may contribute its share to the enrichment of the world. In the movement towards Asian unity, Pakistan and the Philippines can extend a united and vigorous hand towards a better Asia that can help realize the ideal of One World, not a world of unity and peace imposed by armed legions but rather a world united in love, in friendship, in freedom, in dignity, and in true and lasting peace, that constitute the spiritual grandeur of Asia.

In building a better Asia, indeed we promote a better world founded upon enduring principles of which one of the most essential is the principle of democracy. That is why it is important that at this time you are implementing a return of the constitutional system based on the will and liberties of people.

In this great task, not only has your President and leader enabled democracy to strike deeper roots in the soil of Pakistan, but he has also purged it of the common scourge of a young democracy—graft and corruption. We in the Philippines are engaged in a similar task of eradicating venality and dishonesty in public service, and we know the magnitude and difficulty of the undertaking. The success you have achieved under President Ayub’s leadership shall remain for us a constant source of encouragement.

We Filipinos who uphold democracy and love freedom cannot but be gratified that your new Constitution seeks to establish an improved democracy by blending, to an extent appropriate and suitable to your national needs, the presidential and parliamentary systems. While it is not for me to express an opinion on the various features of your system, I subscribe to one of its underlying elements to the effect that no democratic system in one country is perfectly applicable to another country. It is doubtful if it can be asserted faithfully that the system works perfectly in the United States and in the United Kingdom. Even in these highly-advanced democracies, the system is a living organism that modifies and adjusts itself to the varying challenges of new times. This is, therefore, one reason why the system should give due regard to conditions, level of enlightenment and idiosyncracies of younger nations that aspire to adopt the system as their own.

By your return to the constitutional system, Pakistan and the Philippines again agree on one more thing—that democracy is still the best way of life ever conceived by man. Indeed, freedom is the best ideology for mankind. It is the only system commensurate with the grandeur of man’s intellect and the divine dignity of the human being. Because democracy needs the infinite possibilities of mankind, man in turn knows how to restrain his freedom and will to the extent necessary for the common good and the attainment of happiness. This system of freedom which we call democracy is not rigid. It is a system that adjusts itself to every people who love liberty, and adjustment which is addressed in a large measure to the patriotism, ingenuity and devotion to the high ideals of every nation’s leaders. In stating that our two countries have staked their destinies on the democratic system, I wish to express on behalf of my people the fervent wish that in our respective lands, we shall succeed in operating the intricate system of democracy in such a manner as to be able to make use of its virtue and efficiency according to the needs of our peoples, for the attainment of our national goals and a life of peace, abundance and contentment for our citizens.

You have honored me by asking me to address you and by holding your session on a Sunday for the purpose. This honor is a jewel that you have added to the treasured memories which I have gathered during my unforgettable visit to your wonderful country. By your magnificent display of goodwill, in the far-off Philippines, beyond vast distances of land and sea, you have found in me, as the humble present-day leader of my people, a devoted friend and admirer of Pakistan.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.