OUR COMMON HERITAGE

I WOULD like to think that you are conferring this honorary degree not so much for any personal merits of my own, but as a token of esteem and affection for the people I represent.

I am a Christian, and the majority of my people are Christians. But we have a large minority of Muslims whom we cherish as our fellow citizens—the proud heirs of a spiritual tradition which was ours even before Christianity came to our shores.

It is through this link that our two countries have had a common heritage in the distant past, many centuries ago. One of the great centers of civilization in the world can be found in Pakistan—in the valley of the river Indus, cradle of early civilization in central Asia. The far-flung movement of this civilization through the centuries has had a distinct bearing eastward through India and Malacca on to the archipelago of 8,000 islands known as the Philippines.

The history of my country, immediately before the arrival of the Europeans, is intimately linked with the spread of Islam in southeast Asia. But even before that, hardy Muslim sailors and traders must have sailed towards the rising sun and past the golden Chersonesus to the regions bordering the south China Sea. As early as eighty years after the birth of Christ, an Egyptian Greek mariner had written a book, called “Periplus of the Erythraean Sea,” which describes this vast coastal region east of Pakistan. Quite recently, historical researchers have found actual connections between your country and its vicinity to the regions beyond Malacca which ancient mariners called the Golden Chersonesus because of the reported presence of alluvial gold in its shores.

The spread of Islam beyond Malacca took place before the fifteenth century, and undoubtedly doomed to extinction the ancient Madjapahit empire of the Indonesians. The newcomers rapidly occupied the principal ports of what is now the Indonesian archipelago, including the Moluccas and Borneo.

The Muslims first came to the Philippines in 1380, according to local tarsilas or chroniclers. That year, Mukdum, an Arab scholar who had been successful in proselytizing the Malaccans, landed on the island of Sulu, one of the southernmost islands of the Philippines. Ten years later, in 1390, a Sumatran prince named Rajah Baginda conquered Sulu, mainly because he used a new weapon of warfare—the Ian-taka , a small hand cannon or over-sized shotgun, employing gunpowder. His son-in-law, a Muslim leader of Palembang, Sumatra, became the first Sultan of Jolo when he founded the Abu Bakr dynasty upon the death of Rajah Baginda.

In 1475, Sharif Kabungsuwan of Johore in Malacca led an army of Samal soldiers from nearby Sulu to Cotabato, a province on the largest southern island of the Philippines. There he converted the native inhabitants to Islam and established the first sultanate of Magindanao with his marriage to a native princess. Nevertheless, Sultan Kabungsuwan and subsequent rulers of Magindanao remained vassals to the kings of the Moluccas. This accounts for the large waves of migration to our archipelago from the Moluccas and Borneo during that era. The Sultan of Borneo had acquired sovereignty over Palawan, a large island to the southwest, and much mingling took place between natives of the two regions.

By the time the Spaniards reached Manila about a century later, in 1571, the culture and religion of Islam had spread practically to all the main islands of the archipelago. Muslims from the southern islands married natives of the new place, whom they converted to their faith and their ways.

The Islamic influence on the early Filipinos has been wide and diversified. Politically, the loose system of government based on the barangay was tightened to conform with the implantation of the sultanate institution; and regional chieftains began to call themselves rajahs as in Manila. From the religious point of view, the new beliefs and tenets had little chance to develop in the northern part of the archipelago. This was partly due to the arrival of the Spaniards who brought Christianity with them, and partly due to the polytheistic beliefs held by the early Filipinos who resisted the abrupt changes brought about by the Muslims.

But in the arts, crafts and industry, the newcomers had a more lasting influence. The Muslim Malays brought with them knowledge of mining and metal-working. Gold, copper and iron mines were developed, and local artisans learned to manufacture personal ornaments, necklaces, anklets, bracelets and trays. Foundries were started to turn out well-built cannons and other firearms. The Arabic alphabet and method of writing were popularized. Textile weaving was encouraged. Ship-building, and other crafts requiring manual skill, were developed to a high degree.

In brief, one may very well say that the Muslim influence has immeasurably enriched Filipino culture and civilization. The teeming metropolis that is Manila, with its inhabitants now totalling more than two million, was once an important Muslim center of about 4,000 residents when the first Spaniards set foot there nearly four centuries ago. But before Manila became a Christian city, it was a Muslim stronghold.

We Filipinos are therefore the heirs of two great traditions: that of Christianity and that of Islam.

There are those who claim that these two traditions are incompatible: that they have always been at war and will always be at war. We Filipinos, both Christians and Muslims, are determined to prove that this claim is a narrow view and a false view. We mean to prove—and we are proving—that Christianity and Islam can co-exist in peace and democratic unity; that a difference of religious faith need not prevent a deep and indissoluble unity of national purpose.

There was a time, during the more than four centuries of colonial tutelage under Spain and the United States of America, when the Westerners emphasized that we Filipinos could never live together as one people and one nation because of the presence of a sizeable Muslim population in our midst. But this claim was advanced more to perpetuate themselves in the position of overlords, than on the basis of actuality.

“Divide and rule”—this has been the policy of imperialist nations throughout Asian history. They have pitted one tribe, one race, one nation against another, fomenting rivalries and differences, in order to maintain themselves in power.

But we Filipinos have learned the lessons from history. Today, under our present government, Christian and Muslim Filipinos live together in peace and contentment. We have learned that different religious faiths must live together in tolerance. There must be fairness and equality of opportunity for all, regardless of racial origin or religious belief. In the halls of our Congress, there have always been Muslim representatives. Today, the Speaker Pro-tempore of the House of Representatives is a Muslim. I am the first President of the Philippines to appoint a Muslim as member of my Cabinet. All these things have happened in a country whose population is only less than 10 per cent Muslim.

In a plural society like ours, it is absolutely necessary to observe fair treatment, equality before the law, and equitable political representation of all elements to insure contentment and national unity. I repeat, differences of religious faith need not prevent a deep and indissoluble unity of national purpose. Indeed, this very difference of faith should, in men of good will, enrich and further that purpose.

We are not any the poorer because some of us are Christians, some Muslims. On the contrary, we are by that. very fact enriched. We are enriched in our art, our literature, our philosophy. But above all, we are enriched in our capacity for making friends. For when we stretch our hands out to you in friendship, it is not to a complete stranger that we do so.

Rather do we see in you—in your great nation and its culture—something that is after all our own, something that is, after all, ourselves.

It is in this spirit that I have accepted the kind invitation of your great and beloved President, His Excellency Mohammad Ayub Khan, to visit Pakistan, and to accept an honorary degree from Punjab University. Just as Pakistan is the first State in Asia that I am visiting since assuming the Presidency of my country at the beginning of this year, so also this degree of Doctor of Laws, honoris causa , is the first honorary one I have accepted from a foreign university. These are two significant “firsts” during my tenure as President, and I must note with pride and satisfaction that both of them are indicative of the great value I attach to Pakistan, to its great leader, and to its famous university.

My presence here is, first of all, proof of the strong feeling of respect and admiration I have for President Ayub Khan. I look upon him not only as a great leader of your nation but as an outstanding statesman of Asia whose reputation for courage, intelligence, integrity and dedication has gone far beyond the frontiers of Pakistan.

I consider it a distinct honor to receive this academic award from Punjab University. It is a distinct honor even for one who, like myself, has been awarded two doctor’s degrees from actual studies done in law and economics in my own country’s University of Santo Tomas. For the city of Lahore has long been famous since ancient times as one of the outstanding seats of learning in Asia, and Punjab University stands high among its peers in the world of academic excellence.

May I conclude with a salute to the student youth of Pakistan. In you as loyal sons of Pakistan and proud children of Asia lies the hope, not alone of your country but of this vast continent which is our home, for redress against past injustice, for redemption from ignorance, poverty and disease, for a new life blest with peace, freedom and equal opportunity. May you prove yourselves equal to this universal hope. May you prove yourselves worthy of this sacred trust.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.