Toast of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines At the State Dinner in Honor of T. I. H. the Crown Prince and Princess

[Delivered on November 5, 1962]

PHILIPPINE-JAPANESE RELATIONS

Mrs. Macapagal and I are very happy to have Your Imperial Highnesses as our honored guests at dinner on this first evening of your visit to this country. We hail this occasion of your visit as marking the beginning of a new era in the relations between the Philippines and Japan, and it is our hope that the keynote of those relations will always be harmony and peace.

We are living in the same region of the world and we should observe toward each other the feeling of neighborliness. Our two peoples must co-exist in mutual respect. This is a rule imposed on us by Destiny itself.

We from the Philippines are gratified to note that you have turned to the ways of democracy and that militarism has been completely discredited in your country. You are now enjoying a prosperity almost unequalled in the history of nations and your merchants and traders are reaching out for the farthest confines of the earth. As your immediate neighbors, we hope to share with you the boon that comes from this increased prosperity. Happily for our two peoples, already there are definite trends in this direction.

There are many reasons why Japan and the Philippines should be in all the years to come good friends and neighbors. Developments in both countries in the recent past have all been leading to a strengthening of these new bonds of amity. While, on the one hand, Japan has been faithfully discharging her obligations under the reparations agreement, thus assisting most effectively in our economic rehabilitations and development; the Philippines, on the other hand, has been expanding her trade and commerce with Japan. As a result, it is gratifying to note that at present many industries of Japan are utilizing, each year in a progressively larger proportion, raw materials imported from our country. At the same time, new factories in the Philippines are using machineries of Japanese make, and in our shops and stores, a great variety of products of skillful Japanese craftsmanship, artistic as well as utilitarian, may be found.

This newly formed basis for mutually beneficial relations between Japan and the Philippines is but the logical consequence of their geographical propinquity and historical ties which antedate our first contact with the West. In the dynamic pattern of modern life, our two peoples have vast opportunities to find broader areas of common interest and it is my hope that, hand in hand, they will move forward to a better and more ample life for themselves and their children in an atmosphere of peace, freedom, and sovereign equality.

In the expectation that the friendship between your country and mine, which we are here cementing tonight, will continue, we are requesting Your Imperial Highnesses to convey to Their Imperial Majesties The Emperor and Empress of Japan our gratitude for sending you to us as bearers of goodwill and amity. You may reassure Their Imperial Majesties that as far as the Philippines is concerned, we propose to march forward with Japan in closer harmony and cooperation in pursuit of common ideals.

Allow me now to ask you to rise and join me in a toast to the health and happiness of Their Imperial Highnesses and for the continued peace and well-being of the people of Japan.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.