Speech of His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal President of the Philippines For Prime Minister and Madame Ikeda of Japan

[Delivered at the Philamlife Building, September 25, 1963]

TWO NATIONS, ONE GOAL

MRS. MACAPAGAL and I are grateful for the hospitality and honor extended to us this evening by Prime Minister and Madame Ikeda.

In only a few days since their arrival in our country, both the Prime Minister and his lady have deeply impressed our people with their sterling qualities. We shall miss them when they leave tomorrow and feel, on their departure, that their visit has been all too brief and that it is our hope that they shall come again for a longer time.

I am overwhelmed by a combined sense of appreciation and humility over the kind references made by the Prime Minister about me in my efforts for our peoples. I have regarded these efforts as the inescapable duty of anyone who is charged with the leadership of a newly independent and developing nation in Asia adjusting her existence to the stresses which today are stirring all humanity as men everywhere, amidst the anxieties of these stresses, seek a more abundant life in widening liberty. I am grateful for the encouragement coming from such an eminent source and thus heartened, I shall carry on my task with firmer resolve to be worthy of the high expectations and, above all, to deserve the faith of our people in our dedication to their welfare.

Having already had a liking for Prime Minister Ikeda even before coming to visit with us, I have been even more impressed after having had closer contact with him. In the discharge of the responsibility of leadership in his country, he is imbued with a sense of integrity and dedication to his labors for his people. He is completely immersed in the spirit of freedom which our common cause of democracy upholds. His successful leadership of the cause of democracy in Japan has been a boon to the free world and bears promise of more value to the cause of freedom in the coming years.

We are not, therefore, surprised that his leadership has accelerated the material progress of the Japanese people under his double-the-income policy.

I have been likewise impressed by the new emphasis that the Prime Minister appears to have placed on the moral regeneration of the mass of the people of Japan. In this, we think alike for I have dedicated my administration to the invigoration of the moral qualities of our officials and people.

I am in accord with the Prime Minister in his vision of the role of Asia and Asian nations in the promotion of the peace and well-being of all mankind. I share the recognition of the potentialities that are derived for international cooperation and development from the advantageous geographical condition of Japan and the Philippines of being situated between the Pacific Ocean and the Asian mainland, potentialities that become even more magnified in contemplation of cooperative effort with similarly situated countries.

I recall, in this connection, what the Philippine Government said in stating its position on a mooted matter with one of our neighbors, as follows:

“In His infinite wisdom, the Almighty gave natural protection in the form of a water barrier to the island nations located in the Pacific between the massive continents of America and Asia. These island nations are Japan, Taiwan, the Philippines, the Borneo territories, Indonesia, Australia and New Zealand. It is vitally important that none of these territories should fall under the authority or control of a communist state on the mainland of Asia.”

I trust that our intimate exchanges of views have increased a mutual understanding of the respective problems and endeavors of our two nations in such a manner as to be helpful in the resolution of pending matters. With increased mutual understanding and widening area of collaborative effort, our two countries, shall all the more, be in a position of effectively contributing to the effort of keeping our area safe for democracy.

May I invite you all to join me in a toast to the continued good health of His Majesty, the Emperor of Japan and to the happiness and well-being of the Japanese people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Fullness of freedom : speeches and statements of President Diosdado Macapagal (Vol. IV). Manila : Bureau of Printing.