Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the opening session of the Baguio Conference of 1950

[Delivered at the Mansion House, Baguio, May 26, 1950]

Dear Friends:

This first meeting of representatives of friendly sovereign and neighbor States is indeed inspiring. It is most reassuring to the peoples of Southeast Asia and the Western Pacific. I share the distinction which the gentlemen of the conference confer upon the Filipino people by their happy agreement to come here for mutual counsel on the solution of our common problems. I can not but take this meeting as a positive affirmation of our common problems. I can not but take this meeting as a positive affirmation of faith in ourselves and in one another.

Until the recent past most of us could not chart our own course and had to depend on alien guidance. Our loyalties were divided; we could not develop our own initiative; we could not determine our growth as separate nations. Now that we are masters of our own destiny, and as we endeavor to pursue our systematic growth and development consistent each with our national genius, we believe that we can complement one another relying on our common historic origin and traditional sympathy with each other as well as on our geographic propinquity, to better promote our common interests by frank mutual consultations.

This is a historic moment for all of us. A conference such as this has long been overdue. Its purposes have been laid down in the broadest possible terms. It was our desires that we come together with open minds and enjoy in the course of the deliberations complete freedom of action.

Accordingly, this conference remains the master of its own agenda and it shall, by common consent, agree to discuss or not to discuss any subject-matter which is germane to the broad objectives for which this meeting has been convened.

However, it surely is not a violation of this idea of freedom of action to accept certain principles underlying the calling of this conference. We are agreed, I believe, that we are gathered here in our common interest and not against anybody. I might add to meet for positive and not negative action, much less for aggression. Our symbol is the dove of peace. The world as it is is so full of enmity and distrust, shot through and through with conspiracy and tension that we cannot possibly wish to add to the confusion and fear which prevail in the international sphere. I like to believe also that, desiring peace as deeply as we do, we should rather attempt to mitigate the rigors of the political struggle and allay the anxiety which all men feel in the face of the terrible menace which overhangs the world.

We have been careful to emphasize that the conference would do well to limit itself to the uncovering of the areas of common interest among the participating States. Let us fix firmly in our minds what we wish to do in cooperation with one another, and then, let us begin earnestly to find out how best we can do it and to what extent we are ready and willing to lend our cooperation to the common task.

One may perhaps describe our initial task as that mutual discovery, of getting our bearings individually and in relation to others. The freedom which our countries have achieved will mean little until we have harnessed that freedom to the welfare of our respective peoples and used it as an instrument for knowing each other better and working more effectively together for our mutual benefit. We are certain to discover that there are many areas in the economic, political and cultural fields wherein we could bring our purposes into better harmony, and mesh our efforts with those of our neighbors in the interest of a fuller life in larger freedom for all our peoples.

The problems of our region have both a national and an international aspect. Every state here represented retains unimpaired the right to meet and solve those problems by national action according to the peculiar conditions prevailing within its territory. Any proposal for common action, therefore, must be regarded not as a substitute for national action but rather as supplementary to it. I dare that there is not one among us who would deny that any of those problems, whether of a political, economic, or cultural character, would be rendered more difficult by a program of international action. On the contrary, the national sinews will be strengthened by international and direct cooperation.

Various United Nations bodies have done much useful work in showing us where such cooperation could most fruitfully be pursued. In particular, the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East has made various recommendations to most of the countries here represented whereby our national economies and the living standards of our peoples may be raised. This conference may well address itself to the implementation of these recommendations.

Problems connected with the United Nations program of technical assistance to under-developed countries and with the United States program under Point Four, with decisions announced from the recent London conference as well as with plans that may have been evolved in the recent Bangkok and Sydney conferences, will probably arise in the course of your deliberations. I hope that you will find the means of harnessing these programs and decisions speedily and effectively to the needs of our peoples.

We shall not duplicate here the work of the United Nations or any United Nations agency or any bloc of free member nations committed to a concrete program of mutual or self-help. It is our desires rather to supplement their labors and to implement such recommendations emanating from them as will seem necessary to our well-being and prosperity. The Charter of the United Nations clearly recognizes the value of regional action in certain fields, and it will be our constant endeavor to carry on our work in strict conformity with the purposes and principles of the United Nations.

We have the opportunity to contribute as a bigger unit to world advancement, to world peace. Hitherto we have been drawn into conflicts not necessarily of our own choice.

We now want to leave the epoch of destruction behind and to have all the time to rebuild and build. It is within us to profit from our common knowledge and experience, to pool our vision and genius and make of our part of the world a new source of world contentment founded on freedom, peace and prosperity. It is within us to banish doubt and fear and to work out a constructive era of economic stability to raise our peoples’ living standards and give them increasing latitude to realize their potentialities. We must rise in strength and dignity.

We do not propose to fulfill all this with one conference or even with many conferences. But we can initiate the work and create a sense of momentum essential to remove confusion and generate confidence in our resources to help ourselves. We can agree to a concrete basis of regional collaboration definitely providing the working machinery for advancing our political, economic and cultural welfare, which we can in common support and improve. We can perfect such a machinery where it positively sustains the deepening of regional understanding and strengthens world security. We shall have discharged a vital part of our responsibility to this generation and to our posterity if we now take the step, hitherto regarded impossible, to clear much of the road towards common cooperation and action for a world we want to be free and stay free.

Gentlemen of the Conference: it is a deeply moving experience for me to welcome you to this meeting in Baguio. You are gathered here at a crucial moment of history and your responsibility is great. I am under no illusion—I think none of us are under any illusion—that this conference will result in any miracles of achievement. The problems that confront us are much too grave and numerous to yield to a quick solution by magic or incantation. But I am sure that out of the meeting of our minds in this conference light shall come to illumine the path that we must follow. That the task is arduous no one doubts. But the stake is great—it is none other than the maintenance of the freedom and security of our peoples in a darkened world—and it is worthy of our greatest sacrifices.

My friends, you hold the key to a new day and you will usher to our respective peoples its manifold benedictions.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Address of President Elpidio Quirino at the opening session of the Baguio Conference of 1950 Mansion House, Baguio, May 26, 1950. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46(5) , 2019-2022.