Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines To the Filipino people on Rizal Day

Fellow Citizens and Friends:

We are gathered on this hallowed spot to evoke the sacred memory of our national hero.

The human mind is so constituted that abstract ideas, such as patriotism, sacrifice, and service to humanity, are illusive and hard to grasp, and harder to transmute into living action in our own individual conduct and in public life. So, in the history of every nation, there always arises like a high and majestic peak the figure of a man who becomes the symbol of the country’s heroic adventure in the past, of the nation’s supreme aspirations, and of the people’s great destiny in the future. Such is Dr. Jose Rizal who towers in magnificence as the perennial fountain of our national aspirations and the undying inspiration of the Filipino youth.

When fratricidal conflict in our country rages; when one group claims to be better Filipinos than others; when political bitterness floods the nation’s life with mutual recriminations; when religious strife consumes the most delicate sentiments of Christian love, forgiveness, and tolerance; when these tragic happenings threaten to tear the body politic to pieces, Rizal is our rallying point for national unity in the midst of desperate confusion, to remind us sternly that we are all Filipinos alike and that there can be no group monopoly of patriotism and of civic virtues. Before him who is nothing less than the nation’s conscience, we all stand by tradition praised or condemned, not by our party affiliation or religious creed; nor by our material fortune or by the region we come from; nor by the public office we hold or by the color of our skin, nor by the books we have read or failed to read, but by the measure of integrity and loyalty with which we have kept the faith of him who shed his precious blood “to tinge” our dawn.

It is thus the high fortune of our dear nation that whenever amid darkness on the stormy sea of political passions, the Ship of State is in danger of sinking or lashed against the rock of time, firm hands may steer her course by that one resplendent and eternal star, Dr. Jose Rizal.

Through fully half a century since his martyrdom the Rizal cult has daily so grown that whatever the accidents and exigencies of our national life we find in him the authentic exemplification of a faith that pulls us through all vicissitudes

The validity of Rizal to us is not based on the fact that he was a poet, a novelist, scholar, scientist, and the various other manifestations of his versatile intellect and genius. It is based on the fact that he provided us a dynamic, living faith as a nation and incarnated that faith in his thoughts, his life, and his death, better than anyone else did.

While we all feel comfortable about making him a symbol, an epitome, a lodestar, dehumanizing him thereby even as we idolize him, we seldom pause to consider how much greater his significance would be were we to take pains to see him as one of us—human, pulsating, alive. Visionary, yet he was sometimes full of misgivings about the realization of his dreams; purposive, yet he was full of doubts regarding the outcome of his goals, posing even in the novels which were his mouthpieces several possible solutions to the problems of his country’s ills. True, there was very little confusion in that great man’s mind, because he had only the one consuming desire—of setting his country free, materially and spiritually; but he was a prey to dark disappointments such as you and I are prone to indulge in. In Madrid, for instance, when he saw his fellow countrymen seemingly aimless, having no mind of their own, seeking the path that offered the least obstacles, he wondered sadly what his country would come to, and he allowed himself to be taken by despondency. That was not a Superman who shrugged away worries and troubles; that was a man like you and I, perturbed by the obvious and the petty, and seeking in inadequate self-sufficiency the answer to what looked like insuperable difficulties.

Far it be for me to debunk our national symbol and remove him from his pedestal of greatness, but I would bring him closer to us, his cherished people, by likening him, in some aspects at least, to us. His greatness will shine all the greater for the warming sheen of his humanity, and it will be easier to strive to approximate his extraordinariness when we know that in some portions of him he was as ordinary and elemental as the earth that gave him birth and the least of his fellow-countrymen now doing him honor; that he has the common grassroots of humanness, failings and all, between him and us, as well as the common grassroots of the strong, determined Filipinism which has bound us all, in the past during his time, now during our times, and for all time. For the golden thread of our past, present, and future can never be severed.

Rizal had great and glorious dreams of the future of the Philippines. Through Isagani’s mouth, in El Filibusterismo, he foretold the union of reason and magnanimity from the people who were to decide the fate of his country in these words:

“Generous voices there are mingled with ours, statesmen who realize that there is no better bond than community of thought and interest. Justice will be meted out to us, and everything points to a brilliant future for all. Tomorrow we shall be citizens of the Philippines, whose destiny will be a glorious one, because it will be in loving hands. Ah, yes, the future is ours! I see it rose-tinted, I see the movement that stirs the life of these regions so long dead, lethargic. . . I see towns arise . . . and factories, edifices. . . . I hear the steam hiss, the trains roar, the engines rattle! . . . Without hatred or distrust, the people will labor because labor will cease to be a despicable thing, it will no longer be servile, imposed upon a slave . . . we shall extend our hands to one another, and commerce, industry, agriculture, the sciences, will develop under the mantle of liberty, with wise and just laws. . . .”

With peculiar solicitude Rizal was concerned over the Filipino youth. Mindful of these beautiful dreams he exhorted them thus:

“Alza tu tersa frente, Juventud filipina este dia!

Luce resplandeciente Tu rica gallardia,

Bella esperanza de la Patria mia.” and made that well-known appeal to the youth:

“Where are the youth who will consecrate their roseate hours, their illusions and their enthusiasm to the good of our country? . . . Where are you, youth, who will embody in yourselves the vigor of life that has vanished from our veins, the purity of the ideas that have “been tainted in our brains, and the fire of enthusiasm which has been extinguished in our hearts? We await you, O youth! come, for we await you!”

I would be trying to paint the lily if I were to essay to add one gleam to this luminous apostrophe. I can only repeat perhaps with greater urgency and earnestness at this hour this passionate challenge to the youth. In every young soul in our schools, colleges, and universities there should be a response, tingling with red young blood, aquiver with the intense emotion of youth, and arising like a fair dream in the silent watches of the night.

We of the older generation, we who are also about to depart, greet you from this historic cell where the “Last Farewell” was conceived with a prayer in our hearts: a prayer that you may breathe copiously of the divine breath which gave Rizal such an ardent love of country that it transcended death itself.

How great and noble would be our lives if we could repeat with him these lines from his last poem:

“And when my tomb, forgotten by all, Has no cross nor stone to mark its place, Let man make it, scatter it with the hoe, And my ashes, before they return to nothing, May form the dust of your carpet.

“Then it doesn't matter if you put me in oblivion. I will cross your atmosphere, your space, your valleys. I will be a vibrant and clean note for your ear; Aroma, light, colors, blush, song, moan, Constantly repeating the essence of my faith!”

With such intense and sanctified patriotism, you, O youth of the Philippines, will keep intact the precious legacy that Rizal and our other venerable heroes have left our people. That inheritance is far more precious than all the gold that lies buried in our enchanted soil: it is our national spirit in its noblest manifestation. On this momentous hour let us pledge anew ever to preserve our patriotic traditions, and strive with full-hearted earnestness to do our utmost to enhance the happiness of our people, so that we may, when the sun of our lives sinks in the west, leave the fate of our nation, not impaired but improved, not descending but ascending, not waning but waxing.

All of us of the older generation have done our best to do this, some with success, but others without success. Yes, there are those among us who feel poignant regret that their hands and hearts have not wrought a consummate and perfect thing. But there is consolation in the buoyant enthusiasm of our youth, in their strength born of freedom, in their faith that catches its spark from the ever-radiant flame that is Rizal!

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Address of President Quirino on Rizal Day. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(12) , 6116-6120.