Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On the Independence of the Philippines

[Delivered at Luneta on July 4, 1948]

MY COUNTRYMEN, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS AND FRIENDS:

Two nations celebrate today their anniversary of freedom. With the United States of America, this celebration is one of the many she has observed annually in her long and successful life as a republic. With our Republic, it is only the second in its young but promising life. To the Philippines, Fourth of July signifies both freedom to the Filipinos and gratitude to America. To America, aside from being also the historic clay of her freedom, it is now properly a continuous source of justifiable pride for the liberty she made possible for us to enjoy. To both countries it should likewise signify from now on the periodic reaffirmation of faith, friendship, and confidence in one another, based on their solemn covenants and mutual commitments.

To be sure, the Filipino people celebrate this memorable day with perhaps greater rejoicing. I shall tell you why. The recentness of our birth as a republic makes our part in this observance like that of proud parents watching fondly their child grow up. You—I—every Filipino, dead or alive, are the proud parents. Dig deep into the past or scour the present and you will find that our libertarian achievements have no parallel in the history of the world. Every man, woman and child in this vast congregation, specially those who suffered in the recent war, know how we won our independence. Our emergence as a nation has been a most painful process. We can truthfully say that this Republic is the child of storm and stress—of fire and famine. Strange as it may seem, although we are only two years old today, we have shown clear signs of amazing strength and vitality, both physical and spiritual, which surely will endure the hardest test.

To us of the living present, it is of moment to know if we who are responsible for the realization of our dream of freedom and are privileged to enjoy it have accomplished what has been expected of us within the brief span of our independent existence. The question is not so much how we have loyally kept our boon of liberty as how we have used it and insured its further enjoyment by the succeeding generations. That is what counts.

Liberty is a mere abstraction. It is devoid of substance as well as of meaning if the people who possess it do not in reality enjoy its blessings. Many countries became free before us. Several others became free after us. However, in the main, they are yet to enjoy the blessings of freedom and independence in the way we now enjoy ours. We are fortunate that while many nations still face revolutions and civil wars, purges and military coups, today we can breathe in common with our fellow countrymen the air of liberty in an era of peace and good feeling.

Heretofore, we have been enjoying the four freedoms made classic by President Franklin Delano Roosevelt. We have recently acquired two other freedoms as essential as the first four. They are the freedom from hate and the freedom to work. A rediscovery of the greatest qualities of our race made this acquisition possible. Our character as a people was duly and fully tested of late in the case of dissident elements. In bringing them to reason in the impetuous moments of a national crisis, the national character outweighed ballots and bullets. It is this humane spirit which dominates all nations of Christian faith, serving as the great reservoir—of intellect, of highmindedness and of sincere goodwill—which, wisely utilized in the most patriotic sense of statesmanship, can surely make of our country a unified and solid nation and an exemplary unit in the world organization for peace.

In this new epoch, political independence does not mean merely non-dependence upon others. It means co-existence under the most favorable circumstances, among which is the right to live a free, peaceful and prosperous life. By this concept we now co-exist side by side with the most powerful and prosperous countries in the world. Nations and peoples today are no longer judged merely by the power that they can wield; neither are they judged only by the area of their territory, the size of their population, the billions of dollars they have in their coffers, nor by the might of their standing armies, for none of these can stand alone against the World Federation of States to come. Peoples and nations are now largely judged, and rightly, by their positive contribution to the peace and happiness of the world. Judged by this criterion, we can assert that in the Philippines we are certainly making that contribution. We can justly say that as a people we are an active and positive factor in the promotion of world peace. This common achievement of which all of us—from the highest executive, legislative, or judicial official to the lowest employee, the intellectual, the businessman, the rich and the poor alike—can be proud, we won in the teeth of seemingly insuperable obstacles.

When this country was ushered into the family of nations at this very minute and hour two years ago, there were serious forebodings and misgivings, fears not entirely unfounded, that this country could survive. There were warnings that the obstacles blocking our way were insurmountable, that a crisis would occur sooner or later to interrupt our chartered course as an independent nation.

Apprehensive but not fearful, we faced these doubts with faith in ourselves and the future.

As always in the Filipino character again proved dauntless. So today, the prophets of fear and disaster of yesterday may witness for themselves how mistaken they were in their underestimation of our stamina and fortitude—of the ability of every citizen of this country to shoulder whatever burden and discharge whatever responsibility may be placed upon him.

We have moved firmly and steadily onward in strengthening our Republic. In every endeavor of our national life, our creative genius, dint of hard work and love of peace and progress have been our constant guide. Our finances, our agricultural and industrial enterprises, our trade and commerce, our international relationship, have accordingly been bolstered up in all directions. And we are growing every day in national stature and winning the respect and even the love of other nations due mainly to our innate sense of responsibility to the nation and to the world and our respect for our international commitments and obligations.

The long strides we have taken in our economic rehabilitation are far beyond our expectations when we assumed sovereignty. Independent of proffered outside assistance, we have proceeded on our own steam. By our own efforts the volume of our production has almost reached the pre-war level; our foreign trade has exceeded the two billion mark; our government revenues have markedly increased and have even exceeded our government expenditures. Although upon the establishment of the new Republic there was fear that we may not be able to balance our budget within five years, we have reached that goal in two years. This is an achievement short of miraculous. Our living costs have been greatly reduced while our living standards continue to improve. The creation of the Central Bank is expected to enhance our economic sovereignty and to encourage the healthy and sturdy growth of our financial institutions in a manner that will effectively protect our national economy, while cautiously guarding against inflation, and insuring at the same time our monetary and currency stability.

The system of effective control we have established over exports and imports seeks to facilitate our economic recovery and balance our payments abroad as well as to regulate our foreign trade in furtherance of our economic rehabilitation. Our industrialization program is proceeding abreast with the impending harnessing of our hydraulic powers in strategic places; our mining industry will receive the greatest impetus; our gold, our coal, our copper, our chromium and other mines will not only be reopened but will be afforded full development.

Our program of social amelioration henceforth will proceed with the greatest speed on a handsome appropriation earmarked for the purpose. We have sought to improve the life of the less fortunate in our national complement: the laborers, small employees, permanent and temporary, the enlisted men in the Army, the school teachers. All these have been granted not only increased salaries but also vacation and sick leaves with full pay. The great mass of our public servants who have been denied pay­ment of their back salaries have now been given the right to enjoy what had been previously withheld from them due to lack of immediately available funds. The construction of homes for our middle class will be encouraged by the Government’s guaranty of not more than ten thousand pesos of loan for the construction of each home. The opening of public lands for settlement and production and the acquisition of private lands for distribution to tenants are definite parts of our program of government. Social security measures of even broader scope are in the offing.

The transition which marks off the period of planning from the actual execution of our huge program of development is fast narrowing. Presently we are to set in motion a greater machinery of production. We will, of course, continue to plan but, meanwhile, we shall also try to break the ground for expanding productivity and development. Carried forward by the spirit of goodwill that has at last united us, we can with greater confidence move towards newer goals and newer achievements. God illumine our way; God give us strength; God continue instilling in our minds faith in Him and in our capacity to make of this nation forever strong and enduring!

On this very spot, two years ago, the highest representative of the United States Government, on proclaiming our independence, asked if the Republic of the Philippines then just born would survive. Our dear friend for whom our prayers shall never end, the first President of our Republic, Manuel Roxas, promptly answered. “It will live and endure the shock of time.” In his memory and with the greatest resolve I can muster, I wish today to repeat to the world: This Republic lives and shall endure the shock of all times!

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Independence Day address of His Excellency, President Elpidio Quirino, delivered at the Luneta on July 4, 1948. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44(7) , 2319-2322.