Extemporaneous address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the Inauguration of the Cebu Portland Cement Building

[Delivered at Dasmariñas, Manila, May 14, 1953]

Mr. Secretary, Ladies and Gentlemen, and Friends:

This afternoon, I am going to discharge another pleasant duty, that is, becoming a sponsor, not in a baptismal party, or a wedding party, or any other social engagement where perhaps I may be able to derive more votes on the occasion. To be the sponsor in the establishment of a building, or an industry, or any productive enterprise, is one of the things that have occupied me during the last two or three years.

Some of these early mornings, when I cross the streets of the City of Manila and see buildings defying the sky, beginning from the Legislative building, the Finance building, the Agriculture building, the Normal School building, the Normal School dormitory, the University of the Philippines group of buildings in the center of the City of Manila as well as those in Quezon City, and the scattered new factories that have been established and in which I have been called or invited to be a sponsor, I derive great pleasure in recollecting that if I did not become a sponsor in the construction of these buildings, at least I have directed that some of them be erected, principally the first ones that I have just mentioned.

With P25 million set aside for the construction of the Capitol building in the new Quezon City as the capital of the Philippines, which amount I knew could ont be spent immediately in order to house the offices of the National Government in 1948, and believing that the P25 million might perhaps be better invested by utilizing a great portion of the sum in the construction of important buildings now housing the Legislature, the Normal School, the Department of Agriculture, the Finance building, the University of the Philippines, and about thousands of public school buildings that were destroyed during the war, I authorized the diversion of the P25 million set aside for the construction of the new Capitol building in order to save in huge rents being paid by the National Government to house those offices now occupying these new buildings.

Co-extensive with that official activity of the government, I encouraged public construction of other buildings and homes, with the financialization on the part of the RFC. I am proud to have seen erected in the vicinity of Manila as well as throughout the Philippines other buildings and homes to accelerate the rehabilitation of the houses and residences of our population which were devastated in the last war.

This program of the government plus the aid received from the United States by way of damages because of the destruction during the last war, and which enabled us to construct so many bridges, so many hospitals and roads, portworks, and other permanent improvements, there is now throughout the Philippines a new presentation of the Republic of the Philippines which we never dreamed of even when we were expecting independence to be granted to us shortly before 1945.

The physical feature of the Philippines today as well as the atmosphere of progress and prosperity, plus the feeling of contentment on the part of our people—these are things which to me are not only the fruits of the efforts of our own people with our own funds, as well as with the blessings of the Unseen Hand of the Lord that has shown us the way to rise from our prostration as soon as possible—all these have made the Philippines of today a new country, a new nation with perhaps greater vision and brighter future.

Today, as we inaugurate this building, we become more convinced that perhaps it is better that we construct, many things that can be seen and touched, because the unbelieving population of this country, especially those who systematically ignore the strides we have, taken for political purposes, seem to care more and judge more by what they see and what they feel rather than by the fundamentals we have been able to develop in our mind and soul and in our life as a nation, for the Philippines today is not only materially prosperous but it is politically, morally, and internationally one of those respected in the world today.

It is remarkable, my friends, how we have been able to achieve all these during the short period of seven years. But that only shows the versatile qualities of the Filipino race and our determination to build a country once we have been given the opportunity to do so. This building is one of the evidences of the new age, of the new inspiration, of the newly discovered genius that our country is manifesting today as having been developed by the incentive given to us, that we may guide our own destiny as masters of our own affairs.

This building, therefore, is an example not only of the new urge that possesses the Filipino people, but the vision, the financial insight of those who have seen fit to construct this building. I am told that, besides economizing in monthly rent at the rate of P1,500 a month which this company used to pay before this building was constructed, with the other offices that are being rented to other people whom you may be able to accommodate in this building, you may yet derive another income of P3,000 a month. So you get money in the investment, you economize in rent, and in ten years: you will be able to recuperate all the money invested in the construction of this building.

I, therefore, want to congratulate the vision and the foresight of the board of directors of the corporation for having initiated the construction of this building, and I wish that other corporations of the government, with the new incentive being given and the stimulation being extended by the new Secretary of Economic Coordination, they may yet expand the program of construction with the same benefits that are now shown to be of beneficial results to this corporation.

This building costs P1,200,000. But the economic value, the example set for other corporations that expect to construct their own buildings, it is a better value to the government. I am told that the next building to be inaugurated will be that of the PRISCO. Let me hope that they will achieve the same economy and derive the same income and show greater vision with the honor of the members of the board of directors of that corporation.

Ladies and gentlemen, I congratulate the board of directors of this building for the expansion of their program of establishing other buildings and factories, particularly that in La Union, with the hope that others will eventually be constructed to facilitate the erection of buildings by them by the proper and adequate furnishing of materials by the CEPOC furnishing constructing enterprises, thus increasing, such buildings of this beauty and vision. Thank you very much. (Applause)

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Extemporaneous address of President Quirino at the Inauguration of the Cebu Portland Cement Building. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49(5) , 1789-1792.