Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On the 28th Foundation Day of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines

Fellow Boy Scouts:

On this 28th Foundation Day of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, I share the joy of all members and all our people for an organization that helps us to be true Filipinos, true citizens of the world, and true members of the brotherhood of man.

The times in which we live are pretty difficult. Many of you may be old enough to recall we have just been through a world war. Millions of men were killed. The loss of homes and the means of life, not to speak of goodwill and faith, cannot be measured.

And now if men and the leaders of men do not take care, we may yet see another war. With the dreadful new weapons of war, nobody may live to tell a story. Nobody may survive to carry on with the virtues of loyalty, honesty, helpfulness, loving-kindness—such things which make boy scouts happy and life worth living.

We cannot want that misfortune to happen. No real boy scout can want it to happen. No people on earth can want it to happen.

Our elders today are bending every effort to leave with us a world that is not only safe but strong and free so that we can develop and use our talents for our own happiness and that of others.

In the meantime, we cannot just sit tight. We cannot just stand still. We cannot just wait for things to happen.

We can and must do something. That we are boy scouts is something. That we know boy scouts stand for self-reliance, for community consciousness, for neighborly cooperation is something still. That boy scouts go out of their way to give these civic virtues specific progression in their daily thought and action is of the greatest significance.

Addressing the scout leaders gathered at Malacañan on a previous occasion, I stressed the need of utilizing the hundreds of thousands of boy scouts in the Philippines, the greatest wealth of the nation, for production in their respective capacities in order to help supply the country’s needs in food and agricultural and industrial materials.

But more than anything else, in this stage of world turmoil, we need a more effective, universal, and militant spiritual and moral education on friendship and goodwill, on love for others, on love for and loyalty to country. These positive qualities of character will do more than weapons of war to prevent war and to preserve peace and humanity itself.

All this counts for the building of a better social and world order from which to banish fear and want.

In the period of national peril which our country last survived, the boy scouts contributed from their ranks heroes whose loyalty to their country and their God, and whose discipline and sacrifice for Boy Scout principles and virtues, are today part of an invaluable inheritance essential to the building of that better order.

Selfishness, envy, and hate will destroy that order. Buoyancy and optimism will enhance it. Labor and determination will secure it.

I look upon our boy scouts as a continuing source of the type of manhood our country needs and the free world needs to advance human cooperation and brotherhood.

Those of us now actually shouldering the burden of developing our country and cooperating with the free world would feel helpless and hopeless indeed if we did not realize that such manhood is continually on the make.

To the ranks of our boyhood in the scout movement and to the leaders consecrated to its progress, I therefore say: Let us get on. Let us keep up the great work. Let us dedicate ourselves anew on this Foundation Anniversary. We have good and great traditions. The future for which we build will be better and greater still: We shall, I am confident, never want for encouragement, for support, from our people and government, from peoples and governments elsewhere.

All the past is merely a prelude to the future. Therefore, our nation’s investment, the world’s main investment, must remain in youth. The quality of its preparation will be decisive on the durability of what we build today. On this account, we should be proud to be a part of the boy scout movement and do all we can to nourish its growth.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). President Elpidio Quirino’s address on the 28th Foundation Day of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, Malacañan, October 31, 1951. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(10) , 5072-5073.