Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On Memorial Day

THEY GAVE THEIR LIVES TO LIBERTY 1

FILIPINOS and Americans alike pause once again to pay grateful homage and to assess our obligations to America’s unnumbered heroic dead.

They laid down their lives that the American people might preserve their union and retain their cherished liberty, that the oppressed peoples of other lands and climes might enjoy the same boon of freedom, and that the whole world might live without fear.

I have a vivid picture of America’s noble mission in my own land. In the afternoon as I gaze over the sunset at Manila Bay, I erect in my memory a statue of liberty on the black rock of Corregidor against a background of multicolored haze—of blue, of violet, of vermillion, of crimson, beautifully combined as by a master painter, to constitute a symbolic halo of America’s setting sun on Philippine horizon—a sun that recedes, leaving behind it the glow and the glory of a great libertarian mission.

There are many such sunsets in other lands today. Tomorrow they will increase. For, henceforth, as one roams the seven seas and commutes across four continents, one’s eyes will never fail to observe that there is hardly a corner of this good earth but what has been enriched by good American blood to nourish the great American dream—the promise of the good life for all, born out of a passionate devotion to freedom and sanctified by the sacrifices of those whose bones are honored guests in foreign soil.

The progress of this dream dating back from long before Gettysburg, and coming down to our day through the Spanish-American War and the two World Wars, stirs the imagination. Today, almost every American home from sunny California to cold New England is linked by memorial bonds of common sacrifices extending to the farthest reaches of the Pacific and the Atlantic, to the frozen wastes around the two poles, to Asia, Africa, and Europe. America gave the flower of her manhood and the cream of her substance in the most prodigal proportion in an adventure without parallel in the history of human effort, not in pursuit of plunder or power but the noble realization and protection of that dream. Their blood and treasure were expended without stint and without measure, without distinction as to land and sky—in the jungles of Bataan and Guadalcanal, on the beaches of Normandy and Carigara and Lingayen, on the burning sands of Africa, the sunny slopes of Italy, and the frozen tundras in perpetual winter. I stood across the ruins of the monastery of Mt. Casino one day, scene of one of the fiercest battles fought in Italy, and was moved by the sight of the huge white cross of the Polish cemetery, at the foot of which I read the following epitaph: “They gave their lives to liberty, their bones to Italy, and their hearts to their fatherland.” In the choice burial grounds of this my sun-kissed land, we see uncountable white crosses for the: Filipino and American dead, for which a similar epitaph can well be dedicated: “For those who gave their lives to the freedom of this country, their bones to enrich the soil they redeemed, and their all for the peace and security of the world.”

Wherever the dream was challenged or desecrated, America sent her youth to bear the brunt of the battle. The Philippines, benefiting from the blessings of that dream, also gave the flower of its youth; bore willingly and gallantly its share of sacrifice.

It takes one’s breath away to view in retrospect the courageous march of these heroes of democracy and justice, “wearing their wounds like stars.” No spot on earth is alien to them and their deeds. They constitute the great American record of faith and freedom that stands incomparable to any in the history of mankind.

And because of this fact, the eyes of the whole world are focused on America today—the eyes of friends, allies, and former foes alike. While there is stupendous gratitude for and admiration of the record, while it has struck great hope and faith among all peoples, the wonder remains as to what extent those who make America today will heed the spirit of her heroic dead and continue the unfinished task of liberty and justice for all mankind. For the task is as obviously unfinished as it is tremendous. And the whole world, in spite or precisely because of the allure of a rising doctrine of violence, looks to America to lead.

America’s heroic dead can have only one charge to the living:

“Take up our quarrel with the foe! To you from failing hands we throw The Torch—be yours to hold it high; If ye break faith with us who die, We shall not sleep. . . .”

That must be the voice not only from the silent poppy fields of France but from Corregidor or Okinawa’s highest hill.

America is still the world’s greatest hope. The sacrifice of her heroic million dead has raised her to that highest distinction and responsibility. Peoples of the world who have benefited from her sacrifice and service or have glimpsed the vision of her glorious heritage, are anxious to see her provide the leadership and assistance to achieve a unity of peace and plenty that alone can guarantee the lasting welfare and happiness of her people and make the ultimate measure of her loyalty to her heroic dead.

This hope will remain as stubborn, compelling, and universal as the memory of America’s noble dead is eternal.

The voice of Franklin Delano Roosevelt now rings more eloquently than ever before from his simple but gentle grave at Hyde Park:

“. . . . . . We cannot and must not build walls around ourselves and hide our heads in the sands; we must go forward with all our strength and stress and strive for international peace.”

In the face of the turmoil still besetting our troubled world, I seem to hear him continue repeating with the poet:

“I am not resigned to the shutting away of loving hearts in the hard ground, So it is, and so it will be, for so it has been, time out of mind: Into the darkness, they go, the wise and the lovely. Crowned With lilies and with laurel they go; but I am not resigned. Down, down, down into the darkness of the grave Gently they go, the beautiful, the tender, the kind; Quietly they go, the intelligent, the witty, the brave. I know. But I do not approve. And I am not resigned..”

Footnote: 1 Memorial Day address, May 30, 1949.

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].