Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the second commencement exercises of the Philippine College of Commerce and Business Administration

[Delivered on July 31, 1949]

DEAR FRIENDS:

I welcome this opportunity to speak to our people through the graduates of the Philippine College of Commerce and Business Administration. The present local atmosphere, the nature of your training, and these fleet moments in our national history require that I speak in a businesslike manner, straight from the shoulder and with utmost clarity. The smooth routine compliments, the usual expressions of acknowledgment and obligation for this opportunity you have extended to me have to be set aside in my pardonable earnestness to spark you on the proper orientation that our country urgently needs at this hour.

Our Republic was born in self-reliance and we are out to build it on solid rock. Our program of action is well defined and concrete. It is based on the philosophy of total production in order to provide our people with a life of substance and security. While our efforts at research to work out the details of the program to fruition continue, we have stopped theorizing. Our goal is definite and we fully realize that its achievement will be long and tedious. But we have properly charted our course and we are on the march.

What we now need is the proper orientation of our people conducive to the execution of the high policies of the State as expressed in our program of economic development and social betterment. The fulfillment of our program does not rest alone on mere continued top-level dis­cussions of policies. Nor is it enough that we set aside millions of pesos, as we have now, to implement our vast task and approach long-range targets. There must be a responsive, practical atmosphere to facilitate the concentration of our people’s minds on our high objectives. Even the poorest seed, if sown in a well-prepared soil with care and attention, will not only germinate but will flourish and bear wholesome fruit. Government agencies, civic organizations, trade and business bodies, live elements all over the country, in the factories as well as in the farms, in the schools, colleges and universities, in centers of population as well as the remotest barrio com­munities, must cooperate. We must all be inspired to the realization of the importance of our nation’s problems and enlist the active interest and participation of all the citizens of the country. All hands must lift the great burden that is the responsibility of this generation.

This institution from which you are graduating, conceived as one of the most constructive enterprises to help build our country on solid foundations, has a distinct role in this unique period of our national development. I say unique because while we are busy constructing within, there are extraneous forces seeking to undermine what is being built, in the false notion that a pattern they regard as exclusively their own is the God-ordained measure of salvation.

At this hour, we need a strong will and an alert mind, vigorous in construction and not merely vociferous in denunciation. Much is expected of this institution to develop the constructive spirit in young minds so that when they go out of these halls, as you go out today, they can justly assume their share of the responsibility. You have the greatest opportunity to help create a pattern of living consistent with pure national character and inspired aims. You are heirs to a precious heroic and liberal tradition. You are equipped to live in an era of rapid change, looked upon by your neighbors for emulation in the development of that pattern, hopeful of release from age-long exploitation, and increasingly sensible of security, freedom and justice.

Yes, you are at the bright hope of a new day, the judgment of whose promise lies in the enhancement of our people’s productive power rather than in destructive endeavors. Our country needs skilled minds and hands to produce. We must not only develop our ingenuity and occupational skills to the fullest extent but a balanced personality. We have learned from the last war the need for increased moral, cultural and economic education—an education that provides for work as well as play, for production as well as for consumption, for creation as well as appropriation. Thus, for our own purposes today, we must work more, produce more, create more. In raising our productivity, we will secure the abundance essential to social contentment, the attainment of freedom and security, and the constructive pursuit of peace.

Enterprise being the hallmark of your Alma Mater, I look to you to exemplify self-reliance in your future activities. God always helps those who do not disdain to help themselves within the sanctions of our free and Christian society. Take courage in advancing your ideas in the building of your country. You may be harassed and embarrassed on your way, for we mortals have the strange virtue of believing that one’s own ideas or ideals alone are exclusively realizable. Be willing to submit yours to scrutiny and competition in the open market for progress. If you do not get the hearing that you think you deserve, or if they are slow of implementation, you must remember that what is being built for permanence takes a good deal of patience, time and .sweat. All good things are hard to achieve. If you must make strictures about the existing things, be sure at least that you are ready with something better and more practical to replace them. Merely to pull things down is not your mission and it may only create a vacuum for possibly greater evils. In any event, you must, have the nobility and humility to acknowledge a good turn, an honest achievement, or an admittedly obvious .success of even your bitterest competitors. This is an invariable mark of a gentleman and constructive, honest citizen. This new era demands a positive and constructive outlook and we must carry on with greater patience, inspired by intellectual honesty in our highest endeavors—the basis of all manner of individual and collective integrity and respect.

Let us drive away from our minds and our hearts any feeling of insincerity in our dealings with our fellow men, principally in our approach of the serious problems of State. Intrigues and ill-wishings are the greatest deterrents to our progress and stability at this moment. Envy, mortification, and frustration also constitute public enemies. Many other psychological sins are beclouding our clear sky. But the worst curse is the sacrifice of our national interests for the sake of passing political advantage. God grant that, with the proper indoctrination in our constructive endeavors and the assiduous training of our soul in the ways of morality and justice, we may be saved from destruction! I cannot expect otherwise if we have this appropriate orientation. I have no doubt that the graduates of this institution will survive the supreme test in the individual and collective evaluation of the human and national equation.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Address of President Quirino at the second commencement exercises of the Philippine College of Commerce and Business Administration, July 31, 1949. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45(7) , 2805-2808.