Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On the occasion of the 15th Foundation Day Anniversary celebration of the Far Eastern University

[Delivered at the F.E.U. campus, November 5, 1948]

I am quite impressed and astounded by the growth and development this center of learning has attained during its brief scholastic history. It has so grown as to have attracted students from even beyond our confines. Its success as an institution ranks among the best achievements of our people in the past quarter century. It has established its roots, and is today worthy to take its place among the oldest institutions of learning in the land. Human wisdom has been distilled here and has founded a university that can vie with the older ones in other lands. This is a signal achievement for which the builders of this university should receive our highest commendation on this occasion. And I do it, and I extend it, with reverent respect to its founder—Dr. Nicanor Reyes.

On this fifteenth anniversary of its foundation, it is fitting that its leaders renew their pledge to guide the youth unerringly toward light and truth, toward virtue and wisdom, and for all of us to remember in the light of the new day that a training purely scholastic in nature is worse than useless—that for a university conscious of its responsibility the goal to strive at is brains that will think and brawn that will work.

I am sure that the founders of this great institution are not satisfied that they merely help prepare the youth to make a living and get on in society. For a university deserving of its great name such as this should be concerned not only with making the individual under its roof round out his latent powers and possibilities for himself and that of his country or community alone, but also with furnishing him the proper inspiration to utilize his trained abilities to promote the true intent of enlightenment, which is that of real service to his fellowmen—every man.

There is an old idea that a university is a convenient haven for isolating oneself from the harsh realities of the workaday world, suggestive of the monastic seclusion of a medieval day that assures the amplest leisure for digging deep into the knowledge and wisdom of the ages. The search for truth, it is held, is a most arduous pursuit requiring absolute freedom from distraction, and the university as a continuing repository of culture should provide the surroundings for it. There is no doubt there are some temperaments admirably conditioned for this type of existence. It is not to be questioned that a university, may provide the necessary conveniences. The past was even wont to provide old ministers of state, century-old states­men, with quiet seclusion for meditation and study as their own reward for distinguished public service.

The narrow and exclusive notion of a university occupying a cloistered place in the life of a community has, however, long been discarded. We have long since outgrown also our uncritical worship of erudition for its own sake. Today a university must live up to the exigencies of the present and not merely in loyalty to the past as it has hitherto done from age to age. It has become an institution in which any citizen who has the mind may seek definition and articulation of the common world in terms of the arts and sciences evolving before his eyes as well as of the wisdom of the past. We look to the university as a dynamic institution to broaden our understanding of human knowledge and of every part of that world, so that we may pass freely back and forth between the factual and the ideal, and partake of the ennobling adventure between active participation in life and thoughtful withdrawal from it as suits the exigency of the moment.

A university is to be encouraged for delving deep and wide in the vast field of human knowledge and. wisdom if it is to expand the outlook of the students, if it is to extend their vision and raise their aspiration to increasingly higher levels of social cooperation and achievement. But in doing this it should clear through the worn-out and antiquated intellectual rut which has clogged men’s minds from century to century since the inception of authoritarian doctrines and philosophies.

We must emancipate ourselves from over-indulgence in classical or philosophical abstractions, which has so long passed for wisdom of the ancients who discoursed on half-truths for lack of better knowledge of the world then, in order that we can give free range to our intellects in the face of newly acquired knowledge and wisdom from modern scientific discoveries and researches in the new realm of thought and science. This is suggested not as an escape from classical boredom, but as an indication of the high road of real advancement which the modern universities must blaze if they must retain their title to intellectual leadership.

A university does not stop at simply making knowledge and wisdom available to all. It should train the students to make appropriate use of them and to attain the biggest possible measure of usefulness in the everyday life of their community and country. It gives students the perspective which comprehends the rewards of a gainful occupation and the moral and spiritual satisfactions that come of social services and of time well-spent.

The day is past when we can conveniently live to ourselves and ignore the condition of peoples in other parts of the world. As individuals and as a people, we have our own problems. But our attention should not be limited to these problems; it should also seek to discover the relation of these problems to those of other individuals and. other peoples. Our personal and community welfare is intimately bound up with the welfare of others, not only within but also outside our homes and our national frontiers. It is definite that no man can any longer encrustate himself in the restricted shell of his personal and national interests and live as he ought or wishes to live. Other peoples look to us, too, and watch us. They have an interest in our problems, in the solution of these problems. At least we are submitted to that scrutiny in this part of the world. They, too, realize that in the solution of our problems, they may find the key to their own, and the key to the problems that we have in common with the world. They look to us for the accomplishment of certain tasks which make up our common life in the changing world in which we live.

As we prepare ourselves for our own tasks, we must accordingly let others examine our efforts and our endeavors. And in doing the same for others we must start familiarizing ourselves not only with our country and its problems, but also with all of the outside world. We must explore and discover the way to accomplish the urgent tasks that people are facing everywhere. This is a service which this university and any other university of the land can well render.

For nowadays, it is also the function of a university to prepare the youth to become citizens not only of their country but of a new world. We have our responsibilities and opportunities as citizens of a young Republic. We must make that Republic succeed. It is our responsibility to this young generation and we have accepted that challenge two years ago. But we must also provide for the proper execution of our role as a component part of a bigger society of republics. Our universities are expected to provide us the leadership for that goal. We are called upon no less to participate freely in the making of a new world order, and our universities should show our citizens how to become internationally adaptable, internationally useful, internationally creative. This we must consider as our duty in the growing society of free peoples; and our universities must prepare our youth to, live up to the duty to contribute generously to world peace and advancement. This is not a mere ambition. This is hot an endeavor beyond our power. We are actually being called upon to contribute our share not only in our immediate neighborhood but also in international conferences and deliberative assemblies being held throughout the world, engaged in pooling mankind’s knowledge and resources for the peaceful and stable life of all peoples.

In spite of national and racial differences and difficulties arising from centuries of division and isolation, the peoples of the world are moving towards eventual unification as the only alternative to human survival. We, too, here in our little world, must move forward, as we are moving forward, on the basis of mutual apportionment of the pertinent virtues of rival political, economic and ideological systems in every land.

Heretofore, smaller nations have been regarded as mere pawns in the international chess game. Certainly, we— as intelligent, strong, energetic Filipino race—refuse to be regarded any longer as such. We must now assert our own personality, no matter how insignificant it may be, in order that the destiny that God has assigned to all nations, great and small, may be fulfilled. After all, the great bulk of the smaller nations of the world constitute a respectable portion of God’s creation. On this side of the globe alone, for instance,—this we call the Eastern World—we represent no less than a billion people whose potentialities are scarcely developed, and are at least not as exhausted as those of the old world or the new world. We are eager to assert our collective individuality, to shoulder our share of responsibility, and to receive the rewards which may come our way.

When I speak of this side of the world, I also mean the other portions of the world where similar smaller nations exist and are being considered also as mere pawns, or satellites of bigger powers. They should join the crusade for self-assertion for the sake of peace and self-preservation. They and we and all the rest of our kind may be unwillingly dragged into any international conflict at any time.

If such an event should come, we should not merely pray that we may be spared the worst. It is our duty to strengthen ourselves. We can minimize the severity of our lot by doing so. Perhaps, by strengthening ourselves, we may yet convert danger into opportunity, for who knows but that the new international conflict, if it comes, may after all open for the weaker the great opportunity of survival and salvation. If we are not going to be subjected to the cruelties and brutalities of war, and if our already scarred lands are not converted once more into battle ground, and I hope it will not be when an international conflict arises, we may help alleviate the sufferings of the warring nations by providing them what produce we can raise—and raise in plenty for their needs. We can help build a new world order by rearing up with our con­structive genius a citizenry more alert to and more understanding of the world problems which plunge nations into armed conflicts. We can help create a people more responsive to the demands of others in material and moral assistance conducive to the mutual protection and security.

While the bigger nations fight for mutual destruction, my friends, we the smaller ones should strive for construction, for reconstruction, for permanent strength and endurance. Here lies our salvation, maybe also a well-earned glorification.

A university rich in perspective and keenly sensitive to mankind’s integration must, therefore, realize its responsibility to prepare our youth for the new challenge. Any effort short of this objective robs our youth of the inspiration of those values that entitle a man to his dignity and mankind to its expanding freedom. Any performance short of this objective reduces a university to futility and simple deception. According as a university succeeds in the making of a whole man and not merely a creature of his own selfish needs, it advances the day of mankind’s unification and its entrance upon its full inheritance.

My friends, the vision is there. The challenge is there. We have the youth, we have the manhood, we have the institutions to produce the necessary leadership. I am confident that, given the faith, the courage, the dedication, the determination and the will to progress and to prosper, we shall yet emerge strong and powerful from the travails that today are testing our country and the world.

This University can advance no greater cause. The Filipino youth can pledge himself to no worthier consecration. The determined peoples of the world can have no nobler reason for being. Forgetting the fears and the mistakes that are behind, we shall, in concert with like-minded nations, press on to that high goal which is mankind’s insuperable dream and destiny.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Address of His Excellency, President Elpidio Quirino, on the occasion of the 15th Foundation Day Anniversary celebration of the Far Eastern University, held at the F.E.U. campus, at 5 p.m., November 5, 1948. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44(11) , 4244-4248.