Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before the ROTC review and rally in his honor

[Delivered at the Luneta, Manila, November 6, 1949]

Members of the Reserve Officers Training Corps of the Philippines, Fellow Citizens, Dear Friends:

I wish to thank you for the magnificent review which I have just had the pride and pleasure to witness. Seeing you march by in orderly precision on these historic grounds has given my heart a tremendous lift beyond calculation. The familiar words of our greatest national hero come to mind to reaffirm my faith in the bright destiny of our common land. I stand before the cream of our educated, disciplined Filipino youth, the perfect flower of our country’s manhood, and feel immeasurably rewarded by the vision and hope which your attendance here has renewed in me. Ours is a nation blessed indeed with ample resources and the richest, the most valuable by far of them all, stand here today—our country’s youth.

The ROTC itself is not all future. It has a glorious record to remember and go by. Its members, at the outbreak of the Pacific War, found in their status and training the solid basis of an inner irresistible compulsion to service and sacrifice. As individuals and as a group, they rushed to the colors in defense of our country and vindicated the validity of their background. In the dark years of the Occupation, they reinforced the core and backbone of our national resistance. Our soil is richer today because of many an ROTC young man who has given his life and found a final resting place that bears no humble memorial to his service.

I have not the least doubt that you of today are capable of repeating, and even improving on, past performances. I am not saying this in anticipation of a greater holocaust than the last one inflicted upon our country and upon the world. I am saying it because of the conviction that you of today can be just as courageous, just as ready to make the supreme sacrifice, just as capable of vision and faith in the advancement of an order of freedom and justice for yourselves and your posterity.

The fact that there is still fear today in many places, that enslavement still exists for many people, that injustice is still the fare of certain communities, may and can make many a serious young mind cynical and suspicious of the future. The same fact does make many a sober old heart yearn with nostalgia for the so-called “good old days” of feudal paternalism and plain free-booting. The terror engendered by loose talk about the dire potentialities of atomic fission and the possible total liquidation of the race of men is quite real, and to talk of a brave new world where liberty and justice reign would, to some people, be to laugh.

And yet I must tell you in all earnestness that you of today in this vast audience are privileged and to be congratulated because you are in attendance at the birth of a new order destined to bear the marks of man’s fondest dream. There is a false assumption that the world is breaking up into two or three more worlds, and therefore ours is an age of decay and dissolution, of despair and defeat. Sometimes, to judge from our own local experience today, hearing so many loud voices of dissidence and disruption, we may be even tempted to doubt the survival of our Republic. We would make a grave mistake to allow ourselves to be thus affected. We are, definitely, in an age of creation—nationally and internationally. The truculence, the dissidence, the violence indicate merely that we are in the beginnings of a wholly new and prodigious task towards unity and peace for all mankind, starting here at home. The pains, the anxiety and the agony possibly still awaiting us are not those of a dying world but of a new one that is being delivered. It is the mark of leadership in our age to reduce and mitigate the pains.

I am confident that the country’s youth here represented is capable of appreciating this great privilege and responsibility. Our country’s resources are being expended for your education and discipline so that you can measure up to this privilege and responsibility. Your training as members of the Reserve Officers Training Corps should sharpen your capacity to distinguish between reason, responsibility and cooperation on one hand, and the anarchic individualism and license mistaken for democratic liberty, on the others It should heighten your feeling of the connective tissue that binds society, the sense of community and common welfare without which organized, civilized living is empty, let alone, impossible.

Your discipline should quicken your sensibilities to infections of all kinds, the most subtle and dangerous of which is the emotional variety spread by neurotic individuals to find scope and sanction for their own unhealthy aberrations. There are many today of such men failing to make adjustment to the moral and spiritual exigencies of an advancing order of decency and freedom. They make blanket accusations, based not on specific evidence of wrongdoing but on race, religion, party or social organization. They recklessly besmirch the innocent, mistake opinion for anti-social behaviour, seeking to increase their importance by their accusations against others. They use their victims as targets for popular resentment to divert attention either from genuinely dangerous persons or from necessary constructive activity. Your education and training should enable you to appreciate and apply the proper measure of cure for such infection—which is the creative attitude and the creation of the chance to express energy in constructive projects.

As members of the ROTC, you are our country’s basic investment in preparedness for the contingencies that attend our national life and international relations. We cannot be so naive as to depend on absolute pacifism. Neither can we afford morally or materially to believe in absolute militarism. We must reckon with realities and seek to discover how to organize our country, and cooperate with the world, for peace, always working towards that end, without assuming that before the goal is attained any nation can be exempt from war. As the basis of our citizen army, it is in you to obviate the necessity of a purely paternalistic policy on the part of our government which can revert our people to infantile dependence or drive them to savage violence. The high level of your intelligence and training should make for widening self-dependence and orderly cooperation conducive to continuous nation-building and the development of a free and peaceful world.

Our people are proud, as I am proud, to look to the ROTC for the conservation of our tradition of heroic sacrifice. Our country’s great past justifies it. The ROTC record in the war and the resistance sustains this expectation. The tremendous efforts we are making today to be able to pass on to you a task no one can hope to complete by one generation are inspired by this expectation.

Our people look to you for inspiration and example in the democratic but orderly and constructive conduct of our individual, community and national life. This means the rational acceptance and observance of the sanctions of our Christian culture and democratic heritage. This equally means resistance to the tenets and trends alien to them, as well as their rejection. We can show that a democratic community has a discipline that allows fulfillment of the best, creative impulses of its individual members and the preservation of their human worth and dignity.

Finally, because your training and discipline stem from the sanctions of our liberal traditions, you constitute our country’s investment in the advancement of unselfish cooperation in a just and free world order. Because you know what principles you are committed to practice and defend, the lessons of human strivings for the attainment of freedom and plenty and peace will not be lost upon you. On the contrary they will continue to move you, and you will not rest from helping and cooperating with like-minded individuals and nations to push and extend the road nearer to their realization. You will observe the participation of our country in the deliberations and transactions of the United Nations with active and intelligent interest; and within the radius of your action and influence you can spread the intelligence that builds goodwill, understanding, cooperation and peace.

I salute you all. Upon you, our greatest prophets and leaders have looked to perfect their dream of our country’s destiny. For you, they have struggled and sacrificed. Of you, they expect that you will strive no less, because you are capable no less, that the heritage you have received and enjoy may be passed on richer to the next generation.

On this memorable day, the first of its kind in our training for national preparedness, I cannot but feel secure, by reason of your splendid performance, that at long last the country has been able to organize an intelligent, patriotic and dependable nucleus of a citizen army that will effectively depend and protect and preserve for our posterity the liberty and freedom that we won barely four years ago. Considering the threats to our democratic political institutions from within as well as from without, I cannot but feel reassured that with your discipline and loyalty you who grow in number throughout the length and breadth of this our beloved land, our Republic will be secure.

For, in truth, we look upon this generation, your generation, as the repository of that potential strength and the vision and courage necessary for the preservation of our sovereignty and traditions as a nation. On your shoulder, therefore, rests the future of your country’s destiny.

Under the shadow of that great, noble martyr and hero who at this moment undountedly contemplates with pride this patriotic congregation, I want to renew with him my faith in your capacity, and my confidence in your determination, to hold high and honor with your achievements those ideals for which early in the morning of December 30, 1896 he gave up his life that this nation might be born. Your duty now is for you to make it continue to live. For the liberty and freedom which we have sacrificed for centuries and centuries to achieve was not meant for you alone but for the succeeding generations to enjoy. We who have founded this Republic will not sleep in our tomb when we die, if we learn that you have failed us. God grant that you do not. I pray that you will not.

The mettle of our race has been severely tested during our recent vicissitudes. It will again survive that test should future events compel us to submit to another test. The Republic lives with you. It shall live after you.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Address of President Quirino before the ROTC review and rally in his honor. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45(11) , 4842-4846.