Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the Commencement Exercises of the Far Eastern University

[Delivered on April 15, 1950]

Mr. President, Members of the Board of Trustees, of the Faculty and of the Student Body:

I am deeply grateful for this opportunity to express a few thoughts to the faculty and student body of this great institution during your commencement exercises. I know of no occasion more appropriate than this gathering of earnest and thoughtful young men and women where I can speak frankly and realistically of the actual conditions that surround our world today and demand our sober appraisal.

I address myself specially to you, my friends, who belong to a postwar generation. As such, I would suppose you to be remarkably free of certain popular pre-war illusions. The searing events of the past decade have burnt away the three-fold veil from before our eyes: the illusion of automatic plenty, the illusion of invincible freedom, and the illusion of eventual permanent peace.

Today we know that the values which we have been prone to take for granted are no longer ours for the asking. We know that we must labor and fight for each and every one of them, and that once achieved, we shall be able to keep them only by constant and positive effort.

In a more fortunate era, it was not always so. We took for granted the wealth of our land and the fruitfulness of our economy. Hard times never imposed upon us the severe hardships which they brought in countries with a less resilient economy. An easy-going nature fitted us perfectly for a life of comparative ease, and our faith in the inevitable return of plenty was never for long disappointed.

Whenever our struggle for liberty suffered reverses or seemed completely lost, we sought refuge in the conviction that justice and righteousness would emerge victorious in the end, and freedom would be ours. We had a mystical belief that good would triumph over evil as surely as day follows night. Therefore, there was no reason to be alarmed over the future of liberty. Liberty would win out in the end.

Our attitude towards local disorders was that, like tropical storms, they would do some damage and then pass. They were to be endured as recurrent infirmities of the body politic which medication of one kind or another would soothe if not cure. Our attitude towards war itself differed from this only in degree. War was a more terrible calamity to endure, but the eventual and ultimate triumph of peace was foreordained in our thinking.

These were the illusions of a more comfortable era. Insofar as they were born of an optimistic faith in the infinite capabilities of human nature, they may have served a useful purpose. But in most of our people, they bred complacency and resignation. They developed intellectual apathy instead of alertness, moral languor instead of assertiveness. The philosophy of God’s in His heaven, all’s right with the world,” which suited the Oriental temperament, was embraced with uncritical enthusiasm.

Today, that “best of all possible worlds,” wherein dwelt a previous generation comforted by its illusions, has been rudely shattered. We live in a very real world with no guarantees of any kind except those that accrue to every man or every nation as reward for effort actually expended and for work actually done. It is a world which has made it plain to all that it owes no one a living, that freedom is not necessarily invincible, that progress is not inevitable, that peace is not to be had by waiting that human survival may not be left to accident or chance.

I should perhaps not speak to you in such blunt and uninspiring terms on your commencement day. But if commencement means what it should, then it is certainly better, on this day of your coming out into the workaday world, that you know what kind of a world you are getting into, the better to meet its exactions and impositions, Forewarned is forearmed.

There is another reason why you must discard the rose-tinted glasses even as you revel in the joy of your graduation. The margin of personal success and national safety has become dangerously narrow. There is no time to be lost in wishful thinking. There is only time enough to recognize that this narrow margin exists and to work within its limits until they can be pushed outward by constant personal effort and national endeavor.

I have laid stress on personal effort because it is natural for those who, like the great majority of you, are young or working students, to measure achievement in terms of personal success. It is equally natural that they should measure success in terms of securing a job, making a living, and getting on in the world. It has always been thus and it is still so today. The only difference—and it is a very important difference—is that the world has be­come less hospitable to struggling and ambitious youth than it used to be.

Throughout the world as a whole, this has been clue to a variety of causes including over-population, diminishing resources, the increasingly acute competition among indi­viduals for a living, social insecurity, political instability, armed disturbance, the disruption of trade, the severe eco­nomic dislocation brought on by the last war, and the fear of a new war which has hampered the normal pursuits of the people and imposed upon them the crushing burden of armaments.  In our country, all these unfavorable conditions exist in a measure with the exception of the first two. It is of importance to note that our country is exempt precisely from those conditions which are more or less of a permanent character and are therefore difficult to remedy. We have abundant resources and living space enough to absorb the pressure of an increasing population in any foreseeable future. On the other hand, we share with the rest of the world the temporarily political and economic conditions arising from the virtual anarchy of the postwar period and the haunting fear of a far more terrible war than the last.

This is the kind of world which you are about to enter. There are many things wrong with it, and it is definitely not the best of all possible worlds.  But it is the only world we have, and we must put up with it until we can make it better.

Yet, even in this kind of world, we must consider our country and ourselves’ as rather more fortunate than many others. If there is want and privation among us, it is not the dreary, oppressive, soul-twisting sort that you find in the exhausted and over-populated lands. We have fertile land for all who will apply themselves to this primary source of the national wealth. We shall soon produce food staples sufficient for our needs, and our principal export commodities are approaching normal production. We have the possibilities of a modest industrial development that will create jobs for our people and provide us with a substantial portion of our national requirements in manufactured goods. Our financial reserves are increasing again, thanks to the controls that have been imposed and are still in operation.

What I am trying to show is that the ills which beset our particular corner of the world are susceptible of solution by peaceful and orderly efforts aided at home by civil obedience and outside by men of good will. The problems of disrupted trade, economic dislocation, and fear of a new war can be solved only by methods of international cooperation. By direct government-to-government action or through the efforts of the United Nations and its various agencies these problems are being studied and remedies proposed. That our Government is taking active part in this extremely important undertaking is well known to you. But this policy can be successfully prosecuted only with the enlightened encouragement and effective support of our people.

The problems of social insecurity, political instability, and armed disturbance are not peculiar to our country. But they are the sort of problems that will be solved only by our own efforts, by all of us working together as a team, by the people supporting the Government earnestly and faithfully in its endeavors to promote the general welfare. For, in a democracy, the people and the Government are one, and it is a mistake for the citizens to stand apart from the Government as if it were an entity distinct and separate from themselves.

From the forum of this great University, I make this appeal to reason and common sense. For it is appropriate that in this temple of learning we should stifle the strident voice of passion and employ only the measured accents of intelligence and truth. I ask you to look at the facts objectively and dispassionately in order that you may properly discern the good and the evil, and thus bring truth into better focus for the benefit of the unenlightened.

Let us consider some of the evils which we are uprooting now, like nepotism and bribery, graft and corruption. We must be honest with ourselves and admit that these are symptoms of a moral weakness that has long remained uncorrected. They are our heritage from pre-existing social systems and may not be imputed to ‘any single generation, much less to any particular government administration. God knows that I, for one, have been doing my best to rid this Government of these evils, sacrificing friends and supporters to perform my sworn duty as head of this nation. But we must realize that these evils cannot be eradicated overnight, however hard we try. Only by constant vigilance and the systematic reconstruction of the national character, the fundamental renovation of the national soul, and the inculcation of a high sense of loyalty to public trust in men elected or appointed to public office, can we hope to eliminate eventually this scourge which afflicts us. The redemption of the race from this burden of sin can be more definitely accomplished by and through the younger generation by itself accepting its part of the task as we, the older, do our own. I therefore enjoin them to pick up this challenge right now. They must refuse from the beginning to associate with people of questionable character for in the long run and in the eyes of God and man it is people of unimpeachable character that achieve real success in this world.

Another instance is the exercise of civil liberties. Ours is a free country and the civil liberties guaranteed by our Constitution are in full force. There shall be no undue impairment of these freedoms so long as I am President. One of the greatest of these freedoms is the right of free speech, and its corollary, the right to criticize the Government.

But the exercise of this right entails certain obligations. Whoever wields the weapon of criticism has the obligation to do so in good faith, to know all the facts and to give them without malice and without prejudice, and above all, without sacrificing the very name, dignity and prestige of the nation and our people.

Criticism is one of the supreme prerogatives of the citizens of a democracy. But criticism must begin with self-criticism, and in a democracy it is best and most effective when it assumes this character. By this I mean that the critic must come forward with clean hands. He must start from the premise that as a loyal citizen he is himself directly involved in the object of his criticism, that he accepts his role as a participant and not as mere spectator of the drama of our national life, that he is willing to assume his share of the responsibility’ for the evil as well as the good that is to be found therein. Only by showing such an attitude is the critic morally justified in exercising this fundamental right and entitled to be heard by all men of good will. Otherwise, criticism becomes irresponsible fault-finding, an appeal to passion, and an incitement to hysteria.

I must ask you especially to beware of the embittered and disillusioned who like to sulk in the Olympian heights and would not see anything but evil in others or speak except in a voice of dire prophecy and acidulous condemnation.

Whenever evil and misfortune befall our nation, they are content to come out and say: “I told you so!” They seem to be gratified when their gloomy predictions come true. They seem to derive satisfaction from the unhappiness for our people. They will point the finger of scorn at the Government, but will not lift a finger to assuage the misfortune or remedy the evil, not even if their own towns and homes are being burned and sacked and their innocent brethren killed before their very eyes. They are not unlike rocks that have fallen from the mountain-side to the river-bed where they obstruct the flow of the current and gather sediment and dirt, or the water-lilies that grow and flourish in the placid waters but at the same time clog the stream of our national life.

I challenge these men to come forward and, with all sincerity and determination, according to their repeated professions of love of country and readiness to defend, protect and promote our people’s welfare, offer their shoulders to the national wheel and thus help strengthen, with their avowed intellectual and moral vigor, their own nation which they claim is weakening. Our people have a right to expect that they be ready to assume their patriotic role in accordance with their avowals. This is the best test of their real love of country and their fellowmen, tens of thousands of whom are now sufferring because of the apparent withholding of the former’s cooperation in the establishment of domestic tranquility so necessary to our national security.

My friends: I have spoken to you with candor. I call upon the sons and daughters of this University, as I call upon all the elements of the nations, to lend their talent and their genius to the great task of building up this nation. No group of men considers itself adequate to undertake this tremendous task alone nor to have the monopoly of clearness of vision and patriotism.

Our task is in progress, so it is not as if you will start from scratch. Behind you lie many historic milestones marking the objectives our people have already achieved: nationalism, self-government and democracy, freedom and independence, international prestige and personality. But before us lie other goals: economic sufficiency and development, domestic tranquility, and national security.

I summon you to the unfinished task of making this Republic the happy home of a loyal and contented people. We need your strength and your vision to carry on this work. After all, this edifice which is rising will be your dwelling place and your children’s long after we are gone. We who are older are building for tomorrow, and tomorrow is yours.

The young have vision and the old have dreams. It will be a noble mansion that shall rise on the blueprint of your vision and our dream. But between the laying of the cornerstone and the finished structure lie many years of unremitting labor—the piling of stone on stone—until the building is completed.

Give us of the abundance of your energy, of the quickness of your intelligence, of the purity of your moral sense, and of the freshness of your vision, that this task may be done in the spirit that has made our race endure through the centuries, rising by painful degrees from subjection to freedom and dignified nationhood.

And may I repeat what I said on my inauguration: “Help me always to do the right thing. Help me build for our people a new reputation for honesty and fair dealing. Help me establish a new integrity in our thinking, in our words, in our deeds. Let us be men, as the best of our breed have tried to be. Let us be true to ourselves so that we cannot be false to any man or any people. Then we can know the right thing and I, as your servant, can do the right thing for all the world to judge.”

In return I renew my pledge to consecrate the rest of my life to your welfare and happiness and that of our people.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Address of His Excellency, President Elpidio Quirino, at the Commencement Exercises of the Far Eastern University, Manila, on April 15, 1950 . Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46(4) , 1507-1512.