Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the 29th Foundation Day of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines

[Released on October 31, 1952]

Fellow Scouters and Boy Scouts of the Philippines:

I look upon this occasion as a moment of renewal and dedication.

I do not think I could for any length of time afford to lose contact physically and. spiritually with the youth of this country.

To be with you, talking with you and to you, mutually sharing our vision of our country’s well-being and future, is to remain in full vigor of mind and spirit. It is to remain ever at the source spring of inspiration and to secure a continuing replenishment of strength needed so urgently in the important task of nation-building which faces us all today.

That is how important I consider this opportunity, on the 29th anniversary of Foundation Day, to address you, along with your leaders, your parents, your friends, your fellow citizens.

As I looked pensive over the Malacañan compound from the porch the other day, I noticed the overcrowding growth of shrubbery desultorily reaching under the old big trees that are giving shade and pleasant cool atmosphere in the Palace grounds. I went down for a stroll in the garden and I found real inspiration in the observation that the old trees and the young trees complemented each other, the former seemingly affording guidance and protection to the tender growth and the latter providing the promise of exhuberant succession. All I had to do was to issue instructions to pull out here and there weeds and unnecessary shrubbery that robbed the beauty of that composite harmony.

To me, this is the identical relationship between the old scouters and the boy scouts. If Judge Camus were with us today, if Col. Stevenot were in our midst at this moment—as both of them in spirit must be—they would, I am sure, share this feeling. For this is the feeling that was their basic inspiration; this was the source of the compelling drive behind their lifetime consecration to boy scouting in this country; this was the origin of the faith that became their consuming passion to give all Philippine boyhood the chance to develop their potentialities for constructive ends, for community service, for unselfish consecration to the national welfare, to the advancement of goodwill and cooperation among nations of all races and creeds.

I have, at every available opportunity, been stressing what is the prime need of our country and of a world desiring to remain free, peaceful, and happy; and that is the constant cultivation of all those virtues that make the exemplary Boy Scout: loyalty, honesty, helpfulness, loving kindness. Boy scout or no boy scout, everybody, all of us, young and old, should be repeating these words inwardly every day of the year and in every moment of our lives as the guiding thoughts in our daily acts.

People hardened to the hate, cruelty, and antagonism of this world may believe that the Boy Scout conception of the good life is too good to become true, too good to become practical in our work-a-day world.

I do not share, as you cannot share, this distrust of the Boy Scout ideal. Because I know, as you know, that you strive every day to give it vigorous exercise. Because I know, as you know, that the Boy Scout movement in this country and the Boy Scout movement in the whole world, have built a tradition of heroism and sacrifice and service that has proved equal to the hardest and most difficult crisis, national and international.

The last world war is just seven years away in our memory. We need not recount at this hour the deeds of Filipino heroes whose name is Legion and whose moral and spiritual roots can be traced to their precious years of apprenticeship under Boy Scout idealism and practice. Those heroes are now an indestructible part of our glorious heritage.

To remember their example is to affirm our indestructible faith in the power and possibilities of mere mortal clay. It is to present irrefutable proof that we can suffer anything, do anything, survive anything if we recognize the qualities that Boy Scouts cherish to make true in their lives and if we honestly back that faith with conscientious action.

The Boy Scout movement is one of the most important things that have happened to us as a people and nation. It has given a lasting shine to the words honor, duty, service, sacrifice. It has discovered to us that we are capable of all those things and more. It has given us assurance that in the building of our country today, we have the material we need out of which to fashion the durable foundations and framework and body of a Republic worthy of the loyalty of all Filipinos and the respect of all the free world.

In truth, if we sum up all our desires and longings as a nation in order to establish a growing and lasting foundation of our new Republic, we cannot escape the conclusion that we need a new type of generation more responsive to the spirit of the new age and epoch—cheerfully constructive, spiritually solid, and, in mind and soul, lover of peace and universal concord. That is what is expected of this legion of boy scouts increasingly enriching our life as a people.

And so, on this Foundation Day, let it be our solemn prayer that God will continue to provide us with a steady supply of boy scouts who constitute our best material for free men, constructive men, loving men, compassionate men, cooperative men—men that easily stand out as the molaves of our race and constitute its lasting benediction on their native land and the community of free peoples of which it is a proud, peaceful, and prosperous member.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1952). The President’s address on the 29th Foundation Day of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, October 31, 1952. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 48(10) , 4328-4330.