Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On the launching of the National Food Production Campaign

[Broadcast over a national radio hook-up by remote control from Malacañan Palace, October 1, 1948]

FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:

I wish to preface this appeal to the people of this land to join the food production campaign with a plain statement of a simple fact: there is no food shortage in the Philippines today. We have accumulated enough imported food supplies to supplement our local food stocks and answer our domestic needs. Except rice, no food is being rationed here. Our food supply for oar immediate requirements is sufficient.

But we have grave and urgent reasons to prepare for any eventuality of food scarcity. The recent typhoons have destroyed many of the current food crops, reducing our previous estimates of harvest in prospect. Although thousands of hectares of rice land in Central Luzon, specially in Nueva Ecija, which have not been planted during the last two or three years now promise a rice bumper crop, the recent renewal of violence in the area may reduce productivity in certain parts, the results of which we are bound to feel sometime. The present distribution of world food supply, plentiful in the aggregate, is being-restricted because of the confusion in some countries due to domestic tensions or the grave fear of a possible world war; they are not being too free or cannot be free in releasing their surplus stocks; they have their needs to think of or they do not have the means to facilitate shipment to other countries.

We have to make preparations now to insure a future stable food supply in the same manner that a man digs a well before he experiences thirst. We should not wait to become hungry before we dig and plant and produce our nourishment. A hungry individual can not properly and efficiently work.

I therefore call upon every citizen to do his share to produce. Every bit of available land must be cultivated; every backyard planted to corn, camotes, cabbages, pechay and other vegetables. I and the members of my cabinet will start with vegetable patches of all varieties at the Malacañan Park tomorrow. This is the best season of the year most favorable to planting. Time should be spared also to raise chickens, hogs, and other animals. We do not wish for any war but we must be prepared if it should come. We must utilize all the space and all the resources that we have to increase our food supply.

During the occupation we planted a lot and survived. The produce was a great help to our bodies, but our determined spirit did even more to our morale in those difficult times.

I have instructed the Bureau of Plant Industry to help the people secure all the seedlings they need. Every other government agency in a position to assist the people in the way of material, method and machinery is likewise ready to cooperate.

In order to solve our perennial rice problem, I have taken steps to achieve a long range objective of stabilizing our rice supply. While we are waiting for a definite and positive program from the Rice Commission which has been empowered to study the question and submit a concrete program, we must do something now. The present situation requires that we not only prepare for the remote future; we must do something right now while our long-range program take its time to mature for fulfillment.

We live in a really trying period in our history. It is in our hands to make something of our present opportunity to build in this part of the world a nation of progressive, self-sufficient, self-reliant and contented citizens. This we have to prove today by our capacity to help ourselves and to anticipate future exigencies. Our survival and our future progress depend on how adequately we feed ourselves and how well we are seasoned morally to cope with immediate as well as distant contingencies.

The broad lesson of our food production campaign is that we have the chance to show our appreciation of the value of foresight. We must have foresight or we perish. The measure of success that we achieve in our food production campaign will indicate that we are prepared not only to deal with the present but to make the future and meet its opportunities.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Address of President Elpidio Quirino launching the National Food Production Campaign, over a national radio hook-up by remote control from Malacañan Palace, at 7 p.m., October 1, 1948. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44(10) , 3758-3759.