Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On Labor Day

[ Delivered on May 1, 1950 ]

I welcome this opportunity to greet you on this day which is sacred to the workingmen of this country and throughout the world.

I rejoice with you on the commemoration of this historic day. It is with pride that I trace my own humble origins to your ranks. I ask you to accept this fact as an assurance of my sincere and abiding interest in your welfare and my desire to keep open to the man who toils all opportunities for honest advancement from the lowest to the highest position in the land.

Our present era is truly the era of the common man. In the civilized world today, no social development is more significant than the organized efforts of the workers assisted by the state to improve their living conditions. Our own Constitution was drafted and promulgated in the light of this universal development, and the principles of social justice enshrined therein provide a healthy norm for the conduct of our economic and social life.

It is by virtue of its social justice provisions that our organic law ranks with the most enlightened constitutions of modern times. It reflects the problems and issues that are of deep concern to modern man—the security of his livelihood, the assurance of proper working conditions and adequate wages with which to support himself and his family under decent standards of life.

As head of this nation, I am pledged to the faithful observance of these principles. As you are aware, my administration, pursuant to these principles and faithful to the program of social justice formulated since the time of President Quezon, has been sympathetic to all reforms tending to improve the lot of the workingman.

This policy will continue. There shall be no turning back on our program of social justice.

I would now like to draw your attention to certain aspects of the labor movement in our country which require your most careful consideration. I believe the time has come when Philippine labor should pause and with full sense of responsibility consider how it would better fit itself into the economic pattern just evolving. It will profit you greatly to know how far labor has progressed, where it stands at the present moment, and how best its gains and advances may be consolidated. I am sure that, after careful self-reexamination, labor will have a better understanding of its role in our program of economic rehabilitation and development.

Many are wont to believe that the lot of the workers can be improved only by increasing wages and salaries and directly providing for the betterment of the working conditions of the masses. Of course, these are direct benefits accruing to the laboring class. But we forget that there are many other ways by which the same result of raising the standard of living of the common man may be achieved. For instance, when we exert efforts to produce more rice, thus reducing the price of this prime commodity, we are, in effect, raising the purchasing power of the laborer to acquire other things to improve his standard of living. Also, when we create more jobs, we increase the field of choice for labor, benefiting both those actually employed and those seeking employment.

Again, when we impose import control on goods that can be produced locally, we encourage local industries and factories which in time will absorb back the labor of those whose services may have been dispensed with by the importing establishments. In the end, therefore, the number of workers who are employed in the new factories more than offsets the loss of jobs in the importing houses. Or, when we encourage the development of a home industry and help develop a market for its products abroad, we are, in fact, widening the opportunity of the workingman to sell his labor at home as well as abroad.

Thus, there are many hidden factors which only indirectly help to improve the lot of the workingman, yet whose far-reaching effects outweigh the direct benefits accruing to the laboring class in the form of increased wages or salaries, or by means of direct legislation to better the conditions of the workers.

Our program of total economic mobilization envisages the strengthening of all these factors in order to make secure not only the livelihood of the workingman but the economic stability of the nation.

There is one incontrovertible fact which must be borne in mind, and this is, that no demand for increase of wages or for the general amelioration of the lot of the workingman can be granted without first affording industry the means to do so. It is true to say that in these times no one with a family to support can live on a daily wage of two pesos. At the same time, it is unjust that an industry should be compelled to expend its capital investment in order to provide the right scale of wages to its workers, irrespective of the probable profits with which such wage demands must be met in the long run.

Industry is the business of both the employer and the laborer. Any over-emphasis on the interests of one at the expense of the other is not conducive to the promotion of industry. There must be a middle ground where both can see eye to eye and where they can come to an understanding as to how best the interests of both and the future of the industry may be promoted.

In this period of industrial readjustment in our country, when we are encouraging foreign and domestic capital to invest towards the promotion of our huge economic development program, it is opportune that we review not only the problems of labor in its efforts to improve its conditions, but also the possibilities of our industrial development. Thus, we can arrive at a reasonable adjustment between the objectives of labor and the needs of industry. On this question no amount of theorizing over the lot of the workingman or over the interests of the capitalist will help us evolve an ideal relationship between these two factors in our country. Much less can we rely for guidance exclusively on the experiences of other countries where conditions are different from those prevailing in our own.

The principal fact which we should consider in our program of economic and industrial development is that we are still building the national economy, that we cannot expect the full measure of benefits from the new industries at the very beginning. Such benefits grow and develop commensurately with the growth and development of the industries concerned. And until these industries are operating at a steady and normal pace, we cannot hope to establish a permanent standard of wages and living conditions for our workers.

The Government is doing everything in its power to make our country attractive to capital investment. Already several industrial enterprises have been established and others are in prospect as a result of this policy of attraction. But labor must do its share in hastening this process of industrial development. Labor must be ready to forego certain demands at the beginning which may scare away capital or render the establishment of new enterprises too hazardous for the investor.

The problems which confront all new enterprises include the raising of sufficient capital, heavy overhead, availability of raw materials, uncertain market possibilities, the hazards of competition, etc. Despite these risks, the investor will be greatly encouraged to go ahead if he is given some assurance by the Government that it is willing to forego burdensome taxes for a period, and if labor for its part will be equally willing to forego for a time any excessive wage demands.

Management, labor, the community, and the Government must consider themselves as partners in the development of new industries. They all have a stake in the success of every industrial enterprise: management in the form of eventual profits, labor in the form of wages and other benefits, the community in the form of goods and services, and the Government in the form of taxes. They are, in a sense, planting a tree together and each will have its rightful share in the season of harvest.

But before the harvest comes, there must be a spirit of mutual sacrifice as well as mutual encouragement in the relations between labor and management. More than a year ago, I created the Labor-Management Advisory Board in order that both elements may jointly study capital and labor problems, adjust their interests, and harness their common efforts to our development program. This body has helped us on several occasions in reconciling the differences between labor and management and in settling many strikes or attempts to strike during the past few months. I hope it will find means of following up its record of usefulness to the country during the forthcoming National Labor-Management conference which is to be held under its auspices.

Ours is a developing country, and a strike is a luxury we can ill afford. What we need is a moratorium on crippling strikes especially in the new industries. Forbearance and self-denial during the initial stage of any enterprise is bound to bring rich dividends for labor in the long run.

The Government has initiated the establishment of new industries, and foreign as well as private capital is being induced and encouraged to do the same.

New industries mean new opportunities for employment. Workers already employed have a responsibility to help assure work for the jobless. This is their duty to their less fortunate brothers. But more than that, it will in the end be to their interest to help reduce the ranks of the unemployed.

The reason for this is obvious. The more unemployed persons there are, the greater the competition among workers themselves, and the greater the tendency for wages to remain stationary or to fall through the operation of the law of demand and supply. Therefore, to reduce if not to “eliminate unemployment altogether is, in effect to strengthen and stabilize the position of workers as a whole by minimizing the factor of competition in the labor market.

The administration’s program of social amelioration will be pursued with vigor. We are attacking our social problems from all directions and with all the forces at our command. But, while the Government is duty bound to undertake such a program, our working citizens have an equal duty to help this program along—positively by rendering optimum service, and negatively by acts of self-restraint in the manner I have already indicated.

What I am proposing is that these measures of self-denial be taken by the free consent of the workers themselves. In return for such self-imposed discipline I give you the assurance on behalf of the administration that your interests and your welfare shall be fully protected in accordance with our constitutional obligations to the workers of our country.

In a free, democratic society, it takes little courage to fight for one’s rights. What requires real courage is to accept the stern discipline of duty and responsibility. The rank-and-file must reject agitation for its own sake and insist upon a restrained and responsible leadership of labor.

Capital, on the other hand, must be guided in its relations with labor by motives more lofty than the selfish pursuit of profit. It must develop a social conscience. In the social order that I have in mind and which is envisaged in our fundamental law, there should be no exploitation of workers. Management must regard labor as its full-fledged associate and partner and not merely as a tool of production.

The demand of the hour is labor-management statesmanship of a high order based on methods of enlightened self-interest and a just social conscience. This is the happy prospect which I hold out to you on the occasion of Labor Day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library