Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Upon his conferment of the degree of Doctors of Laws, honoris causa, by the University

[ Delivered on February 12, 1949 ]

With solemn gratification I rise to bear witness with you to the initial realization of a great vision. President Quezon conceived the idea of a greater university on this spacious ground. He saw that the University of the Philippines must have room to grow. It could not grow bigger where it was first planted. It needed not only more ground but better surroundings. It needed an atmosphere of concentrated but not cloistered intellectuality. It needed an open field far removed from the noisy and sordid distractions of the workaday world—an open field where the imagination and thought could freely take wing, and the spirit could make direct peregrinations to broader realms of truth and wisdom.

Environment influences and determines the thoughts that guide man’s actions. By continued contact with the things that man sees in his daily life he develops his faculties to adapt himself to his surroundings. If the space in which he lives is limited, his development is dwarfed as a tree is dwarfed in a garden pot. Similarly with man’s thoughts and imagination—they are dwarfed by a limited horizon.

Today I read with great joy in the faces of the faculty and students the great psychological influence of the transfer of our University to this bigger, more beautiful site. I sense in your midst the spirit of great expectations, than which there can be no greater encouragement to deeper thinking, to higher aspiration. I see more life, more enthusiasm, more aggressiveness in both professor and student, and feel the irresistible contagion of their influence. Here indeed, taking shape, is the promise of a greater University.

I shall not tax your mind with pure abstractions. As a part of the workaday world, I cannot but bring you the compulsion of our country’s practical problems.

Under the shadow of two world wars and all the bitter lesser conflicts before them, as well as the more precarious ones after them, the common man has emerged as the main object of solicitude and highest hope. This is only to be expected. The Lord Almighty has created so many of his kind. The happiness of the most privileged being can never be secure where the common man fails to find satisfaction for his basic grievance—the lack of the elementary necessities for a life of relative decency, dignity and growing fulfillment.

Heretofore, we have been nurturing the common man’s loyalty to his country and government merely in terms of direct personal, material benefits. He has been pampered into believing that the nation’s sole concern is his material welfare and upliftment. And for as long as these benefits continue to make him contented and happy, his loyalty to his government and country lasts. But the moment he is deprived of them, or suffers even only a diminution of his share of them, he becomes disillusioned and bitter towards his government and country. He has developed no sufficient moral leverage with which to keep his loyalty unshaken during his temporary disadvantage or suffering. His attachment to his country and government lacks the tensile strength of that loyalty which binds a child to his mother. A mother may be incapable of providing her child with all his needs because of limited means or the accidents of human life. But we would not expect that child to disown her, or turn his back to her. No matter what happens, he would continue to love her and serve her as he comes to a man’s estate.

The heart and soul of the common man must be strengthened in his attachment to his land, to his fellow countrymen, to this government, as they constitute the sources of all the benefits that enable him to have and enjoy the good things of life.

Who knows but that this lack of attachment is due to the fact that the government’s solicitude for the common man’s welfare has not gone deep enough in his conscience to impress upon him that it is sincere and earnest. Thus it is necessary to inspire mutual trust as an essential human value in the attainment of this ideal relationship. The government is a corporate body politic, and, because it has life, it must also have a soul. This soul must find flowering in the common man.

I hold that to serve the interest of the common man is to serve the interest of all—including the highest, the richest, the most powerful and the best endowed.

Some alien system would place economic benefits within the reach of all, but it reserves to the state the absolute power to regiment or erase the individual to attain that objective. In the Philippines, in keeping with our democratic tradition, we seek to democratize economic benefits and leave to private individual and collective effort, under state guidance, the development of our economy that will sustain those benefits. We are faced with the choice between physical satisfaction along with moral abdication of the individual human personality on one side, and material betterment rooted in individual and common responsibility, dignity and liberty on the other. Our choice is clear.

Under our system, we hate no class. But we proscribe and prosecute any group, capitalist or labor, that utilizes its power to bully and exploit others. We respect property as the product of honest effort and a means to fuller living, but not as an instrument for oppressing others or for perpetuating that oppression. We want and help people to build their own homes, to own the lot on which to build them and the land they cultivate to sustain their needs. Such people contribute most and best to the success of an economic program of balanced national life.

We have the advantage of a patrimony rich in natural wealth. Our responsibility does not end upon announcing and feeling that we have practically unlimited natural resources. Merely, to speak of them is not to enjoy their use. Merely to invite others to develop them is not to benefit ourselves as a people.    And we should not be too sure that they will forever remain our patrimony, or that their potential value will rise, let alone remain, the same with time.

We must remember the parable of the talents. It teaches us that what we do not use we cannot develop, that what we do not develop we cannot always keep. The world is becoming a closer and more crowded neighborhood. Democracy, or any other system, is no protection to those who sleep, like the Foolish Virgins, on their opportunities or their potentialities.   It is never intended to be.

We must get busy; we must work, dig. All the expected gold under the ground cannot establish our credit for the capital we need unless we start digging ourselves and prove that we are determined to, and can produce. Credit is available in direct proportion only to our existing productive assets. Our democracy here should produce—as I know it is producing—citizens and institutions with demonstrable capacity for achievement in creating wealth and opportunity.

We must know how to take intelligent risks in developing our resources. The same daring and courage with which we assumed direction of our destiny when we secured our political freedom should be manifest in our economic program. We have always known that God helps those who help themselves. We have proved it in the political field. Nothing should bar us from doing it in the economic. This is a critical phase of our struggle for the betterment of the common man. We are right in it now, at the crux of it.

We should be inspired by the fact that we are the master of the instrument to social betterment because we are the instrument ourselves. This instrument is not dependent on the whim of any person or agency beyond our control. It depends solely on our vision, our spirit of resolution, our willingness to undertake responsibilities, our capacity to show our loyalty to our people and the heritage of common liberty that has developed through centuries of pain and aspiration.

This is an age of universal readjustment. Other peoples of the world today are revising and strengthening their way of life. They have to, to get along and survive in a community where it has become impossible to ignore the neighbors, impossible to wish away the potential threats to their respective established ways and the common welfare.

Each nation has its own pattern of reconstruction and rehabilitation. Each country has its own program of action inspired by an idealism peculiar to its history and the extent of the havoc wrought upon its people by the last international conflagrations.

We do not have to dissolve our personality as a nation in that world community. Indeed, by reason of our national experience, it requires that we develop and strengthen that personality more. For it is as a distinct personality that we can enrich our contribution to the life and well-being of that world community.

Our objective, therefore, is a happy citizen of this country that is equally a happy and helpful citizen of the world. He lives free and secure not in national isolation but in international dependence. He loyally supports his government and makes his individual voice, jointly with others, count for understanding and cooperation in the family of nations. His country and people have a way of life that fulfills their material and moral aspirations and contributes variety to the color and texture of a world pattern of cooperative living.

In an effort to cooperate in the establishment of a world order we must start with an acceptance of the diverse cultures of the world. We must understand their basic similarity of purpose and process. We must recognize their diversity and their different emphases as productive of the richness and color and variation that man has achieved in living and in human relations.

The world today is ruled by conflicting ideologies which have complicated all the more the work of universal readjustment. Our country happens to have been linked with experiences, with adversities and with glories which, at one time or another in our short history, we have shared with others. In fact we have been both beneficiaries and victims of world conflicts. I know of no country which has been more subject to changes in its national evolution because of these conflicts than the Philippines.

In planning and pursuing our salvation, we should keep within the context of the broader world tasks towards peace and ordered living. The stability of whatever social betterment we may achieve for ourselves as a people is conditioned by the measure of security and cooperation that prevail beyond our national borders. We should not be presumptuous to assume responsibility for the peace and happiness of the world. But we should see that the attainment of our own betterment at home helps clear the way to its increasing-achievement and just enjoyment in the broader community of the family of nations. We take the position that this shrinking planet must accept the urgency of mutually just accommodation among peoples as the only alternative to its reduction to a wasteland and common graveyard of all human hope and humanity itself.

We need total economic mobilization to raise the common man, and make him strong, self-reliant, patriotic. Total economic mobilization spells full employment, which in turn would mean peace, security and contentment. It is idle to talk of social amelioration without the material means for achieving it—the nation-wide release of our available energies for economic production. There can be no full employment without industries to create enough opportunities for work for the people. Social relief is an empty phrase without the goods created by work to satisfy immediate needs during disaster. There can be no peace where people are restless because of their inability to earn the wherewithal for feeding, clothing, sheltering and educating their children. The particular problem of peace is not definitely and permanently resolved by law-enforcement officers.

It is necessary that there is a continuous and steady development of the country in order to make available all the benefits that the common man as well as any other citizen of the land longs to enjoy. But this development cannot be realized without the common man’s cooperation in the maintenance of peace which is the necessary prerequisite to any constructive and creative activity for the general welfare. And this constructive and creative activity—the fountain-source of every material benefit—can only be achieved on his own soil, with his own hands, with his own intellect, and with his own determination. He cannot depend on any other land or on any other people.

Total economic mobilization is not the exclusive prerogative and function of the government, or of the party in power, or of any social group. It is the concern of all— as it should be, in our kind of democracy. The government is expected to fill the bill of leadership, but it feels free to invite and to draw upon the talents available in public and in private life. It feels free to inspire and to enlist support from any and every section of the population. It does not depend upon coercive power to secure public cooperation. It looks to the compulsion of an inner sense of individual obligation and national responsibility to muster all efforts in the promotion and prosecution of a common social program.

This program has a definite advantage in being developed in an atmosphere of democracy. We do not have to liquidate millions of our countrymen to see that it works, or to find out if it works. Our system is flexible enough to give everyone a chance to be heard, to permit revisions in our planning, as exigencies require. Our people are free to exert and coordinate their individual efforts under a government whose sanctions we periodically pass upon for correction and improvement.

The effort and the responsibility for the ample production of the good things of life intended by total economic mobilization, require that we must subordinate personal interests to the imperatives of the common welfare. This program presupposes individual self-reliance and social cooperation. Our intellectual elements, our business and industrial elements, our labor elements, must realize this compulsion. We have no other alternative to the new slavery in which freedom rests not even in those who dictate but who are prisoners no less of their own dialectic.

We should not mistake, however, the attainment of the material good things of life for the ultimate answer to the yearning for peace, for goodness and beauty, or for lasting individual and social happiness.

A confirmed materialist would invoke his mystic formula of thesis, antithesis and synthesis to produce the good man of his ideal society. In that society the state is presumed to have withered away because the good man no longer needs its dictation and protection, and because the environment has reached its complete efficiency and effectiveness in perfecting the good citizen. Individual freedom and happiness are sacrificed for efficiency.

We should have had some reassuring proof of this assumption by now from the new generation brought under its dictation. But we are not permitted to see it. An iron curtain has been set up and all we are allowed to glimpse and appreciate, on occasion, is continued hate, truculence and suspicion towards the unregenerate non-communist portion of humankind. We can see, by the filtering reports, that there is more, instead of less, government in the communist Promise Land. Its reconditioned citizens are denied by their state the joy of visiting and leavening freely and directly, the outside world with their sweetness and light. They leave this missionary task to naive fellow travelers, to mysterious underground agents of political subversion, to disciplined engineers of social division and chaos. The home-grown common comrade cannot be trusted to resist the alluring but evil appointment of a tottering, capitalist order.

It is a sad fact that the prosperous are no less immune to evil-doing than the poor and the hungry. Not infrequently, prosperity merely accentuates the appetite for conspiring against goodness, truth, or beauty. Man does not live by bread alone, and it is to be doubted that it can be any different, even in a materialistic society – where spiritual matters are regarded as legitimate objects of derision, and where people, after all, are still human beings.

Social amelioration through total economic mobilization has, therefore, its limitations in the attainment of greater peace and contentment for our people. However important and urgent, abundant supply of the good things and mastery over the technique of their production, such as applied science assures us, are not the decisive element in our individual and national fulfillment.

It is not what more things can belong to us, but what high things we can belong to. It is not so much mastery over things as being mastered by supreme spiritual devotions. The great hours of our lives, rememberable to our dying day, are the moments when we were swept out of our individual selves by something that mastered us—the breath-taking sweep of great mountains, the magic of great music, the fascination of heroic and noble deeds, the inner consecration to a cause bigger than ourselves, our family, or even our restricted community. This is the soul and substance of our Christian heritage. In our efforts to develop our country to raise the common man, we must find firm anchorage in the fruits of our labors and in the spiritual loyalties that can deepen the meaning of our lives. We cherish the liberties that our kind of democracy provides in order to enjoy the privilege of being mastered by those loyalties.

Dr. Trinidad Parclo de Tavera once remarked: “Los enemigos del pueblo Filipino son la nipa, la cana, el coco, y el Padre Nuestro.” This was a searching explanation of the much alleged indolence and the resigned acceptance of the common man’s lot in his time. But times have changed. The Filipino has awakened from his lethargy. The nipa, the bamboo, the coconut, in the light of his initiation into modern science and technology, are now militant symbols of his determination to develop his country’s natural resources to secure national stability and happiness. El Padre Nuestro we still retain, but not as an enemy; for we need, indeed, not a return to blind belief, superstition and obscurantism, but an enlightened appreciation of the un­searchable riches of the spirit. Yes, we need more urgently than ever to rediscover God and the creative benedictions of His discipline. We should ever invoke a deeper love of country predicated upon actual toil and devotion.

To get the most of this privilege is to continually strengthen our faith in ourselves, our self-reliance, even as we look up to the hills whence cometh our help. We must eschew factional bickerings, captious carping at honest efforts of others to serve, facile approaches to problems of public welfare, the dissipation of social intelligence in magnifying trifles to salve the individual ego.

Undue preoccupation with the ego, with amor propio, can be a great obstruction to our national progress. We should not be afraid of losing face in a passing issue, of being disauthorized or repudiated, if our heart is in the right place. In our business, intellectual, and political life, we should rejoice in the success of others and welcome the discipline of gracious patience in awaiting our turn. Our success should be measured in terms of individuals we have helped, of institutions we have built and developed. We should welcome any chance to credit people for their good work, to acknowledge their fine constructive performance. We need charity and humility when we are right, but especially when we are tempted to dogmatize in direct pro­portion to our lack of information.

We cannot conceal our deficiency in facts and reason by heaping abuse on others who refuse to stoop to our manners. Our keenest rivalries should be, not for position and prerogatives, but for the best way of giving constructive service.

Our country deserves all the loyalty and devotion we can give. It is a beautiful country. It is a rich country. And it is a free country. It has been consecrated by our blood. It has developed a way of life allowing for continued improvement consistent with the needs of free men. It holds out the hope to millions beyond our shores courageously fighting for the advantages we enjoy. My fellow countrymen, we have every reason to be proud of our country and people—without falling for the illusion of becoming a chosen or master race. We have every reason to be happy in this country without coveting what is not our own.

As we reconstruct and build our new nation in harmony with world readjustment, we define our own mode of living. We must have our own pattern, drawing from the experiences and lessons of others,—a pattern suitable to our peculiar conditions. Thus we evolve a way of life inspired by democratic ideas and guided by tested social advantages. It is a new philosophy that has been distilled from the bitterness of the past. It is a flower that has grown from the ashes and ruins of yesterday. It is a spiritual force that has sprung from the severest test of our moral fiber. It is a weapon that has been forged on the anvil of adversity so that we should ever vanquish hunger and want. It is an inspiration that makes us march forward to conquer a new day for our posterity. It is a vision that has presented itself on the dawn of our redemption and resurrection. It is a new ideology that urges us on, shaking our lives and our very soul, to realize the dream of our dreams,—an enduring sovereign Republic.

Upon institutions such as this great university of our people, upon people such as the products of this institution, largely depend the conservation, the development, the fulfillment of our Philippine ideology into increasing reality, into a creative individual, national and world experience.

The measure of this university as our country’s most precious investment in the development of our best human resources will not be the noble structures that will rise in due course on these picturesque rolling uplands. It will not be in the amount of deposited and recited learning in its halls. It will not be in the lofty scholarship that can, on short notice, be mustered into parade for public inspection. The measure of this university has been, is, and will continue to be—the men and women that sally forth from this campus equipped for consecrated leadership, the happy progressive communities in every corner of this land that benefit from their dedication and service, the growing quality of life and aspiration which is offered to every child born in this blessed country of ours as its heritage.

Far it be from us to expect the complete realization of our dream of the good life. We can only pray for the capacity to pursue with undiminished fervor a continually rising ideal for every new generation. This is life’s most exciting privilege. This is our greatest adventure. Our Alma Mater should always be here to help us and our children become worthy of this high adventure. For this is the heart of social amelioration—for you and for me, for this generation and for our prosperity.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Address of President Quirino upon his conferment of the degree of Doctors of Laws, honoris causa. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45(2) , 657-666.