Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the opening plenary session of the Educators’ Congress

[Delivered at Malacañan Park, December 2, 1951]

Dear Friends:

It is more than a happy coincidence that this Educators’ Congress, as part of the ; Golden Jubilee of the Philippine Educational System, follows closely on the heels of the 1951 election now widely recognized as a signal victory for democracy in our country. In the success of that election we had a good demonstration of the meaning of our school system in the preservation of our democracy. For in truth and in fact the Republic of the Philippines was inaugurated and its affairs are presently administered mostly by the products of that system.

The response of our new citizenry in peacefully and freely registering their will at the polls was as much a contribution of public education under a democracy. And the role played by the teachers in maintaining the freedom and purity of the ballot showed the manifest influence of our schools in our democratic way of life.

The relation between democracy and education in this country is thus mutually vital. It is for this reason that we are placing the greatest reliance on our educational system not only to make democracy real but to preserve and improve it as our most valuable heritage. This is our only guarantee to be free and to remain free.

We conceived this Educators’ Congress, therefore, in an effort not merely to exalt the far-reaching advantages of our educational system in our life as a! nation but principally to re-examine it for possible improvement and for the necessary adjustment to the increasing exigencies of the new epoch and the marked advancement of the enlightened world.

In appraising our educational system of the last half century, you will have a chance to isolate its virtues from its limitations and propose ways to make it more adequate to the demands and needs of our people. Such proposals as you may formulate should of course revolve around democracy as a principle and a process, the absence of which spells the death of freedom, the keyword of this Congress.

We get an idea of the meaning of democracy in the statement of Lincoln that no man is good enough or wise enough to govern others without their consent—that is, without some expression on their own part of their needs, their own desires and their idea of how social affairs should go on and social problems be handled. This involves the development of individual and collective responsibility, of which we cannot have enough.

The recent experience of certain peoples indicate that democracy is not a static inheritance whose safety can be taken for granted. Every generation has to accomplish democracy over again for itself. It has to be worked out in terms of needs, problems, and conditions of the social life which is ever in a state of flux.

I congratulate you for the liberal outlook reflected in the choice of areas for discussion during this Congress. I can see that our educators are sensible of the urgency of rethinking the meaning and application of the democratic process in relation to the most disturbing problems of our time. There appears to be a keen awareness of the challenge to educators for courageous understanding in those problems and an equally bold and democratic direction of the social forces at work towards their solution.

Nationalism, for instance, poses a problem to our educational leadership. The spirit is a potent force very much abroad in the world, especially in our part of it. It is creative when it nurtures a just pride in what is of our country and seeks its further development to enrich understanding and cooperation among neighbors. It is destructive when it fosters snobbery, arrogance, and isolation or is moved by hatred and intolerance. Aggression is not without its roots in nationalism. We need the fresh formulation of a democratic approach to nationalism as a social force for betterment of life among ourselves and our relations with other peoples.

The impact of our educational system on every home and community in the exercise of freedom is indeed a worthy field of exploration if only to measure the reality of democracy in our midst. The isolation of school from life, of knowledge from action, is an old question but by no means resolved. Unless the barrier is removed, the schools cannot meet the challenge of democracy in providing an insight into the movement and direction of social forces and an understanding of social needs and the resources to be used to satisfy them.

This barrier is not overcome by merely loading pupils with economic, political or historical information however varied. The problem is to relate such information about present society with things that are done, that need to be done, and to teach how to do them.

Our educational leaders would do well to consider how our citizenry, after going through the mill acquiring assorted knowledge, may become less easy prey to the manipulations of bosses and machines and the distortions, casual or deliberate, they read in the newspaper or hear on the air. Anything less than this will not serve if our purpose is to see democracy prevail in our homes and communities and for our people to benefit from the freedom it is supposed to sustain.

Incidentally, it has been noted that one of the causes for the destruction of political democracy in countries where it was nominally established was its exclusively political character; democracy had not become part of the bone and blood of the people’s daily conduct of its life. This is especially interesting to some of our people to whom the reality of democracy seems to be limited to talking and breathing politics the year round, and to whom no action, especially official, is conceivable without a political purpose or intention—-in the sense of jockeying for position and power.

Something of a corrective to this pre-occupation is the increased emphasis being given by our school system to the development and acquisition of skills which we believe urgent to build an economy of plenty and to remove a potent cause of discontent. It comes from the realization that democracy and freedom cannot nourish in an atmosphere of want.

I invite this Congress to measure the progress of our school system in this direction. As of today, it can be said that our disposition to enjoy the fruits of an abundant economy still far outruns bur readiness and preparation to produce the goods for proper enjoyment. We need a good deal of reorientation to attain proportion and balance.

And when this shall have been accomplished -and when we really shall have instituted an economy of abundance, the question still remains whether |the ability to get jobs and earn a livelihood is coupled with any understanding of the place of the industries and vocations and professions in our social life and their part to keep democracy a living and growing thing.

There are many other instances heretofore unexplored where the educational system could make democracy more real.

The problem of health, or health insurance, for instance, is intimately connected with the matter of economic competence. There would be no point to democracy and to freedom without the soundness of body and mind to enjoy their blessings. But how to keep our people not only healthy but sane is not purely a problem of ability to multiply usable commodities. The leaders of our educational institutions would be making a substantial contribution to the security of our democracy to work out a practical system of moral and spiritual motivations that might guard against the anxiety and fear which could plague the most prosperous and well-fed people in the world.

The study of labor, its history, significance, and possibilities, is not yet integrated in our educational system. We must not forget that the greatest bulk of our population on whose shoulders the burden of a real democratic life rests are represented by the farm and industrial hands that turn the wheels that make our national wealth. They, more than anybody else who can well take care of himself, must find their proper place in a democracy of decency and contentment. We must, therefore, study their problems more conscientiously in relation to our life as a truly democratic people.

The same with the study of how to counteract ideologies inimical to our democratic system. We often talk of democracy in the abstract, exhausting our knowledge of constitutional law and the universally established principles of democratic process all over the world in our zealous efforts to protect the rights of the individual, and yet we do not exert the same effort to define and analyze the theories and ideologies that rob us, even at the cost of our lives, of that same right. On the contrary, some of us even defend the perpetrators when they are accused of destroying our greatest democratic institution which is the government itself. We must, henceforth, make a soul-searching study; of how to counteract the system adopted by the enemies of our democratic life.

But the most pressing and immediate problem confronting the world today is how to educate the human conscience for peace. Humanity still bleeds in the name of peace. In Korea today, human lives reaching to millions are being sacrifice ostensibly to preserve world peace. If those dying and dead in Korea stood holding each other’s hands in a line, they would make a belt around the globe to impress the living with the ghastly wasteful process. Korean graves that we often see in newsreels are veritable endless furrows of human agony that are shocking the conscience of the modern world. On top of this, there is the threat to use the atom bomb—to end the war? No, humanity itself.

Armaments, cartels, retaliatory measures, treaties, and other diplomatic devices have all signally failed to achieve peace. A possible reason is that those who resort to arbitrary power rely too much on their strength to impose their will; little or no thought is given to those below, the common people, who are being sacrificed at the altar of conflicting ideologies for peace.

Democracy is founded on faith in the capacities of human nature, faith in human intelligence and in the power of pooled and cooperative experience. Within this faith, we can well address all our efforts to educating the human conscience for peace to enable mankind to survive and be nearer to the image of its divine creator.

As the children of the same Creator, can we not live peacefully together irrespective of the form of government we choose to guide our own destiny? Thus, the need to educate the human conscience for peace.

These are a few of the opportunities open to this Congress as you appraise the progress and prospects of our educational system against the needs of our people. We who have tasted the blessings of democracy are convinced that in democracy lies our greatest chance to survive as a free people.

Distinguished delegates to this Congress, I look to you to give a fresh presentation of those needs and the possible practical answers education can offer, under changing social conditions, to fulfill the promise of freedom and democracy.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Address of President Quirino at the opening plenary session of the Educators’ Congress. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(12) , 6100-6104.