Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before the U.S. House of Representatives

[Delivered on August 10, 1949]

MR. SPEAKER, DISTINGUISHED MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:

It is a rare honor and privilege for any man to appear before this august Body of the distinguished Representatives of the American people. Thirty years ago I occupied a seat in the House of Representatives of my country. This fact makes me feel at home in your midst. As the head of a new State that owes its existence to American wisdom and idealism, I am filled with a mingled sense of gratitude and humility because of the special, circumstances that have brought me to this mighty rostrum.

The Independence Act you passed in 1934 as our charter of liberty has well directed our course as a nation. During the transition period between 1934 and the actual grant of independence on July 4, 1946, events of the most far-reaching significance to the world transpired. That period provided the greatest test ever served on our people and it revealed to us that quality of the freedom that we had been fighting for, and to America and the world at large, the character of the nation that has become its recipient and beneficiary.

The whole world has plunged into the most destructive war known in history. The Filipinos bled with the rest of humanity in that titanic struggle. Thank God, we have survived. Instead of succumbing to desperation, following the untold devastation of our country and the decimation of our population, we have come out stronger, fortified in the blessings of democracy and freedom. We have risen from our prostration disposed to anticipate and face the dangers of another possible world conflict. And we are determined to carry on and to fight to the last man on the side of America if freedom, our freedom and your freedom, should ever again be menaced and the democratic way of life imperiled.

Immediately after the liberation of our conutry in 1945, we thought that the Philippines could not be rebuilt in less than ten years, that it would take much longer for us to be able to stand on our own feet. But I can say with pardonable pride that the stride we have made during the last three years has more than eloquently vindicated our capacity to bear our burdens and obligations as a free and independent people.

While many countries in the world are still at a loss to reconstruct or rehabilitate themselves, bewildered in the face of uncertainties produced by their troubled surroundings, the Philippines today stands in the midst of a most distressed region as one stable unit, a veritable haven of many people in the Far East, whose liberties have been threatened.

We have been concentrating our attention on our internal development. We have not lost a single moment and opportunity to enhance the stabilization of our economy. We have adopted a new ideology based on total economic mobilization of our country as a means of providing our people a fuller life of substance and contentment, in our determined endeavor to improve our living standards and in that manner contain and counteract the onrush of a totalitarian system battering down the doors of our neighbors. We thank America for the opportunities given us to develop ourselves and our country, and for the assistance and guidance we know the United States is disposed to lend to us in our future undertaking. The new Republic of the Philippines was born in self reliance and we are determined to build it on solid rock. We cannot do otherwise if we are to deserve the distinction of being America’s original handiwork in the sphere of freedom in Asia.

I have come to your country in furtherance of mutual understanding between your country and mine—for the preservation not only of freedom and prosperity but also of the peace of the world in our part of the globe. I am positive of your concern in this regard. I am emboldened by the fact that President Truman has graciously invited me to have an opportunity of presenting our side of the understanding.

I hope that this mightiest Body of legislatures in the world will have timely and effective cooperation in our efforts to achieve the right promise of that understanding, and enable us to contribute in our modest way to the fulfillment of the high mission of the United States in the advancement and preservation of world peace and security to all liberty loving peoples. This has become an important phase of our Philippine foreign policy. It has been inspired no less by a deep sense of obligation that we owe to this great country that has given us freedom which I know America will do her best to help protect and develop.

My country is determined to succeed. My people are confident that you will continue to extend them every possible support to succeed. Your people and mine, by a fluke of destiny, have become partners in a most glorious adventure which it will be to your interest, as well as to that of the entire world to prosecute towards increasing fulfillment.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1949). President Quirino’s address to the U. S. House of Representatives, August 10, 1949. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45(8) , 3262-3264.