Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On the Independence of the Philippines

[Delivered at Luneta on July 4, 1949]

My Countrymen, Distinguished Guests and Friends:

Three years ago today and close on the heels of a terrible world war, the second but the most devastating ever, which left everything in shambles, the Filipino people dared the United States of America to fulfill her promise of independence. The time hardly seemed auspicious, but in an incomparable historic gesture of idealism and faith, America, the world’s greatest democracy, honored her word and decided to launch the Republic of the Philippines in its adventure of freedom.

A world that was watching us had doubts, but not our own people nor the great people of America. Of its own will, the United States chose the 170th anniversary of its own independence to renounce its sovereignty in the Philippines, recognizing the right of our people to determine our own destiny. Thus, beaming with confidence and great faith and spurred by a burning determination to rise from our prostration, we the Filipino people became, on July 4, 1946, the first full-fledged democracy on this side of the great Pacific.

The record of our first three years of independent existence amply sustains that faith. The very influence of the record upon the outside world, especially upon our immediate neighbors, more than amply sustains that faith. Since the inauguration of our Republic, India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Burma and Korea have followed our example, while Indonesia and Indo-China have followed closely to effect their liberation.

On his inauguration as first President of our Republic, President Roxas gave full appreciation of the difficulties facing us at the start. The beautiful surroundings that now lend grandeur to this year’s Fourth of July celebration were then a sorrowful sight. Our other cities and towns were rubble in great part; our farms were so much abandoned waste land; our industries, mainstay of our pre-war economy, were crippled; our income was negligible; most every supply of material for food, clothing and shelter was in ration. Our schools were in ruins, the “barong-baro.ag” as a makeshift structure was not only the prevailing reality but also the common state of mind. Violence was more than a mere hangover of the war; it was the routing experience and not the nine-day sensation it has since become. We then predicted that it would take us no less than ten years to reconstruct our battered country and its institutions. But in three years, we have risen above those difficulties: we reconstituted and reorganized our institutions, reinvigorated our spiritual and material life, and established a pattern of freedom and peace in our part of the world.

The firm foundations of our body politic as a free and democratic nation have been successfully laid. We have, besides, designed a concrete and comprehensive plan of national development and launched its systematic fulfillment with ample funds for its implementation. While we have cast our eyes for assistance in some directions, largely towards the United States, and secured some, we looked into our resources directly and proceeded apace to lift our country on our own initiative. We have started full steam ahead and established the basis of our economic sovereignty.

In our total economic mobilization program, we have given immediate and full attention to food production. As a result of the program of expanding food production now in active execution, we have narrowed the margin of our foreign dependence for rice supply and have practically banished the blackmarket. Our average annual pre-war rice production was about 1,857,000 metric tons. Our present production is estimated at more than 2,240,000 metric tons. We have set up the machinery which will make the country within five years self-sufficient in the staple cereal that is the yard-stick of our living costs and standards.

We eat and dress and live better today than we have ever done since liberation and, in some respects, even before the war. The homes that we have built and are building today, whether for owners or for those who rent, for the well-to-do as well as for the modest employee and worker, are a decided improvement over what we ever had before the war—in design and function. Our cost of living has been reduced since 1946. The peso today can buy about 40 per cent more prime commodities since then, indicating that we are waging a successful war against the high cost of living, while at the same time increasing the purchasing power of the wage earner.

The Philippine peso is today recognized throughout the world as one of the most stable currencies, having a reserve of more gold and silver to back up its monetary circulation, compared proportionately with even the United States and other stable countries. Our foreign trade has jumped in volume from ₱72 million in 1946 to ₱1775 million in 1948, and the trend is still rising this year.

The growth of popular education has been adequately met. The pre-war enrollment in the public schools was about 1,944,000; today we have more than 3,372,000, and since last year no child of school age has been refused admission for lack of room, nor will there be any this year even with the prospect of much greater enrollment.

The highways, to sample the rate of rehabilitation of our public improvements that have been rebuilt or built or are in building all over the country, are now obvious pictures of the landscape; only a professional partisan grouse would deliberately miss them. The motorized traffic that crowds them everywhere attests to the vigor and substance of our recovery and development under the most strained conditions. All national, provincial and city roads existing at the outbreak of the war have been completely opened to traffic. In addition, more than three thousand kilometers of new roads have been constructed. In the course of a few more months, motorized traffic between Aparri and Sorsogon will be opened.

Since we became a Republic, about 2,400 public buildings, including hospitals, markets, post offices and municipal buildings have been built, reconstructed or repaired. An aggregate of 156 irrigation, river control and flood control projects have been constructed or repaired. In addition, almost all pre-war water supply systems, port works and other public works projects have been restored into operation. We have embarked upon a large scale construction of 17 major irrigation projects, setting aside therefor ₱10,000,000 this year for their construction in addition to the ₱22,000,000 worth of irrigation projects already provided for by law and ₱5,750,000 portable irrigation projects by the employment of pumps and pipes.

Now, let me turn to the lot of the less fortunate of our inhabitants, especially those who bore the brunt of the resistance at home or in the field. Large scale previsions and gratuities, back pay, hospitalization, educational and other benefits, have been made as a partial measure of the nation’s appreciation of their loyalty and heroism. We shall not cease until they have been completely brought back to the normal productive pursuits of peace. And the teachers and the enlisted men in the Army, and the other low-salaried employees—they have all received increase in salary, providing them with a more decent livehood.

At no time in the history of our nation has the worker, in this period, been given more opportunity to win benefits and privileges in our industrial set-up and to consolidate his gains consistent with the enlightened principles for the advancement of the welfare of the common man. The redistribution of landed estates has been accelerated; a system of extending credit facilities to small farmers and of apportioning uncultivated agricultural areas to expand food production and facilitate land acquisition by those wishing to work them has been perfected.

Graft and corruption is no monopoly of this country and Republic. We have proceeded to uproot it with utmost vigor within the sanctions of our constitutional and democratic processes, giving every man his day in court and putting him in jail when he deserves it. The infections of our body politic should worry us if we could find no feasible method of eradicating them except by cremating the whole body.

The solution to ills besetting our nation is not to be achieved by simple incantation. It rests on freedom to probe our soft spots and the will to apply the knife of truth, understanding and responsibility to them. We are a healthy Republic today because we have that freedom and that will.

Our Republic, I am proud to say, is the one especially bright spot in our corner of the Pacific today. It is the one spot where any stranger bringing good-will and understanding can feel immediately the warmth of our people’s welcome and the advantages of our increasing restoration to the ways of freedom, productivity and peace.

In the currents and cross-currents of conflicting interests touching this part of the Pacific, our Republic en jots a unique position that is being viewed today from outside not without admiration and judicious envy. We have freedom, we have achieved a great measure of recovery and peace, we charted our course of economic development and are going ahead with it, we have concluded pacts and agreements with other free nations essential to our security and growth, we have a very articulate and respected voice invariably aligned with justice and the oppressed in the councils of the United Nations. We have established our international credit and acquired a name and prestige of distinction among the leading powers of the world. On top of all, as we celebrate today in common with the United States of America the glory of a Fourth of July rooted in a common liberal and libertarian tradition and in a joint experience in and for democracy consecrated in blood, the Philippine tricolor, wherever it is raised anywhere in the world, floats proudly high and dignified inspiring the respect and good will of all nations.

Strange as it may seem, only some critics at home would rob it of its magic wand. And not all is rosy to us. Today we face the prospect of extinguishment of our freedom by the lowering clouds of a ruthless imperialism—now in retreat in the West, but at its flood-tide in the East. We cannot afford to think that we, or any other free nation here, can remain free, can continue to advance towards plenty, and can preserve the peace if the countries around us now valiantly struggling to shake off old chains and to ward off new ones, fail to conserve their gains towards freedom until they fully attain it. Our answer to the threat of red imperialism and the new slavery is a real union of the peoples around the Pacific on the basis of common counsel and assistance in protecting and advancing freedom and peace, in facilitating the development of their resources for the benefit of their general population. To this our Republic feels bound to commit itself if it is to continue the pace of its progress since 1946 and to see its neighbors share the blessings of freedom and peace under a democratic system. Such a union should enable underdeveloped members to help themselves better through cooperation in the manner contemplated in President Truman’s bold, new program of technical and material mutual aid.

We are favored by the fact that while our Republic may be envied, it is not feared. We do not envisage encroaching on our neighbors to insure the fulfillment of our program of total economic mobilization and social amelioration. We enjoy picking on each other at home to discover our limitations and test our virtues, proving how well we can stand the hazards of democracy.

If this is the epoch of democracy, as we have reason to believe it is, and if we are the unique outpost of democracy in this part of the world, as we are proud to know we are, we have, in this Republic of ours, achieved the basis for the spiritual inspiration that would set and keep the lights of democracy continually aglow in our part of the world.

Our Republic was born in an atmosphere of crisis and want, but now it is hitting its stride. It knows where it is going and how it is to get there. What emergencies it faces today are incidental passing pains artificially created by seasonal partisanship, and will disappear with the rains that follow the thunderclaps.

On this sacred clay, let us dedicate ourselves anew to the unfinished tasks before us. Let us pray the Almighty that our hearts and our minds may continue to be sensitive to the grace of His wisdom and guidance.

Because we have been singularly blessed in the first three years of complete freedom, I am confident that, as good and true Filipinos all, conscious of our country’s heroic traditions, we shall continue to strive to be worthy of divine direction in our efforts to make our Republic strong and enduring. United and free, we shall continue to build it up into a dynamic and decisive factor—at home and abroad—for freedom, for good-will and for justice to all men.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Independence Day address of His Excellency, President Elpidio Quirino, delivered at the Luneta on July 4, 1949. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45(7) , 2791-2796.