Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On Arbor Day

[Delivered over a national radio hook-up from Malacañan Palace, September 10, 1948]

The second Saturday of September each year has been proclaimed Arbor Day. We pause in our daily tasks to ponder the significance of trees to our life; we make an inventory of the manifold benefits we owe these leafy benefactors of the human race, and rediscover our duties and obligations towards them. It is most fitting that we reflect on the tragedy that would befall us were we to be suddenly deprived of trees and their products; that we resolve to do all we can to conserve, protect, and multiply them in order that we may enjoy a more abundant life.

We shall celebrate the day tomorrow by planting trees and holding appropriate programs that will focus national attention on our trees and forests. For that matter, we should make every day an Arbor Day. Tomorrow and thereafter, whenever and wherever there is opportunity, we should raise trees not only for food, for shade, for shelter, but also for ornament, for park purposes and for our protection. We should plant trees on our barren areas, our denuded hills, our eroded mountains so as to make these uneconomic portions of our patrimony blossom again.

The uses of trees are as numerous as the names that we have given them. We grow them as forest trees, shade trees, ornamental trees, medicinal trees, fruit trees. I would lay emphasis on fruit trees and forest trees, from which the world derives the most important raw materials—food and wood.

President Theodore Roosevelt once said: “A people without children would face a hopeless future; a country without trees is almost as hopeless * * *.” In the past we were prone to pay very little attention and care to our trees; we had them in such abundance. Fortunately, we have come to realize that we cannot go on wasting and despoiling them at will. Our forests constitute a rich heritage which we have no right to destroy or squander. Rather, we should increase their quantity and quality by importing and growing suitable varieties available from everywhere. The effects of wanton forest destruction are already being felt in such deforested places as Cebu, Bohol, Siquijor and the Ilocos provinces. There the struggle for existence is daily becoming more acute because of the decline in agriculture due to poor or exhausted soil.

Those of us who have traveled in other countries and have seen the disastrous effects of forest destruction cannot but shudder with apprehension as we contemplate the hardships that will be visited on our people if the indiscriminate cutting of trees now going on is permitted to continue. We have seen places where, for lack of firewood, people are using grasses, roots and dried animal “dung” to cook their food. Those places present a decadent or declining agriculture, an impoverished nation, a very keen struggle for existence among the people. In order to rebuild what men so wantonly destroyed enormous sums of money are now being spent in many countries for reforestation work and for construction of expensive terraces, dikes, dams and levees. In our own land, hundreds of lives and millions of pesos worth of property are lost every year because of floods. In addition, towns and barrios which were formerly productive, have been washed away or eventually abandoned. Despite our great forest wealth, there are many barren mountains and treeless slopes which are sad to contemplate. Because of the lack of forests at their headwaters, streams rise quickly to destructive flood heights and as quickly dry up in summer when their water is most needed. Dikes, dams and levees cost a good deal to construct in the thickly populated communities. We can reduce these costly forms of protection by the cheaper natural process of planting trees wherever we can—strong trees, useful trees, beautiful trees which can be pleasant to the eye everywhere.

I wish to call upon every provincial, city and municipal official to cooperate with the National Arbor Day Committee in carrying out a comprehensive plan of nation-wide tree-planting. The Committee has chosen to dedicate its program this year to the memories of our war dead and heroes, particularly our beloved and departed Presidents Quezon and Roxas. Nothing can be more fitting to symbolize their lifetime ambition to make this nation grow and develop for the benefit and enjoyment of posterity. I invite every citizen of this country, especially the youth of the land, to plant at least one tree each tomorrow as a reminder of our national duty to keep and preserve this nation. Let us all pay heed to the poet’s prayer and make it the prayer of every young citizen who plants a tree:

God, Let me blossom as a tree That bears the storms with majesty. Let my young body, washed by pains, Be refreshed as trees from rain. Let me grow sturdy as a fir That feels the winds with gentle stir Of all its branches, yet is still Where its strong roots clasp the hill. Teach me, O God, to live and grow As straight as trees in sun and snow; As with the trees that bear old scars, Lift my young body to the stars!

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Arbor Day address of President Elpidio Quirino, delivered over a national radio hook-up from Malacañan Palace, September 10, 1948. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44(9) , 3207-3208.