Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Upon being conferred the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws

Spiritual Imperatives

Ang pagkilala sa Diyos bilang pinagmumulan ng lahat ng karunungan, katarungan, at pag-ibig ay isang pangunahing tungkulin ng bawat lingkod-bayan. Ito ay nagbibigay-daan sa atin na maglingkod nang may integridad, malasakit, at dedikasyon sa kapakanan ng ating mga kababayan. Recognizing God as the source of all wisdom, justice, and love is a fundamental duty of every public servant. This enables us to serve with integrity, compassion, and dedication for the welfare of our fellow citizens.

Ang pananampalataya ay nagbibigay inspirasyon sa atin na maging tapat sa ating mga tungkulin, maging huwaran ng pagiging makatarungan, at magpakita ng paggalang sa dignidad ng bawat tao. Faith inspires us to be faithful in our duties, to be a model of justice, and to show respect for the dignity of every person.

Bilang mga lingkod ng bayan, dapat nating isabuhay ang mga birtud ng katapatan, pagiging responsable, at pagiging mapagkumbaba. As public servants, we must live out the virtues of honesty, responsibility, and humility.

Ang paglilingkod sa bayan ay hindi lamang isang trabaho, kundi isang bokasyon – isang tawag mula sa Diyos na gamitin ang ating mga talento at kakayahan para sa ikabubuti ng lahat. Serving the country is not just a job, but a vocation – a calling from God to use our talents and abilities for the good of all.

FATHER RECTOR, MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY, MY FRIENDS:

Out of a full heart I thank the Faculty of this great University for the high honor which they have today so graciously conferred upon me and, through my humble person, upon the Filipino people.

I came before you from a journey across the Pacific: from Manila, halfway around the world.

More than four hundred years ago, a bold adventurer crossed the Pacific from Spain by way of the New World. His name was Ferdinand Magellan, and his journey ended in the Philippines.

Magellan carried in his intrepid ships the power of the West; he had gone forth to extend the dominion of imperial Spain over the rich archipelagos of the Eastern Seas. But with the soldiers of Spain came also her missionaries, and these made the more lasting conquest.

Some four centuries later, the Sword of Castille was broken, and her regime in the Philippines passed into history. The Gross of Christ remains. It stands in the center of every Filipino town and village, not as the relic of a past conquest but as the symbol of an indestructible kingdom—the Kingdom of God.

Under its benign shade, a nation came into being, waxed strong, and finally attained, through an unselfish act of a similarly inspired nation, her independence as the Republic of the Philippines: the only Christian state in the Far East.

As President of that Republic, I am happy to reaffirm on this felicitous occasion my people’s gratitude to the people of America, and our warm fraternal regard for those of this country with whom we are bound by the special ties of our common religion.

Unlike Magellan, I have not come with power to conquer, which we have not, or with missionary zeal to convert you to a new faith, which is not ours alone.

I have come humbly to bear witness to the fact that the ancient faith of our Fathers stands securely in our Islands, a cherished heritage from the past and an unfailing source of inspiration, guidance and strength amid our share of the trials which the war and its aftermath of conflict have visited upon most of the rations of the world.

The vicissitudes that we have stood likewise through the various other epochs of our national existence have imposed a salutary discipline on our souls. They have made us spiritually stronger. Thus we have survived more than three hundred years of misrule. Thus we have emerged from the Philippine Revolution of 1896 and the ordeals of the Spanish-American War with increased power in our resolve to lift our country out of obscurantism and servitude. Our spiritual resources have thus grown with every adversity and have saved us as a people time and again through many a peril and crisis.

In the gathering darkness that now blankets large areas of Asia and the Far East, the faith of the Filipino people stands out, a beacon to friends of like mind and spirit, a warning to others that whoever seeks to subvert or destroy our liberties risks shipwreck on the rock of our determination to defend our freedom.

With the support and comradeship of friendly peoples if possible, alone if necessary, we are resolved to resist with all our strength the evil thing that is now striving to enslave men and nations under a tyranny more ruthless than any other in history.

Mindful of our weakness in material power, we nevertheless take this stand because there is no other course that we, as a Christian people living in a democratic state, can in honor and conscience pursue. As the central crisis of our time moves ever closer to its inevitable climax, we perceive more and more clearly that there can be no practicable compromise, no possible middle course, between us and those who would undermine and overthrow our way of life.

We are entering the stage when the defense of our freedom becomes synonymous with the defense of our faith. This is as it should be, for it is implicit in the very nature of Christianity and democracy that political liberty can­not exist or flourish unless it stands four-square upon the bedrock of religious freedom.

All the freedoms that together constitute the soul of the truly democratic society have their origins in the Christian precepts on the essential dignity and the infinite value of the human person. Our traditional respect for the equality of men, as well as our developing concept of a world community of nations based on a new order of justice and equality for all, are but extensions in the social and political spheres of our Christian belief in a brotherhood of men equally cherished by God and each deserving of a measure of His infinite love and justice. Christian doctrine is the fountainhead that nourishes the life and growth of our free institutions.

It was no accident that the Philippines should have developed as it did into a working democracy in the Western tradition. The faith of the Filipino people, their Christian training and traditions centering around the concept of equality and brotherhood among men, provided an excellent situation for the healthy and ordered growth of the democratic institutions implanted by America in the course of her nearly five decades of enlightened and progressive sovereignty over the Philippines.

Today, in common with their sister democracies in Asia and other parts of the world, the Filipino people find their hard-won freedom increasingly menaced by the aggressive and violent expansion of a ruthless, fanatical, political faith. And like all the other Christian peoples faced by this mortal danger, they are impelled by the nature of things to turn to their own faith for strength and sustenance in the struggle.

The subverters of order and democracy understand perfectly the vital, indissoluble link between faith and freedom. Invariably they try, sometimes openly, sometimes under-handedly, always with ruthlessness and energy, to pervert or destroy religious freedom as a prelude to the total extinction of civil liberties, as one might undermine the cornerstone of a building in order to demolish completely the whole edifice.

On the other hand we seek in every way possible to safeguard and enlarge the scope of religious freedom, knowing that without it all the other freedoms would languish and eventually wither away, like trees rooted out of the soil and cut off from the life-giving air.

Since Communism is not a purely ideological menace, the physical defense raised against the aggressive threat of its armies and the subversive activities of its fifth columns, will necessarily loom large in any scheme to contain and ultimately to master it. With American help and under American leadership, the countries of Western Europe have gone to great lengths to counteract the danger of further expansion westward.

In Asia and the Far East, we have ourselves taken the initiative in trying to move the free nations threatened by this totalitarian advance to some form of effective mutual help and common action.

But it is in the internal renewal of Christianity and democracy that the best hope of conquering Communism lies, for it is only by establishing the superiority of the democratic way of life that we can prove with finality the fallacy and the emptiness of the Communist challenge and promise.

In this great task of reform and renewal, America and the Philippines have a special responsibility—America as the leader of the Christian states of the West, the Philippines by virtue of its status as the only Christian nation in the Far East.

It is a task that requires the highest vision and statesmanship, and the greatest measure of courage enterprise and self-sacrifice. As we think of this task, and all that it involves, it behooves us to meet the urgency of strengthening the spiritual values that lie at the foundation of a better world order which should be increasingly responsive to our common aspiration. We have them all in our rich Christian heritage—humility and penitence, goodwill and charity, and a courageous faith.

The last war, or any war for that matter, has generated a good deal of pride and self-complacency in the hearts of the victors. We should seek restoration to the grace of humility if we are to build for permanence and peace. We must realize a measure of responsibility for the condi­tions that have bred hate, pride and violence in the relations of men and of nations and have committed the world to the recent unprecedented holocaust that hit all of the human race.

Our profession of the Christian faith will avail us nothing if we keep vindictiveness and hate in our hearts. That great Catholic writer, G. K. Chesterton, has well said that “hell hath no fury like a non-combatant.” We should check up on ourselves as to how much of authentic goodwill that knows the welfare of each, mighty or humble, to be dependent on the welfare of all, we really can claim to be existent in us. We should determine and raise the measure of recognition on the part of all peoples of the rights of others. We should be sure that we fully believe in a power that makes for justice and righteousness.

Our national experience in spiritual growth and power we must continually endeavor to achieve as individuals, if we are to stand the subversion of our cherished way and frustrate those who depend on spreading hate and chaos and violence to secure their march to power.

In other words, we must be prepared to fight the forces that make for hate and communism in our individual lives first. We must know something of self-conquest, the mastery of those intransigeant personal impulses which would betray our loyalties to a Divine Power.

We must subdue our pride, our selfishness, our ill-will, our unbelief. Religion provides us the spiritual weapons in this task of self-conquest that alone can make us invincible in fighting for freedom and justice not only for our country but for others as well. The great moral influence over our people of the wife of one of our greatest Filipino leaders, Mrs. Aurora Quezon, was de­rived from this source of strength and power. In the tragedy that removed her precious presence from our midst, her only married daughter, Zenaida Quezon-Buencamino, was able to bear her loss, in the death of her young husband as well, upon knowing that, as he breathed his last, he remembered not only to call her name but to invoke God. The faith that her mother had was reborn and renewed in Zenaida to make her self-dependent and to strengthen her resolve to serve others, instead of bewailing her personal loss.

Such an example recalls vividly the victories that our people have had in adversity, and their consequent growth in spiritual strength constitutes a definite encouragement to us to succeed in our invididual efforts towards self-conquest. It proves our capacity to develop the inner re­sources we need to combat the major threat of our time internally as well as externally.

Thus we must look to our faith, the courageous faith that can level the mountains of hate and violence that a totalitarian system now on a rampage has raised up among men and nations, the faith on which human freedom and an enduring peace can rest securely under just law in our troubled world.

It represents the spiritual imperatives of our time, and we must rise to their challenge adequately if we are to build a better order worthy of the loyalty of succeeding generations.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Spiritual Imperatives. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45(8) , 3266-3270.