Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On United Nations Day before the Rotarians

[Delivered at Polo Club, October 23, 1952]

Mr. Toastmaster, Fellow Rotarians, and Friends:

The spirit of Rotary, of friendliness, good cheer and good will, and the spirit of the United Nations, of peace and security, are beautifully associated this evening to make of these festivities an appropriate occasion for the creation of an atmosphere both pleasant and edifying, thus giving us an opportunity to rise above the local atmosphere of political tension which needs release and relief.

I am happy to be with you this evening, secure in the conviction that I am with friends desirous of leaving behind the noise and tensions of partisan strife. Here in this free and open space dominated by a feeling of freshness and unlimited freedom, we expand and relax. Certainly this select congregation of high-thinking men and women, beaming with optimism and lifted by a buoyant spirit, radiates hope and confidence, proving that the world is not totally lost to us, notwithstanding the dire predictions of the nervous prophets of our time.

I was on board an intercontinental airplane one day when I overheard a conversation among the members of the crew regarding an approaching storm on our way. I immediately asked the operations officer if we could skip the storm.

His retort was immediate: “As long as this airplane is pressurized, as it is, we can always rise above the storm. There is an open big space up above.”

And I say at this moment that as long as you and I and our people are properly pressurized, able to adjust ourselves to any atmosphere and control ourselves with sufficient restraint, wisdom, and prudence, we can well afford to rise above the menacing storms and strifes which are but a part of the growing pains of .our young Republic. Thus we can appropriately understand the meaning and aims and objectives as well as the accomplishments and failures of the United Nations, the seventh anniversary of which we have gathered here to celebrate on its eve.

The United Nations was founded within the shadow of the immeasurable destruction of a world war. It was a categorical expression of the hope that springs eternal in the human breast—the hope of universal concord and peace necessary to release the soul of man for creative fulfillment.

In 1945, the slogan of “one world” was pregnant with hope and faith, if not with charity. It embodied a resolve that man must not fear again. The winter of discontent was believed far gone and on the way out; the mood on* the upsurge was that of spring and renewal.

The founding nations resolved “to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war … to reaffirm faith in the fundamental human rights … to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties can be maintained … to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom.”

Remembering the weaknesses and failures of the old League of Nations, the new organization resolved upon a world federation with greater powers and wider membership but with no provision for voluntary withdrawal, to preserve international peace and security. It assumed that the big allies in the last war would continue to be inspired by the same mutual friendly cooperation that moved them during the common peril of that war.

The unanimity has since suffered a progressive disintegration. A new ominous phrase was born and has since gained currency—”the cold war.” The East and the West, as words, have taken on new significances far removed from Rudyard Kipling. New planets have preempted dominant positions in the international firmament and satellites have gravitated to within their respective orbits. Today, there is one world still—if you wish to make an issue of it—a “United Nations” but divided against itself. The indiscriminate but deliberate use of the veto by Soviet Russia has made havoc of all the hopes of cooperation and peace that clustered above and gave effulgence to the hills of San Francisco for the world of 1945.

Up to now there has been no way of compelling action from members for the implementation of United Nations resolutions in their respective territories. Up to now such implementation has been left to the sense of moral obligation of the member state concerned. Up to now no effective measures can be applied to member or non-member states guilty of aggression.

Korea has been a turning point in the career of the United Nations. Korea in 1950 compelled a makeshift arrangement for the assertion, however inadequate, of the authority of the United Nations against wanton aggression. Military forces contributed on a voluntary basis by democratic member states or members identified with the democracies have stopped the march of, but so far have not liquidated, aggression in Korea. The situation has brought into focus the inadequacies of the United Nations’ collective measures in a real emergency, indeed the inadequacies of any international organization whose members have the heterogeneous background that they have—of colonialism, of imperialism, of hostile ideologies and tragic national experiences. Korea has given impetus to an alternative— the formation of regional security arrangements aimed to constitute an interlocking global defense system for the preservation of freedom and peace.

The Philippines has cooperated and is cooperating in Korea as a military and a moral battleground. It has expanded and is advancing this cooperation in undertaking to promote the formation of a Pacific Union that will meet with the peculiar and varied orientations of all the countries of Southeast Asia.

While the accomplishments of the United Nations constitute a record of positive if not spectacular achievements, the whole world is still restless, nervous, fearful, and many are on the verge of despair.

One of the most dynamic thinkers of our times believes that unless something quite unforeseeable happens, one of three possibilities may come to pass before fie end of the present century. They are:

1. The end of human life, perhaps of all life on our planet.

2. A reversion to barbarism after a catastrophic reduction of the world population.

3. A unification of the world under one power possessing a monopoly of all the major weapons of war.

This is just expressive of the failure of the United Nations in its ultimate effort to achieve its high aims towards world peace and perhaps a despondent apprehension of the futility of the measures so far adopted to that end. For it fails to appreciate the positive advantages obtained by this world organization.

There is no doubt that the United Nations has accelerated the rehabilitation and development of backward and underdeveloped countries. Its Economic and Social Council created regional economic commissions in Europe, Latin America, and the Far East to facilitate this work. Programs of technical assistance are in operation in these different areas.

The United Nations’ specialized agencies such as the UNICEF for the welfare of the children of needy nations, the FAO for the proper development and allocation of world food resources, the ILO for the advancement of labor welfare, the UNESCO for raising cultural levels and standards everywhere, the ICAO for advancing air transport, the WHO for reducing incidence of diseases, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund for facilitating the economic development of rich but underdeveloped countries, the Universal Postal Union, the International Telecommunication Union, the International Refugee Organization, the World Meteorological Organization, the International Trade Organization, the Inter-Governmental Marine Consultative Organization—all these specialized agencies of the United Nations have embarked on projects designed to raise living standards in areas hitherto handicapped by lack of technical and other resources.

While the United Nations has not yet resolved the serious problem of Korea, nor has been able to reach an agreement on the control and manufacture of atomic energy, nor has found an acceptable formula for the regulation and reduction of conventional armaments, we cannot ignore that it is the best available instrument we have at hand with which to meet the problems and difficulties that face the world today.

To us small nations, particularly those in Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations is still the best means however imperfect to help achieve our purpose of peace, freedom, and security. It gives us a forum for airing our grievances and needs. It has successfully eased if not reduced areas of political crisis and conflicts. It serves to crystallize world opinion on the proper resolution of problems affecting all the peoples of the world. It enables us to pool our resources along with those of the rest of the world to advance-the economic, social, and cultural development of our country and our neighbors.

The dark prognostication of nervous philosophers should not let our thoughts run along the apocalyptic line of doom. Rather it should make us realize the urgency of more constructive and positive thinking as a means to clear the clouds that overshadow and oppress the human spirit everywhere today.

The degree of disagreement is definitely academic and in no way decisive on the destiny of mankind. Its sole interest lies in the fact that I am an inveterate optimist. God in His infinite wisdom has tolerated man to exist to this day; it has been a mighty long time, indeed; and I would not say that man, even in the bottomless depth of his folly, is incapable of early self-extinction after all the triumphs of the human spirit in all these centuries.

A reversion to barbarism is not impossible; races and civilizations have been known to decay and perish, but they have left a rich humus of memories and experiences on which other races and civilizations have been known to subsist and flourish.

A unification of the world under one power possessing a monopoly of all the major weapons of war is very possible, indeed, within this century. But with all that power on earth, there can be no real peace unless the, individual country or people acquire the inherent capacity for peace.

Peace is what the United Nations stands for. It is its reason for being. It is an ironic commentary on our times that while everybody talks about peace—the democracies, the dictators, the Rotarians, the churches, labor, industry, business, the rich, the poor, the public man, the private citizen—that while all these talk about peace, there is no peace.

Ours is a troubled epoch, its soul under constant torment, its loftiest aspiration a continuing experience in moral frustration!

The secret explanation must lie in the heart of every man, woman, and child, in the spirit of every group, organization, party, and nation. The explanation is the lack of peace in the heart, in the spirit, the lack of all that constitute and make for peace—such as good will, tolerance, sympathy, helpfulness, love, and hope.

Let every man, let every organization, let every community, let every nation, feel peace, think peace, exemplify peace, acquire the daily habit of peace, and our people, our region, our world shall be nearer peace. There can be peace at the point of a gun or with the threat of an atom bomb but not the peace that mankind longs for, the permanent peace in mind and soul, the feeling of tranquility that everybody has his daily bread and respects human rights and dignity. And this kind of peace can only be secured by a proper discipline of the moral spirit and character of the human race.

This is the challenge of our times. This is the primary responsibility of our educational and cultural institutions. We must return to the Master Teacher, to the humility and the sacrifice that gave Him and His name lasting power. We must not only believe but act the true follower and lover of the Prince of Peace in the intimate precincts of our family relations, in the transactions that make up community life and endeavor, in the activities that constitute nation-building, in the contacts and efforts that require international understanding and cooperation.

We have been alarmed by the talk of revolution. There is only one revolution we truly need—a revolution in the human heart to repudiate the hate, the greed, the selfishness that have been our unhappy heritage from the past. With that revolution in the heart substituting peace for force, good will for hate, cooperation for dissension, we shall be in a better position to march with the United Nations towards the lasting peace that is our dearest dream.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1952). The President’s United Nations Day address before the Rotarians at the Polo Club, October 23, 1952. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 48(10) , 4323-4328.