Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the opening day of the 11th biennial convention and 29th anniversary of the National Federation of Women’s Clubs of the Philippines

[Read by Executive Secretary Teodoro Evangelista, March 31, 1950]

I regret that I am unable to be with you on the opening day of the 11th biennial convention and 29th anniversary of the National Federation of Women’s Clubs of the Philippines. I regret it all the more because I am fully aware not only of the importance of this occasion but the vital role which this organization has played and will continue to play in the promotion of our nation’s welfare.

This organization occupies a warm spot in the hearts of the Filipino people. During the past three decades it has established itself in a pre-eminent position in the field of community service and social welfare. It has created a network of affiliated clubs throughout the length and breadth of the Archipelago which, in the hands of an alert and skillful leadership, has become a weapon of great efficacy in developing a strong civic spirit and a sense of national unity among our people.

Our nation today is passing through a grave crisis. It is well for our people to realize that this crisis, arising from both material and spiritual causes, will require the closest cooperation between the people and their government to solve. This crisis has manifested itself in the shape of three major problems: the problem of peace and order, the problem of food production and total economic mobilization, and the problem of developing a new sense of honesty and integrity among all our people whether inside or outside the Government.

As head of the present administration I wish to pledge to you the unceasing and relentless effort of the Government to solve this three-fold problem vigorously, speedily and without fear or favor. Plans are afoot by which the Government hopes to bring a greater measure of peace and security throughout the land in the shortest possible time and without giving quarter to the lawless elements that are disturbing the national tranquility. We have initiated and are following up a program of economic development calculated to make our country self-sufficient in food supply and to increase our production of export commodities at least to pre-war levels if not beyond. Finally, the Government has embarked upon a policy of cleaning up graft and corruption, dishonesty and abuse, inefficiency and waste in our body politic.

I give you every assurance that my administration, in cooperation with the other branches of the Government, will prosecute these policies relentlessly until our goals are achieved.

At the same time, our people must be reminded that the Government is not omnipotent, that it cannot do all these things by its own efforts unaided by the masses of our people. The Government is merely the political organ for the execution of the popular will, and the potency and effectiveness of its efforts must depend ultimately on the degree of cooperation which the people vouchsafe to it.

Therefore, in a very real sense, it may be said that the responsibility for solving the present, national crisis rests equally upon the Government and upon the people themselves. I have no doubt that our people desire nothing more fervently than the three goals which I have just stated; namely, peace and order, economic security, and moral regeneration. The good society rests upon these three pillars and I am sure that I interpret our people’s desires correctly when I place these three objectives at the head of our national program.

Since we are agreed that these are our three major, problems, I beseech you to give us your light and to lend us your strength towards their effective and speedy solution.

As we buckle down to this great task we should do well to indulge in a bit of self-criticism. The solution of our problems presupposes a capacity for positive action. Positive action, in turn, requires that we rid ourselves of three vices; namely, the vice of complacency by which some people are prone to accept existing evils in the hope that everything will turn out right in the end; the vice of “letting George do it,” by which some people, while recognizing the existence of evils, yet refuse to do anything about such evils themselves because they expect other men to do the job; and the vice of “niñgas cogon,” by which some people are moved to action by a short-lived reformatory zeal which dies out almost as soon as it is born.

I, for one, do not accept the theory that these traits are inherent in our people. We all have seen how our nation has passed with flying colors the test of blood and fire during the war and the occupation. The story of those tragic years is not a story of complacency, lethargy, and short-lived enthusiasm. It is a story, rather, or courage, aspiration and determination under seemingly insuperable odds. Our people have shown these qualities in every crisis of their history, and I am sure they have it in them to show these qualities again in the face of the serious problems that confront us.

The community service and social welfare organizations have a special responsibility in arousing and directing the energies of our people towards the solution of these problems. I look upon them as the loyal partners of the Government in the successful execution of our national program. I look with special interest and enthusiasm upon the efforts of the National Federation of Women’s Clubs of the Philippines to accomplish its share of this program. We have a right to expect that this organization of Filipino women, which draws its huge membership from every class of our society and from every nook and corner of the Archipelago, will evolve its own program of social action on a nation-wide scale which shall reinforce and support the efforts of the Government in this field.

You, my friends, have labored with us in the service of our people for nearly thirty years. You have developed a tradition of loyal service that has earned for your organization a special place of honor in the affections of our people. I take this opportunity to congratulate you most warmly on your past achievements and to call upon you to face with courage and enthusiasm the grave tasks which await to be done today and tomorrow.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Address of His Excellency, President Elpidio Quirino, at the opening day of the 11th biennial convention and 29th anniversary of the National Federation of Women’s Clubs of the Philippines at the Escoda Memorial, March 31, 1950 [Read by Executive Secretary Teodoro Evangelista]. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46(3) , 915-917.