Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On the Sixteenth Anniversary of Constitution Day

[Delivered on February 8, 1951]

Dear Friends:

I rejoice in the opportunity to celebrate with you the 16th anniversary of our Constitution.

We have a great document in our Constitution. The combined knowledge and wisdom of the best available minds of our people and the experience of other free peoples that made the history of the world found expression in that noble formulation of our system of government. It is comparable with the best that modern civilization has or knows for free men anywhere.

I am proud that I was one of its signers; and, if only to bring back to mind my association with the country’s greatest talents who framed that wonderful document, this banquet, to me, is an occasion for rededication to the high ideals that guided its adoption, as well as a reconsecration to the best interests of our people and renewal of pledge for the preservation of their liberty and freedom.

But as we grow in years we realize that our Constitution is not a perfect document. It is not a final revelation for all time, and it was not meant to be. It is well that it was not, for it is a living thing. It must grow as we grow, and it must change as we change in response to the needs of our separate times. Verily, the Constitution lives for the people and not the people for the Constitution.

Thus, since the birth of the Constitution, the imperatives of our very own experience as a nation, more than as demanded by our political and economic transition, have required inescapable changes in the brief space of 12 years (1947 being the last time we amended the fundamental law of the land). For the nature of the government it set up combines permanence with provisions for progress.

But while the Constitution must be constantly adopting new premises from life, eliminating mere survivals from the past, it does not follow that it can be and must be changed with every fresh drift of opinion by chance, whim, or fancy.

However, there should always be reason for testifying to our capacity for improvement. On an occasion such as we have today, we do well to refresh our minds in the spirit of the Constitution to check up our bearings, adjust our sights, and strengthen the loyalties which it defines.

The spirit of our Constitution as reflected in those loyalties is something we hope to maintain through the processes of time. It accentuates and sets store by the civilian way of living together in the Republic, the way of preserving our liberties and decencies of social intercourse against the frenzies of the despotic and violent temper.

Something must be done to render more foolproof the guarantees for clean elections. The periodic expression of the popular will as a safety valve for political passions that, repressed, have a tendency to foster and poison the entire body politic, must be adjusted and synchronized to reduce not only the frequency but the expenses of elections. Experience has shown that constant political tension has marred and dismally delayed the solution of many of our constructive national problems.

Safeguards for the legitimate-succession to power, through the normal democratic processes, of able men inspired not solely by political and personal convenience, nor by force or violence, should be at the back of our minds when we consider our fundamental charter.

The task of the present and the future, a task of civilization superior to all others, is to preserve the idea of constitutional processes as contrasted with the authoritarian principle of despotism and keep it anchored firmly in the minds and affections of succeeding generations.

The sad spectacle today is the presumptuous role of people outside of the law and their sympathizers who would dictate on what the government should do to facilitate their march to power or exact their terms for the abandonment of their nefarious activities. Backed with the force of arms, the pretension is not only revolutionary but suicidal to our democratic existence. How to meet the situation squarely and intelligently but effectively is the problem of the hour. Other countries are confronted by the same problem at this moment.

Our task is rendered many times more difficult because we are building as we are being divided and destroyed. We are compelled on occasion to depart from the normal procedure by force of fact and circumstance attesting to extraordinary danger. Thus it is that in the crucial test between freedom and tyranny, between democracy and communism, the constitutional spirit is placed under the severest strain.

The mortal enemies of our Republic may invoke, as they do, the protection of the Constitution they seek ultimately to destroy.

Communist propaganda in our midst is distracting public attention from its conspiracy to overthrow our government surreptitiously seducing public sympathy by utilizing the Constitution to protect the plotters against national security.

The conspiracy is now well-known. The details of its systematic execution have taken some time in unfolding. The reports of the daily press confirm the vigor of a widespread, ruthless movement for the violent overthrow of our democratic system. “Revolution” is their confessed watchword. Enough innocent lives have been sacrificed; enough property has been destroyed.

We certainly do not. propose to permit our Constitution to be used as a shield for crimes against citizens and the State, in the transparent pretense of restoring civil liberties and democratic processes.

We should be less than innocent and not allow it to be a springboard for the defense and comfort of aggressive aspirants to power, whose claim to experience in government is circumscribed to terrorizing defenseless citizens, murdering them, looting their possessions, imposing tributes, and subscribing to the inevitability of progress by force and violence.

What should challenge our action more in this perilous period is the question not only of rights affirmed under the Constitution, but of duties that devolve upon us to keep the document a living thing and to sustain a government embodying its spirit.

We have been wont to regard the Constitution as a mere compendium of inalienable rights, but seldom as a code of duties. We have been wont to think of it for what there is in it for us; quite a number, for what indulgences it authorizes and dispenses for their selfish gratification. Very few have thought much of the labor, the struggles, the sacrifices out of which the rights were earned and for which the noble document acquired meaning. Certainly, many merely thought of themselves as lucky heirs to an ample fortune that they could squander after having established their title.

What we should all know and what every new generation should know is that the Constitution can continue to be a fruitful instrument of rights only as we conscientiously contribute our share of duties in terms of our own labors .and sacrifices to preserve and maintain our inheritance, our way of life, our system of government.

“The defense of the State is a prime duty of government,” says our Constitution. But our responsibility as citizens and the ordinary rights of individuals must yield for the security of the State. The duty of the State to protect the life, liberty, and property of the people requires a corresponding obligation on the part of the individual citizen.

The right to life, liberty, and property derives meaning from the obligation to respect them, protect them, and preserve them in others, not in any license for inhumanity, violence, and indiscriminate vandalism or appropriation.

The honesty, discipline, and competence called for in the daily conduct of our lives cannot be supplied by the Constitution however perfectly it is worded or however ingeniously it is amended in accordance with the latest predilections and fancies in the struggle for power. The initiative for all those imperatives must start from our individual hearts and consciences if our Constitution is to have real flesh and blood.

We should ask ourselves what we should do and what we should give to keep us strong and united in facing the threat to our freedom and common existence—even yielding on occasion and for the moment certain of our individual rights where they are outweighed by the exigencies of common security and wellbeing.

A good citizen makes a good government; a good government makes a good constitution. In the same way a bad citizen spoils a good government; a bad government spoils .the; best constitution.

Civic virtue or civic conscience is essential to good government. Where the citizen lacks it, and tolerates disrespect of the law or abets the flagrant violations against life, against property, against civil rights, he helps undermine good government, himself becomes a menance to good government, and society. Where the citizen, lacks civic virtue, he easily falls victim to distrust of government fomented and fostered through consistent, mischievous political propaganda to compensate for defeat and frustration.

My dear friends, in your own provinces, you have seen numerous examples of crimes systematically committed against the life, liberty, and property of innocent men, women, and children. If stout lovers of the Constitution come out to defend the perpetrators of these crimes and apologize for them, we should not be surprised if we had a .meaningless Constitution. And we should be less surprised that, realizing the danger, we avail ourselves of the extraordinary remedies under the Constitution for the security of the State and for the protection of the poor, defenseless citizenry.

We are not giving the Constitution a chance to succeed if we easily fall for enemy propaganda that exploits the constitutional spirit to effect the destruction of our free institutions, if we let the enemy divide us on the artificial issues they create to camouflage their conspiracy and distract us from the urgent job of restoring the peace and tranquility of our communities, increasing our productivity and raising the general well-being.

We are not giving the Constitution a chance to succeed unless we take to reinforcing our moral and spiritual sinews, unless we let our conscience govern our action and rule put the fears, distrust, and bitterness among ourselves which vitiate common understanding and cooperation.

The Constitution cannot supply us the character we need and lack. On the contrary, we must develop integrity that can make our Constitution, or any constitution, a valid charter of our liberties.

Members of the Philippine Lawyers Association, you can be of immense service to the system of freedom that our Constitution celebrates by developing our moral resources and dedicating them to the charter’s broadening fulfillment in our daily thought and practice. You can reduce to the minimum the technical hocus-pocus for evading duties and responsibilities and for creating issues that serve to confuse, divide, and embitter the people when the need is for good will, understanding, and solidarity.

As individuals and as a people, we can survive our perils and emerge the stronger when we cherish the Constitution not merely as an affirmation of rights but as an injunction to civic duties for the pertetuation of a free and democratic system.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, on the Sixteenth Anniversary of Constitution Day, Manila Hotel, February 8, 1951. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(2) , 628-631.