Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the tenth annual commencement exercises of Adamson University and on the occasion of his being conferred the degree of Doctor of Laws, “honoris causa”

[Delivered at the St. Theresa’s College auditorium , April 28, 1948]

I have been summoned to this great seat of learning to be honored in the traditional glamour and splendor of academic paraphernalia and sheepskin. Having spent my lifetime exposed to the swift and swirling currents of practical life, I believe it timely and appropriate that on a time-honored occasion like this I draw those in the cloisters to the sidewalk of practical affairs and as a man of the world, bring to them the rugged beliefs as forged daily on the anvil of factual and actual experience.

We live in an era which may prove to be either the prelude to the millennium or the last in the history of mankind.

The contradiction between man’s desire for peace and man’s weapons for war finds expression in the cold conflict that is raging between democracy and communism. While constantly avowing a desire for peace, West and East are nervously waiting for war.

It is time for mankind to pause in its uncertain course and consider why there is such an appalling disparity between its capacity for peace and its capacity for war, why its noble desires and aspirations are invariably betrayed by its own deeds. Here and now, it is time for us to ask if the universities, which produce the thinkers and the leaders of every nation, have somehow failed in their task.

Higher learning first developed in cloisters. In the ancient world of Plato and Aristotle philosophy was dispensed to an exclusive set of students who followed their mentors to the meadows and woods of Athens and led detached lives. Much of the world’s learning also came from the religious sanctuaries and cathedrals where monks and priests crystallized much of human knowledge into theology, literature, philosophy, mathematics and science. Of necessity, the search for wisdom ignored the day-to-day affairs of the outside world and was directed exclusively to the quarrying of the rockbed of truths and facts as fossilized in past human experiences.

From such centers of research and meditation came the idea of the university and its basic function of pursuing truth. The character of universities and their mission have since undergone fundamental transformation. Gingerly and slowly, these institutions have tried to keep abreast of the contemporary world.

But in general university education still retains its detachment from life, still keeps its unconcern over many of the basic problems of peoples and nations. This is true with respect not only to the substance but also to the form of instruction. We continue to sacrifice the current and urgent facts of existence for the long-cataloged chronicles of battles, the long-proven theorems of mathematics, and the long-crystallized forms of dialectics. And we make students acquire all this as a part of their education, often without giving them an inkling of their relation and application to home and hearth, to the tribulations and turmoils of the world.

I realize that it is not only teachers and students who succumb to the fascination of ancient and medieval times.

Thrilled by the wisdom of Solomon and the boldness of Genghis Khan, some people now and then emerge from the musty volumes of history, and, like Archimedes, excitedly announce that they have found the solution to the complex problems of the present. I do not minimize the great contributions of the past to the accumulated wisdom of the world. But I do maintain that we must hold paramount the study and analysis of our country’s position in the present world situation and direct all our efforts towards the practical and effective solution of the problems as they arise. To dig deep into the past for guidance may prove interesting to the scholastic mind but is unoriginal and uncreative as taking a rabbit out of a hat. Just as the generalship of Eisenhower and Mac Arthur was a vast improvement on that of Alexander the Great, so the method of solving our unique problems of today must be commensurately wiser than the statecraft of the Pharaohs of Egypt and the kings of Babylon.

Ivory-tower education has produced ivory-tower citizens. At home with Alexander the Great and Napoleon, they may not be helpful companions to Juan de la Cruz. No wonder it has often happened that the honor student in college becomes a mediocre man of affairs while the middling turns out to be a competent man of the world.

Educators seem to have sought to disguise the detachment of colleges and universities from the realities of everyday life by emphasizing extra-curricular activities consisting of literary programs, athletics and social parties that now and then give the student a taste of the common diet of mortal men. Without doubt, these projects serve some good purpose. It is regrettable, however, that, by creating in most young minds the wrong impression of values and merits, they may unwittingly foist wrong ideals for youth to emulate. The loquacious and bombastic, the social lion, the expensively-dressed and well-groomed has each wrongly become to adolescent minds the embodiment of the competent and complete man.

The precarious condition of the world is in a sense proof of the failure of education in general and university education in particular. It screams for a fundamental and radical educational reform, a reform that wiL add as a major objective of education the endowment of each graduate of a measure of practical statesmanship. This objective can be attained if the youth is properly exposed to the urgent problems of the nation and the world. Such exposure should result in familiarizing the student with the problems, in stimulating him to think and meditate on them, in inspiring him to seek their solution: in short, in making him part and parcel of daily life as he advances in his training while broadening his knowledge of the past to serve as a ballast.

In the Philippines, the new university education should introduce Filipino youth to the peculiar problems of our own times and, if possible, endow them with the ability to participate wisely and actively in their solution. The principle that universities should be instruments of the state for the good of its people is not new. Emperor Frederick II founded the University of Naples in 1224 expressly to train men to take a share in the administration of his empire, and, after the Reformation, universities more and more became active agencies in the attainment of the objectives of good government. This mission of the university subsequently became obscured by the clamor for academic freedom, the demand for research, and the effort to restore and reestablish the humanist traditions. There need be no fundamental incompatibility in all these objectives; we in the Philippines should be able to reconcile and muster them as additional active forces in the building of our new Republic. The present generation is confronted with problems and responsibilities far heavier than those ever faced by mankind. We must untangle the maze that confounds and confuses. Clear thinking, clean living, devotion to progress and to high ideals and principles which have ever kept mankind moving onward—let these be our guide.

Whether or not the international situation, now characterized as a cold war, will aggravate into a shooting war today or tomorrow or in the next few years, the Philippines can have no better way of preparing itself for peace, if peace there be, or war, if war must come, than by intensifying the training of men to meet the responsibilities required. If war should come, technical men will be of great assistance in producing the materials of war that may be necessary. If peace should continue, the same technical men could help produce the wealth that will bring prosperity and happiness to our people. Men with technical training in industrial engineering, mining, fishing, forest exploitation and other lines will be most useful to the Republic, both in war and peace. Technical training should be an immediate objective of university education so as to adequately supply the country with the urgently needed technicians in our vast program of reconstruction. Our unlimited potentialities so require and our future economic stability so demand.

The Adamson University is emphasizing technical training. In its effort to train technical men for the proper harnessing of our resources and man-power, it is rendering a unique service to the Philippines.

The Philippines has always been a great importer of foreign know-how. We have always hinted experts in all branches of knowledge from mining engineers to fishing-experts. That is because our preparation has not been as advanced as in other countries. However, there is no denying the wisdom of striving for self-sufficiency in technical education not only because this is one of the signs of national maturity, but also because men and women trained at home with the tools available and the materials on hand will in the long run create here the needed reserve to draw from for public service in times of necessity. Moreover, men and women trained in universities in this country, with curricula geared to local conditions, should prove not only better technicians but may in the long run also develop methods and tools of their own ingenuity suitable for local use. The process of adaptation to environment is not a matter of months or even years, but often of generations. The longer time, we have had in training technicians and the more experiences these technicians acquire from year to year and generation to generation. The greater will be the efficiency and productiveness resulting from their work.

The training of technical men need not wait for the decision as to whether or not the Philippines will continue to be an agricultural or become an industrial country. It will be a long long time before we can produce the number of technical men needed to man our existing industries. It will take still longer’ time to train the number we shall need if we are to embark upon an intense program of industrialization. There is, therefore, 40 danger whatsoever of an oversupply of technical men. This is a field in which we have barely scratched the surface.

This is the challenge of our young Republic to our colleges and universities and their faculties; and students. It is a challenge which I hope this my new Alma Mater, the Adamson University, will meet with earnestness and determination. During its years of pioneering educational work, this great institution has ever been among those in the vanguard. Its solid accomplishments qualify it admirably to take the lead in making university education in the Philippines responsive to the solution of the immediate problems of our society, as it has so done in providing for the necessary industrial technical training of our youth.

President Adamson: To you and to your Board of Trustees, I wish to express my gratitude for the signal honor that you have accorded me by the conferment upon me of the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws. I accept the honor with great humility resolved that, in all my acts henceforth, I shall render this institution a commensurate honor.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, at the tenth annual commencement exercises of Adamson University, on Wednesday afternoon, April 28, 1948, at the St. Theresa’s College auditorium, on the occasion of his being conferred the degree of doctor of laws, “honoris causa”. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44(4) , 1339-1343.