Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before the Philippine Association of University Professors

[Delivered on May 31, 1952]

Ladies and Gentlemen:

When the Republic of the Philippines was inaugurated, there was a message brought to this part of the world. That message was democracy. I have noticed in your discussions since this morning, and in the announced topics of discussion, that your deliberations will center on the topic Democracy.

Democracy has been abused by the different elements of the civilized world. Even the so-called totalitarian countries, who are enemies of democracy, speak of democracy. Which goes to show as we usually say, that even the devil can quote the Scriptures. Anybody can speak of democracy even if he were against democracy, just to promote some known objective or to suit his own convenience.

Democracy in the Philippines has been a topic of both those in favor of democracy and those against it. It has been very much abused. But even those who desire to show the benefits of a democratic country have forgotten that we in the Government are trying to transform the qualities of democracy into concrete, tangible form to enable all to experience the tangible results of democracy. Those of us who are specially engaged in politics have found it very convenient to gainsay, if not systematically attack or disparage what is being accomplished by our government, irrespective of the party affiliations of those who are at the head of it, by calling this government dictatorial, undemocratic, and other undesirable epithets. And our people have become confused regarding the kind of democracy that we are trying to implement in the Philippines.

During recent days, to show how democracy works in this country, especially in our campaign against dissident elements who are really against our democratic institutions, we employed several means to show in concrete form the benefits of democracy to our people. We have chosen two ways by which we can convince, especially the dissident elements, that democracy works here despite communism. We have employed military means as well as economic means.

As far as military means is concerned, I think that we are succeeding much to the chagrin of those who would like to see the failure of this administration, in gradually but finally instilling in the minds of the dissident elements the dangers of communism. We have already broken the organization of the politburo. We have sent to jail several followers of communism in this country. No less than 100 have been sentenced to jail and two or three have been sentenced to death. Aside from that, we also, in our military action, have eliminated, not to say liquidated, in the frontal attack between the government forces and those of communism or dissident elements, a great portion of those unbelievers in democracy in the Philippines. So, both by military action as well as by court action, we have been able to handle the great portion of the problem of dissidence among our enemies in our own land.

Actually, we are engaged in another campaign—that is, on the phase of economic development—showing to our people the benefits of democracy. As early as three years ago, I had the temerity to launch an ambitious program to provide our people with a new ideology to follow. No matter what you want to do, if you do not have a definite objective, if you do not have a concrete program of action, people will always believe that you are just talking of abstractions. So, with our limited means, I launched three years ago the new Philippine ideology based on total economic mobilization We did not gain much ground during the first two years, but especially since last year, with the help of the United States which has committed itself to give us $250 million to implement our program of economic development, we started a new revolution in our economic life.

I would not call it exactly an agricultural revolution or an industrial revolution. I might therefore call it economic revolution. We have to center our attention to this phase of the campaign against those who do not believe in democracy in this part of the world. We have implemented that program with huge projects of development, huge constructions of basic units of our industries such as the establishment of hydraulic plants, irrigation systems, fertilizer plants, cement plants, as well as minor industries, so-called cottage industries, in an effort to coordinate the national effort with private initiative so that we could round off our program of economic development, and convince our people with the tangible results and benefits of democracy.

Although we have already inaugurated several of these projects since a year ago, the major projects will begin to be inaugurated by June. We have a big irrigation project in Zambales that is going to cost the government ₱3 million. The fertilizer plant in Lanao will be inaugurated by the end of the year. The hydroelectric plant at Maria Cristina Falls will be inaugurated not later than February of next year. And around that date, we will perhaps inaugurate the national shipyards in Mariveles. All these are part of the total economic mobilization program.

We have seen how industries have multiplied in our country since liberation. Since liberation up to July 1, 1951, the number of new industries established in the Philippines was only 70. Seeing the great incentive and the rush on the part of financiers, and encouraged by the new atmosphere of economic development given by the United States government, the new industries that were registered from July 1 to October 31, last year, were around 72. From 1945 to July 1, 1951, there were only 70 new industries. From July 1 to October 31, 1951, 72 were established. And from October last year to date, I think, that amount has been doubled. Industries are springing throughout the country today. The spirit of the people now is towards industrialization. There is a veritable industrial revolution in the country today. With the establishment of basic industries, I am quite sure that we can now present facts and figures to show how democracy works here in tangible results. This is a different stage in our development.

In other countries, their propaganda is speeches and pamphlets. They go from place to, place utilizing all the means of persuasion to make the people realize that democracy is more advantageous than totalitarianism or communism.

In our country, with all the facts we now have in our hands, what we lack is words, persuasion, and transmission in what we are doing to inspire the people and spark them to action. That is what we want. It is surprising that some of those who had been captured as intellectual leaders of the communists in the Philippines come from the ranks of university professors. (Laughter)

It is surprising. For example, Celia Mariano, Pomeroy’s wife, Lava—some of these intellectuals in the communist ranks, come from the class of university professors. And you are the ones advocating democracy, saying you are doing more than what we are talking about. And I have been showing that eloquently during the last two or three years.

What we need, therefore, is to coordinate our efforts. While we are digging, while we are producing, while we are making a campaign for total economic mobilization, let us evolve a new ideology or doctrine which expresses the efforts of our people towards the realization of the benefits of democracy. And it is you, university professors, who must handle this and not the government itself. So I ask you, I challenge you to honestly put in concrete form some catchy message to our people and to our country regarding the advantages of democracy.

I have long been fighting and I am still fighting, to transform the qualities of democracy into concrete forms, as I said, in order that the people may have evidence of the tangible results of this idea of democracy which will otherwise be meaningless. But others have to help in making the people understand them in their minds, in their hearts, and in their souls, because once you have been able to win the loyalty of the people and convince them of the great benefits of the program of action we have traced, I am quite sure tranquility will reign in this country and we can center our attention to our economic development which is the source of a stable government and the happiness and contentment of our people.

I hope that you will go beyond the routinary discussion of things attached to your profession as professors and help the government evolve some formula by which we can send a message to our people and have something to inspire them and win their support and loyalty to our side. I thank you for having given me this opportunity to discourse on something which is directly connected with my own duties as administrator of the affairs of this country. Thank you very much. (Applause)

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1952). Address of the President before the Philippine Association of University Professors, Malacañan Ceremonial Hall, May 31, 1952. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 48(5) , 1762-1765.