Address of Honorable Fernando Lopez Vice-President of the Philippines Before the Community Chest

[Delivered on January 21, 1950]

As I take time to pause from my official duties, I come to you today with a special obligation to perform because I believe that this movement which you have so laudably started and admirably guided is the foundation structure of good citizenry and the gospel of decent and strong government edifice. It behooves every man to make it his duty to be part of this noble crusade. As the Red Feather drive ends today, we look back to our yesterdays. We face the present realities, visualize the future and stop to measure how much of our feelings and our thoughtfulness have been tangibly expressed and translated into charity and benevolence for the good of community and humanity. We ponder to count or recount not in the amount that we have given to the poor and the forgotten but in the abundance of human relations that we have augmented and moulded; not in the terms of charity we have bestowed, but fundamentally, in the standard of real service we have rendered to our communities and mankind. For the mission of the Community Chest is much more than charity. Charity is nothing else but giving to others something in terms of money or articles and other valuables. The humanitarian expedition of the Community Chest is rather the unselfish rendition of service to humanity, gratis et amore , compensated only by the spiritual satisfaction arising from having done a good deed to others and to society. In your crusade there is no excess, for human nature is boundless and the nobility of character that is in you is bountiful. While charity begins at home, as the saying goes, yet it should not end at home, for it is far better to give and to love beyond your homes even if you remain to be poor, rather than be rich with empty hearts within your homes.

The activities for this year of the Red Feather Institution are varied and numerous, worthy of recognition and appreciation. When struggling families going down to indigency are helped to stand on their feet and returned to society; when the poor and the underprivileged bearing patiently the burden of poverty are given not only love and affection but security to live in order to exist; when the aged and the infirm are given respiration and respect; when homes are builded for the homeless and even the deaf and the blind taken care of; when the youths are provided with wholesome atmosphere and opportunities to become assets to society and the government—then you can, in conscience say, that you have not failed in your mission, that you have not failed your fellow beings, your God and humanity.

As this drive goes to a successful end today, I heartily accepted your invitation so that I could offer my personal congratulations particularly to the unselfish organizers and crusaders of the Community Chest Movement of Greater Manila, for the marked promotion in the social order they have implanted in our Filipino homes and communities. You have successfully federated and consolidated various social agencies to a common goal and to a United Fund. You have contributed not only to the sanitation, health and recreation activities of our people in Greater Manila, but in your own way, you are assisting in the educational, physical, and moral elevation of the citizenry in this infant Republic of ours.

The nineteen affiliated social agencies through which you infuse and diffuse your services, your charity and liberality, also deserves public commendation for the unselfish and untiring efforts they have shown towards the general interest and welfare of our various localities.

The Community Chest has introduced a more effective and systematic procedure in serving the best interests of the deserving classes. The hospitals with charity wards, the family agencies devoted to the protection and preservation of family life, the charitable institutions specifically established to look after the unfortunates and the downtrodden, the missionary agencies nursing women of broken morale and broken homes, the schools and other institutions fostering and promoting the education of our children and our youths are monumental human structures which will become lasting mementos to your invaluable services and sacrifices.

In this connection, I also offer my congratulations to the public for the earnest response and wholehearted spirit with which they have manifested to make the Red Feather drive this year a complete success. I hope that the more fortunate of our populace would give out more to our less fortunate brothers. The pleasures of the rich are but the products of the tears of the poor, and the happiness that one enjoys will be eventually lost by coveting for more if we do not share it with our fellow beings. The Filipino citizen by nature is endowed with a soft loving heart and carries the satisfaction of giving rather than receiving. We are conscious that life is but a probation on earth, its worth being measured in how much we are at ease with ourselves and our fellowmen. We live in this universe not as we desire but the best we can. For, every human being, even if he belongs to the lowest strata of society, possesses a certain degree of dignity and integrity which he endeavors to maintain in order to hold his place among his fellowmen, even within his class and level. Take away that pride, that honor and that dignity and you will see him slipping away from the atmosphere of respectability and uprightness to become a burden to society. To save such human being from the abyss into which he has unfortunately fallen and to restore him and his family to his proper place in society, is not only the mission of the Community Chest but the bounden responsibility of the public just as well.

One of the main concern of the Red Feather organization, for instance, is the protection of children from the pitfalls of life to which they are inevitable heirs. It is strange to what extent efforts will be exerted to save a single child’s life. There was, for example, the case of a little girl who fell down a well in California last winter. The news swept across the continent and the oceans, and awakened sympathy from everyone who heard it. Efforts and means to take her out were contributed by various individuals, and it was estimated that $50,000 had been spent before she was recovered. Yet no one spoke of the amount spent, but everyone was concerned about the happiness of her parents. Such is service to humanity, which is invaluable and indispensable. The Community Chest of Greater Manila should be highly commended for striving to serve our communities in the spirit in which that California child was saved. Let us all open our hearts and join this Red Feather drive for the sake of our today and our tomorrow.

This world-wide fraternity, which is composed of 14,000 agencies operated by civic-spirited citizens the world over has for its primary objectives the social welfare, health and education of the citizenry. We are asked to supply funds to keep it in operation from year to year. It is the most glaring monument of private enterprise operating to sustain private charities and presents a strong and formidable front against the forces of Communism disorder and unrest. It is a worthwhile project which merits the support of every individual and very institution.

Here in the Philippines, the men and women behind the Community Chest are to be congratulated for the exemplary service that they have manifested in keeping with the program and ideals of this universal organization. Civic-spirited citizens and Government officials, men and women, regardless of creed or color, have joined hands behind this movement. Our public has done its part by responding accordingly to its call. I earnestly hope that men in the government should give more attention to this human mission. After all, you can only govern the people by serving them. Everyone seems to have realized that its primary aims are really carried to the letter. In the final analysis, significantly the Community Chest motto is rightfully worded thus: “Everybody gives, everybody benefits.” As the saying goes: “It is better to be of service even to the bad for the sake of those who are good, than to fail the good on account of the bad.”

Ladies and gentlemen, as we close this annual Red Feather drive today, let us commence another drive tomorrow. We may now rest in satisfaction at the thought that we have given and that we too have benefited. Let us hold ourselves in readiness to cooperate with the next drive to spread charity, social justice, and human affection to all * * * to kindle and enliven the living spirit in our hearts and our souls—as testament of our goodness and kindliness, of our solidarity and nobility.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Lopez, F. (1950). Address of Vice-President Fernando Lopez before the Community Chest. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46(1) , 37-40.