Address of Honorable Elpidio Quirino Vice President of the Philippines On the occasion of the awarding of diplomas of merit and medals to the “Outstanding Mothers of 1946”

[Delivered on December 2, 1946]

We have gathered this afternoon to do due homage to the worthy fathers and mothers of this nation. We have singled out this one day of the year to lift the ordinary reverence of every home to a national worship of the first order. We do this not because we believe the reverence of the home is in great need of being bolstered up. Neither do we do it as second thought for unpaid tributes to those who lived before us as fathers and mothers for whom as a Christian people, we have long observed and reserved a day of prayer and religious remembrance. We do this for a great national purpose. Now more than ever this country needs good fathers, good mothers,—parents who can intelligently guide their children in our new national existence and teach them the true meaning of independence, our right outlook, our obligations and responsibilities, and the value of self-reliance, and thus properly inspire them with the natural pride and courage of self-respecting people in the spirit of true devotion to their home and country as a patriotic duty.

We have set a day for our national heroes. Their worship sets the standard of greatness which the youth should follow. The youth can only follow such a set standard to the extent as parents are willing to work and sacrifice for their offsprings in order to give them the best guidance and discipline at home and wherever they may be. That is the plain story of every man who has attained renown. His beginnings always started at home—be it a palace or a humble hut—the inspiration has always been that of his mother or father. And that is the lesson of parenthood we should all learn if Parents’ Day were to have a meaning and purpose as we conceive it as a day of dedication and worship.

It is fitting that on such an occasion like this we should be presented with both the subject and object lesson. For the object lesson, we are honored today by the citation of the National Federation of Women’s Clubs with the presence of the two most distinguished Filipino mothers.

The respect and affection that all men have for their parents, their families, and their homes, is born with nature. The most inexhaustible spring of literature, the world’s finest poets have poured inspired and sublime thoughts to exalt it in words of lasting form and beauty. The modern state itself, with its complicated structure of rights and obligations, has evolved from the basic pattern of the family; and even religion has borrowed the imagery of parenthood to illustrate the relations between man and his Creator. But the war from whose general disaster we are only slowly and painfully emerging has emphasized anew the urgent need of formulating a philosophy of human relations fit to withstand the new demands of modern times. I have made reference to the war because, in large measure, it was a conflict between rival and irreconcilable ideologies, a conflict that has not yet been fully resolved. Especially here in the Far East, it was a clash between two antagonistic philosophies shaped and reenforced by different conceptions of the role of the family and of the home.

One of those philosophies, darkened with the cruelty and brutality of primitive man, had fossilized the ethics of the jungle. It subordinated and submerged the individual completely, enslaving him to a rigid tyranny of age and status. The wife was subject to the husband, the children were subject to the father, the widow was subject to the eldest son, and all were subject to the patriarch of the clan. The entire nation was likened to a vast and disciplined family and, like children subject to their father, every man and woman was subject to the sovereign who was the god-emperor. In this primitive pattern, the individual had no more rights or responsibilities than a minor child; he had only one duty, the duty to obey, to obey blindly, to obey without argument or compunction. The individual did not matter in the scheme of things; he had no value or worth as a human being; his sole significance and reason for existence was found in the family and in the greater family of the State.

There may have been a time in human history when these ethics were justified and even necessary. There may have been a time when the paramount need for survival of the species, for the continuity and propagation of the race, demanded and exacted the subordination of the individual to the larger unit, to the family, the clan, the tribe, or the empire. But we have seen for ourselves the horrible fruits of such a philosophy in our duty.

The modern era, however, in a violent reaction against these feudal theories of the home, has formulated a radically opposite philosophy of its own, with which we cannot be in entire agreement. This modern philosophy exalts the individual above any and all social ties or obligations; it enthrones and crowns him as an almighty tyrant, without responsibilities or obligations other than the satisfaction of his own selfish desires. The family becomes for him no more than a temporary arrangement like those of the beasts of the field or the birds in the sky. When the biological needs of the care and feeding of the young are filled, the home is deserted like a cave or a nest when the mating season has run its course.

Closely allied to this philosophy, and indeed its logical outcome in modern times, is the totalitarian doctrines which holds that if the individual has any obligations, he has them only to the State, to the dictator, the most powerful individual of them all. Marriages become experiments in eugenics conducted by State scientists. Children are bred and reared in the cold efficiency of State nurseries. Thus, we saw the Nazi dictatorship encouraging the promiscuous union between German soldiers and German girls in order to produce more cannon fodder, without benefit of marriage or the inconveniences of establishing and maintaining a home. We have seen also other totalitarian systems vainly endeavoring to destroy the family by making marriage and divorce a matter of purely routine registration with the police.

The Filipino people have rejected all these evil and pernicious philosophies. Our ancient, traditional, and deep-rooted faith in the Christian doctrines cannot allow us to accept the theory of extreme individualism, just as our profound and war-tested belief in democracy cannot permit us to enslave the individual to the tyrannies of the primitive family. The family that we honor today, the home whose sanctity we are pledged to preserve, is a Filipino family in a Filipino home, with all the rights and obligations that it implies.

The Filipino family of today should be, and is, an equal partnership of mutual love, respect, and trust, where the individual man or woman is equally conscious of his personal inalienable rights and of his personal obligations to his marital partner and his children, and where the children render due obedience and respect to their parents while the parents guide their children, as long as it is necessary, along the road to full personal fulfillment and achievement.

There is a test that is usually reliable in evaluating the institution of the family, and that is the position of the wife and the mother. Where the woman is a mere chattel, the family cannot be strong and healthy. But where the wife enjoys the rights and prerogatives of an equal partner, where the mother directs the education of the children she has borne, the family is likely to be a legitimate and valuable human institution.

The Filipino family, I believe, can pass this test with conspicuous honor. Few nations in the world, if any, can compare with ours in the position of the woman in the family and in the home. The peculiarly fortunate circumstances which have given us the benefit of both Oriental and Occidental philosophies, of both Christian and secular influences, and of tradition as well as modern science and democracy, have produced a Filipino family that combines stability with freedom. The Filipina today can well boast of a position that few of her sisters of other lands enjoy, and it is most fitting that we should honor her in observing a day set apart for the Filipino family.

Thus, it is most appropriate that we should honor on this occasion the outstanding mothers of the year. It is the Filipino mother who has nourished the true traditions of our family; it is also she who has taken the boldest steps to strengthen and modernize it. I am thinking now especially, of one Filipino mother whom we would undoubtedly honor today if she were alive to receive our homage of respect and admiration. I refer to Josefa Llanes Escoda, who was in many ways the prototype and model of the modern Filipina. Surely by her fruitful life and her heroic death she has given the world a shining example of the modern women of our race. A progressive champion of the rights of her sex, an unselfish and tireless social worker and educator, she displayed fully the capacities of the Filipina in fulfilling her duties to her country and to society. You who were her colleagues in the National Federation of Women’s Clubs, of which she was president in her lifetime, can testify to the energy, abnegation, and leadership with which she pursued her high objectives. But what is more significant for the Filipino family and home, is that she did not allow these numerous and exacting duties to distract her from her obligations as a wife and a mother. She was a devoted partner and helpmate of her husband, and she gave the last proof of her devotion by risking her life together with his in the extremely dangerous task of underground work and resistance against the enemy. She risked her life and she gave her life, side by side with her husband. And in giving her life for the cause of our national liberation, certainly she also gave final and uncompromising proof of her love for her children, for she died that they might enjoy the blessings of liberty and democracy. A nobler example of the modern wife and mother of our race cannot be found than this heroic fighter for the very spirit of the Filipino home.

Today she cannot receive the earthly honors which we should have wanted to bestow upon her. But we honor her in honoring her own mother, Doña Mercedes Madamba de Llanes, the worthy parent of her heroic daughter. The National Federation of Women’s Clubs has set forth her achievements in its citation of her as an outstanding mother of the year. But I like to think of her as the traditional type of Filipina mother, so similar to the mothers of most of us, the modest, self-sacrificing mothers found in almost every Filipino home. She is a simple woman and yet her simplicity is her greatness. Simply she faced the challenge of life when she was widowed and left with the care of seven children, six of them daughters. Simply and with quiet courage, she gave each of them an education, supporting them single-handed until they were equipped to face life on their own. And just as simply, when the time came, she received with brave resignation the news of the fatal imprisonment of her eldest daughter.

Doña Mercedes, let me say to you here that there would be no Filipino heroes or heroines without Filipino mothers like you.

Yes, Mrs. Llanes is a typical Filipino mother. Indeed we have only to look around us to see in every street and in every barrio, mothers who fulfill in every respect our national ideal of womanhood. Of how many others might this admirable achievement be told! How many fathers and mothers in our provinces, determined to rescue their children from their own lot of ignorance or poverty, have made the most painful sacrifices, have denied themselves the most urgent necessities, have sold their work-animals and their small inherited possessions, in order to send their sons and daughters to school! I cannot think of these brave unselfish parents without feeling proud that they are Filipinos!

The story is the same throughout our history. It was the immortal Teodora Alonso who shaped the mind of the young Jose Rizal; it was she who encouraged him in his high ambitions and sent him abroad to study how he might serve his oppressed people. And it was she, the eternal Filipino mother, who dedicated heart and soul to her children, and whom Rizal afterward pictured as the unforgettable Sisa, weaving bright dreams for her sons out of her blood and tears. So powerful is the theme of motherhood throughout our national history and literature that it is a commonplace to say that our greatest men have in their own words paid the tribute that Mabini paid in dedicating his principal work to his mother. “Mother,” he wrote, “wishing to place above your tomb a crown devised by my own hands, I dedicate this little book to your memory. It is poor and unworthy of you but, to this day, it is the best crown that the inexpert hands of your son have been able to fashion.”

For the mothers of these heroes and patriots, the true reward, and indeed the only reward that they expected and the only reward that could content them, was the greatness of their sons. In the greatness of their sons they found their own greatness, the fulfillment of their dreams, the realization of their ambitions, the winning of their heart’s desire. For this they had made their daily sacrifices, suffered their repeated privations, endured their trials and their tribulations. And they asked no other recompense than that they had not labored and suffered in vain; their sons were learned and famous and great, and they, in their obscure humility, were well content.

Of all this gallant legion of Filipino mothers, no one today can be prouder or more content than she whose son has reached the summit of fame and glory, whose son has been consecrated by popular election with the leadership of our entire people in the bright dawn of freedom. No Filipino mother can find more cause for satisfaction and rejoicing than the mother of the President of the Philippines, Doña Rosario Acuña Roxas de Picazo.

Doña Rosario, we honor you today not only because of the eminence of your beloved son. The dignity which surrounds you is not merely the glory reflected from your son’s position as the leader of our people. The honor and the dignity are yours, of your own right. They are the measure of your own achievement as a wise, devoted, and unselfish mother, as the mother whose training, guidance and inspiration lighted the spark of intelligence, high vision, daring courage, and the unfaltering qualities of leadership of the worthy first President of the Republic of the Philippines.

Ladies and gentlemen, the honor of being the living mother of the President of the Republic has been enjoyed by no other Filipina in our history. No other Filipina has lived to see such a rich fruition of her hopes and sacrifices or such a magnificent reward for her labors and privations. No other Filipina has lived to see her son receive the highest honor and trust in the power of her people to bestow, the Presidency of the Republic.

But she has carried all these honors with graceful modesty. Her unassuming figure is rarely seen in the palace halls of Malacañan. Although a room has been reserved for her there, she prefers to live in her own house, unattended by privilege and publicity. This is indeed the true Filipino mother, content that she has fulfilled her own unique mission with all the energy and devotion at her command. It was not easy to do it. The mother of seven children, she brought them up and gave every one of them an education in the face of all handicaps and difficulties. Whatever honors and distinctions she may receive now or hereafter were surely won legitimately by her motherly efforts, the efforts of a gallant and patriotic Filipina who deserves well of her country and of her people.

It is parents such as this that the Philippines needs in this decisive era. We are raising ourselves from the debris of a ruthless war to a place in the council of progressive and free peoples worthy of our new dignities and responsibilities as a sovereign nation. More than ever before in our history, we need patriots, men and women who have been taught from childhood to defend their country, to treasure freedom, and to love their fellowmen. We need clear minds, strong arms, stout hearts, and souls that are self-possessed. All this must come from the Filipino home and from there alone. It is there that future generations will learn the heroic traditions of our race, its legitimate aspirations for the future, its urgent and demanding challenges for the present. Let us hope that the models of Filipino parenthood whom we honor today will inspire every Filipino family to be the nursery of a brave, free, progressive and prosperous Filipino people.

Fortunate is the mother who, in the momentous life of her son, lives to observe his eloquent achievements and share in his glory. Happy is the mother who, in the posthumous consecration and glorification of her daughter, can hear the encomiums and national recognition of her daughter’s heroism from the very lips of gratified admirers. But more fortunate and happier still must be the son who, at the zenith of his political and patriotic career, still has a mother whom to impart his fears, his longings, his aspirations, his happiness, and a distinguished and loving mother of his children with whom he can discuss the latter’s future and glory. Doña Rosario, Doña Mercedes, with your presence you have honored us. I congratulate you both. And, may I say, Mr. President, I envy you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). Address delivered by Vice President Quirino on Parent’s Day, December 2, 1946, on the occasion of the awarding of diplomas of merit and medals to the “Outstanding Mothers of 1946”. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 42(12) , 3261-3268.