Commencement address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the Conferment upon him of the Degree of Doctor of Laws, Honoris Causa, by the Far Eastern University

[Delivered on April 19, 1951]

Mr. President, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Board of Trustees, Members of the Faculty, Members of the Graduating Classes, My Friends:

The spirit in which I have been received this afternoon by this great University inspires my noblest sensibilities. And the distinction erstwhile conferred upon me more than touches the human heart. It affords a rare encouragement to one who has made of public service a consecrated vocation. For this privilege my gratitude gentlemen of this great University, is indeed unbounded. It becomes a challenge to mind and conscience to make of this event a worthy occasion for serious reflection. Anxious eyes have been expecting that on this memorable event I may give an answer to one speech delivered somewhere in the vicinity of Manila. I shall not make that answer because the Far Eastern University has given an eloquent answer this afternoon.

Certainly, the conditions of the world today are such that we have practically no choice but to think for the most part in global terms, in spite of ourselves and whatever the limitations of our intellectual or official range. The need for so broad an outlook thus becomes a self-imposed responsibility, even to those not in authority.

The present world is fittingly likened to the human body. The least of its members, to the extent of a finger, cannot be pricked without the entire organism being immediately conscious of the injury. Part of that organism may have become paralyzed by the infiltration of some destructive substance, yet the body remains vividly aware that something dangerous is infecting or affecting it. The earlier we attempt to effectively bridge the gap between awareness and suitable action, the better is our chance to appreciate our position in the world and feel secure, not to say at home, in it.

I carry the notion that our ability to understand the world as it is now and adjust our ideas accordingly will determine in large measure our success or failure to fit into the pattern of our national and community life and to give amplest fulfillment to our individual and collective potentialities.

It has been the practice in the past to adopt policies of the State only to adjust government institutions to prevailing local conditions in a given epoch. For this reason fundamental policies or political systems of governments or countries varied since human civilization required ordered existence as within the functions of government.

Tribal institutions were the basic organizations during antiquity. Gradually, tribal chieftains became kings, kings became emperors, and regional institutions became national. And, as popular consciousness developed, hereditary titles became constitutional, monarchies became republics, and kings became presidents. But the duties of citizenship were invariably confined to the discharge of individual responsibility to the existing forms of government in each country. After centuries of political development in the different countries in all climes, those duties, until recent years, had been limited merely to those devolving upon the citizenry within the borders of each nation.

And so an over-emphasis on nationalistic tendencies was cultivated and, in many cases, exaggerated. Darwinism as a theory was exploited to the limit to rationalize the greed behind modern regression to the primitive jungle instincts. The doctrine of “everybody for himself” was held to be the only valid human motivation. This apparently justified the clash of interests and even of arms among governments in their international relations.

Today the new struggle is for world supremacy, ostensibly to advance a worthier life for the human race. To avoid the sacrifice of millions of lives in the struggle requires the severest test of human understanding.

In our age, therefore, when internationalism is daily exerting itself to advance world understanding, it is imperative that citizenship perspective should develop apace with the progress of that understanding. The citizen of today must acquaint himself with conditions prevailing in other countries with which relations have been established in many aspects of international life.

It is a fact no one, none of us here can blink that he lives in a divided world. By individual attitude or conviction, he is committed, or should be committed, to one side or the other. It would not help him any to nurse the illusion of being neither for one side nor for the other, or that he could be with both as a third force, in order to account adequately for himself as a world citizen. If he is only thinking of his personal safety, the margin that he enjoys in being all things to all sides is negligible indeed. The crossfire may hit him sooner or later—assuredly, he will be hit—without resolving the question of the honesty of his heart or of the worth of his person.

Knowing that he lives in a divided world, the true world citizen should understand what his side of it seeks to preserve, continue, and improve. It is not enough that he professes loud adherence to a political order based on Constitutional rights, free elections, arid untrammeled expression of opinion, a competitive economic system providing a broad latitude in pecuniary rewards, social mobility and fluidity, religious freedom, equality of opportunity. These are identified by the word democracy, which today is seen to be more than a political formula, a system of government or a social order. It is also regarded as a search for a way of life in which the voluntary free intelligence and activity of men can be harmonized and coordinated with the least possible coercion. Its supreme merit is held to be that it frees the human mind and fosters the experimentalism without which men cannot successfully adapt themselves to a changing world.

The world citizen should be no less aware of the other side from which he is excluded by inflexible iron curtain, and with whose philosophy of violence and methods of dictatorship the dissidents of his own country have made him familiar. There are cracks in those curtains through which he can catch glimpses and see the wide disparity between the extravagant claims and the reality. The citizen should ponder in what way other than violence and absolutism beneficent changes may be effected to succeed or reduce the age-old evils, in protest against which a potent revolutionary system has come into being. Instead of preaching or encouraging revolution he should, rather, set an example of constructive evolution.

I submit that a citizen adequately informed of the world in which he finds himself today will be more able to adjust himself to the exigencies of community life. In being conditioned for a higher and broader level of citizenship by the daily impact of that knowledge on the community of nations and the developments among them, he sees insurance for better understanding and effective neighborly association in the limited community in which he lives.

It would seem odd, not to say paradoxical, that this process should be expected to bring the desired result to achieve peaceful and fruitful local community life. But this should be because by broadening his horizon and thinking in terms of national unity and duty, of the rights, conveniences, and privileges of a neighbor nation, the citizen could become more understanding and tolerant in his dealings with his own close neighbors at home. For it is easier and perhaps more convincing for a man to compare his duties with those of the world outside than with those of his own immediate neighborhood, as it is certainly hard j to explain why a person should be more considerate to a foreigner than to his own countryman. By this way, this is one of the most repugnant practices rampant in some sections of our country. When some of our populace receive foreigners, they lavish every courtesy to him and yet when a poor individual in the neighborhood, perhaps barefooted, perhaps in rags, perhaps hungry, comes along, he seldom gives one-tenth of the attention he shows to the foreigner. What a sad commentary to ourselves and to our free institutions!

Now what are the duties of a world citizen today? He should be not only familiar with conditions prevailing in other countries but also alert and immediately responsive to new ways of life, new thoughts, new inventions, new vision, and new manner or manners of approach to the multifarious problems confronting the different nations of the world that have accumulated for ages but demand solution in our own age. He has to be many-sided, placing t himself at times in the position of those people of other countries, to see how he would react if he were to conduct himself towards a neighbor or representative of a neighboring country.

He has to discard many idiosyncrasies that have been outmoded or become obsolete to keep pace with world advancement. His thoughts require adjustment for fruitful passage along new avenues perhaps heretofore unfamiliar to him. He has to develop a new feeling of relationship to cultivate that sense of international understanding that would best fit him as a citizen of his nation in its relations with other nations. He has to develop short-cuts in the fulfillment of his international obligations so as to comply more efficiently and effectively with his duties at home and as a member of the new society.

As humanity grows and as he must contribute to that growth, he has to find means of contributing by increased production in many ways to provide for that growth. Perhaps he has to accelerate his pace in the accomplishment of his daily tasks so as to catch up with the effective modern techniques in human activities. He will therefore use his scientific knowledge not to augment human suffering but to increase modern convenience and enhance human happiness. He would encourage the Newtons, Cavendishes, Faradays, and Darwins to freely exploit human knowledge to enrich life and diminish disease. He would look upon the advancement of atomic science as a means, not to extinguish all culture and civilization, but to build a better world.

While the new citizen of the world hates ill-will and hates it in all its forms and promotes good-will and good cheer among his fellowmen, he reacts sternly against those that destroy humanity’s beneficent work everywhere. To him the capacity for building a country, like honestly building a name, is the most sacred attribute of a civilized person, and he will not tolerate the slightest malignment of his country’s name, nor the destruction of what his country is building or has built.

He too must be well qualified to unmask his misguided brother in the hills whose information, however deficient and however perverse, enables him, I don’t know in what way, purposeful way perhaps, to invest with political and social meaning his acts of rawest cruelty and barbarism, deluding himself into believing that he is an integral part of a marching world legion dedicated to rescuing humanity from poverty and injustice. He must have the character to denounce not to protect or defend those who exploit and abet with pious protestation of love of country the so-called “liberators” whose dangerous, or subversive ideas, more than bullets, are now causing the decimation of thousands of innocent, helpless people.

To be truly useful in an atmosphere of world understanding, the new world citizen must accordingly be not only wise but courageously responsive to civic demands if he is faithfully to interpret his duties and responsibilities during the present age.

The new citizen of the world is not a defeatist. He does not surrender to his personal frustrations. He rises from the debris of war determined to build anew what has been devastated, and never discourages the honest efforts of others whose new vision of a prosperous, stable national life he has no business to confuse or destroy in the midst of enthusiastic execution.

In short, the citizen of the world today is entirely a new man brought up in a new atmosphere, called upon to discharge new and broader duties. He has to fit himself to the new surrounding with a broader outlook, higher understanding, and greater responsibility. He has to have a sustaining faith in his people and in the capacities of human nature, in human intelligence, in the power of pooled and cooperative experience.

He must understand that while power politics is responsible for the present world struggle for supremacy, fundamentally the issue is which of the major contending forces can provide a way of life more conducive to the contentment and happiness of the great mass of human beings involved? He should ever remember, too, that, to achieve their fundamental objectives the democracies, ranged together, pool not only their resources, material, mental, and moral, but even their sovereignties in a spirit of cooperation; that on equal footing they could advance their common thoughts; that their common watchword is full development to secure freedom from want and freedom from the new slavery. He must realize that there can be no reward without quest, no produce without planting, no wages without work, no national security without individual sacrifice.

He must know too that our association and cooperation with the other democracies of the world are based not merely en racial or regional and spheric considerations but on a higher plane of international relations, ever mindful of our record never to surrender our distinct personality, much less our sovereignty and dignity as a people even if’ it merely involved slight supervision by a foreign power of our internal affairs.

This is the new type of citizen that the age demands of us to produce in this country. We have a wonderful material, inspiring material, promising material, before me this evening. The history of the development of the Filipino race shows that our people have known how to respond to the exigencies of every epoch. Doubtless in a new era such as this, we will again respond to its imperatives, breaking away the barriers of prejudice and suspicion that have made us unhappy in our relations with our chosen and tried friends. With such friends we may have grievances to settle, but they are grievances that time, devoted to honest negotiation and informed with a generous spirit of understanding born of identity of purpose and ideals, can gradually but surely resolve. The way, therefore, lies not in withdrawal but in joint responsibility and action.

There is the new challenge to world citizenship today. Citizenship in a democracy has a peculiar meaning, not only expressive of respect for individual rights and recognition of human dignity, but assertive of the greatest good for the greatest number—the essentials of a democratic existence.

The continued validity of that type of citizenship is being tested. It is being tested in our country; it is being tested in all democratic countries. The test is universal. We are thus included in the universal test for survival.

Members of the graduating classes and authorities of this great institution especially, you and I who have a joint obligation to posterity to survive that test, must learn the simple precept that national life requires continuous struggle to preserve it, and give it strength and honor; that freedom and independence are enjoyed not merely by professing them, but by building on them. In such hour as this, building by cooperation is the rule; isolation, the exception.

Thank you and good night.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Commencement address of President Quirino at the Conferment upon him of the Degree of Doctor of Laws, Honoris Causa. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(4) , 1726.