Excerpts from the extemporaneous address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines To young professionals and students from Visayas and Mindanao

[Delivered on May 6, 1953]

Ladies and Gentlemen:

. . . This is a most delicate period in our history. In the last seven years we have planned all solutions to our national problems that people from outside are amazed at our progress, at our work of stabilization, and not only at the reconstruction and rehabilitation of our country. Men who are inside are trying to disparage because of political reasons the great work that the country as a whole has accomplished during the last seven years. But all these advantages we have gained, all this work we have accomplished during the last seven years, all the benefits we are deriving, all the name and prestige we have acquired and established, and all the potentialities we expect to be able to tap in order to increase the strength, the stability, and our endurance as a nation, all these will be set to naught if we don’t know how to choose the national leaders in an interesting period, in a precarious period such as this, because the great conflict between two ideologies now raging is going to decide what country the Philippine Republic is going to be—either a communist or a democratic country. If it is going to be a communist, and that is my fear if our party is going to lose, then we have lost; everything that we have built; even the liberty and freedom that we now enjoy will be nullified.

So it is a delicate situation, knowing as we do now, the attitude of our political adversaries, knowing as we do now, the effects of disintegration, knowing as we do know the effects of arresting our political development and industrial and economic upsurge, knowing as we do the effect of arresting the momentum of our progress will be a retrogression of the steps we have already attained during the last seven years.

It is a pity if we are going to change a regime that has already started beneficially, gradually, and efficiently and that has laid the foundation of a republic that know, if it continues its work of accomplishing its program, of action, will be able to stabilize our country and make it more lasting than the one we had before we were granted our independence. So, in a delicate situation such as this, we have to be very very careful in selecting our men. It is not wise to crowd all the best men in one side. We have to distribute our forces—each one to his own specialty, each one in his line of activity, each one with his one experience, each one to what is more fitted for him. If one is fitted to go to the field and fight the Huks, let him go to the field and continue fighting; if one is more fitted to develop the country, let him go and develop the country. If one is more fitted to go and represent the nation in the United Nations, let him stay there. If one is more fitted, to go and lead the industrialization of the country, give him a chance to wind up his own genius and assert his individuality and give a seal to his own efforts to cooperate in stabilizing this country. We have to spread our men, as what is said in Spanish, “Cada uno, en su lugar;” that is what should guide us in choosing our men. We cannot all be presidents. We cannot all be vice-presidents. We cannot all be senators. We cannot all be representatives.

I invite you to think with us in a coordinated manner so that we can place our men where they are most fitted to mind their respective duties, so that we can utilize all their experience in a manner that we can solidify and strengthen, politically and economically, the future of this country.

I want to take advantage of the opportunity, now that you are here, to discuss with you some phases of our national political problems that ought to be the guide of-our actuations during the few months before the election. I want you to contribute with calmness and serenity, of your thinking and your attitude. Contribute that, in our effort to secure a wise and prudent decision in this coming campaign. I would have advised you not to be dragged into this hysteria of thought, of aggression, of childish campaign, converting; even the most solemn precincts in the offices, in the homes, in the clubs, in the most respected homes and offices, and in political reunions, into nothing but vulgar expressions of one’s feeling or attitude.

You are young professionals; you are students. You belong to an intellectual group. Let us exhibit the quality of that intelligence that you are developing; let us exhibit the prudence now being generated in your mind and soul; let us exhibit any feeling of patriotism, a mere cultured way of approaching our national problems; and let us exhibit our prudence and our wisdom as citizens of this country, because you, as professionals and students, cannot escape your responsibility and your duties, because you represent a bulk of the population of our country now, the population that should lead in the intellectual and higher pursuits of our government. You should be the one to be relied upon, guided by all these high motives in directing our public opinion and actuations, and I want to take advantage of the opportunity to rely on you for a wise judgment in this direction. (Applause)

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Excerpts from the extemporaneous address of President Quirino to young professionals and students from Visayas and Mindanao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49(5) , 1784-1786.