Excerpts of the Acceptance Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Upon his nomination as standard bearer of the Liberal Party

[Delivered at the Santa Ana Recreation Hall on June 12, 1949]

That you have chosen me as the standard bearer of the Liberal Party in the bid for national leadership in the coming elections will constitute a priceless treasure in my none too rich heritage in the public service. . .

When on July 4, 1946 we established this new Republic, we little knew that we were establishing a responsible and creditable unit in the promotion of world peace, security and contentment. From the shambles of a most cruel, war, we hardly anticipated that we would erect a strong, stable government within so short a period. We little hoped that we would rise from our prostration so quickly; erect and reconstruct our homes, our Government and our industries in record time. We unexpectedly rediscovered a new spiritual strength in our courageous determination to rise from our misfortune and misery. And yet that is now history. It is a history that our people can be proud of, a history that our people can well record as the greatest test of our intelligence, resourcefulness, courage and vision—a history of which the Liberal Party can be justly proud for its amply successful direction of the nation’s course during the short but eventful period.

Today we are met to renew our determination to follow that distinct course in our national history. We shall not be distracted from our arduous task, from our rocky and thorny path. We summon everything that is great and noble in our character as a race in our unflinching effort to secure our highest objectives. We are not going to wage a fratricidal war. We are not accepting the puerile and childish challenges of our adversaries. Our slogan is not destruction but construction. Our goal is security and stability. We have a new weapon. Our adversaries have their peculiar own. One would use disillusionment and despondency, anger and revenge, indecency and vulgarity, insanity and bitterness—bile. The other would use metaphysics and hallucinations, threats and violence, desperation and revolution—fire.

Ours is different: Construction and development, abundance and contentment, social amelioration and dignification of the masses, total economic mobilization food production—rice. To bile, our answer is charity and understanding. To fire, our answer is steadiness and serenity. To both, our answer is greater love and respect for our country and people whose decency and intelligence will not be insulted with bile and fire, with political bilge and arsonism.

We have a tremendous task before us. Our program of total economic mobilization, implemented with already allocated millions of pesos for its execution, cannot be fully accomplished in four years. But we shall not ask for more time to secure these basic foundations of an economy of abundance for our people. In the same manner that we have successfully established the firm foundations of this Republic, so our party is establishing, and we pledge to continue the full establishment of, our firm economic foundations.

We shall not be deterred by philosophic disquisitions on the procedure we have adopted. We shall again submit our accomplishments and will want to be judged by our action and not by our pledge. In fact, I for one did not even have an opportunity to make a pledge when I assumed office as the head of this Nation. And as I accept with all humility the new challenge to further service, I submit myself to our party and to our people on the basis of my accomplishments and with the training, experience and highest motives that inspired me to accept the nomination.

I accept the challenge because I expect your undivided support manifested by the unanimity of sentiment with which you have chosen me. I accept the challenge because I consider it my highest duty as long as I live to continue serving my country to the utmost and the last of my efforts.

I accept the challenge because I want to help the Liberal Party fulfill its pledges. I accept the challenge because I want to help each and everyone of you in our determination to pursue our policy of clean, honest and efficient government. I accept the challenge because I want to serve further the interests of our people, particularly that great mass of the common man from which I sprang. I accept the challenge because I know we are going to win, for win we must—and we will!

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Excerpts from President Quirino’s acceptance speech upon his nomination as standard bearer of the Liberal Party at the Santa Ana Recreation Hall, June 12, 1949. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45(6) , 2434-2435.