Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On the occasion of the celebration of the 50th Anniversary of the Declaration of Independence Day

[Released on June 12, 1948]

LET US ERECT AN ENDURING EDIFICE

On the occasion of the celebration of the 50th Anniversary of the Declaration of Independence by General Emilio Aguinaldo on June 12, 1948, President Elpidio Quirino invited the veterans of the Philippine Revolution to cooperate with those at the helm of the Republic not only to protect and preserve this edifice but to make it respected by ourselves and by outsiders. The President spoke extemporaneously more or less as follows:

I AM HAPPY to be able to stand on this azotea, which is of historic significance in our struggle for freedom and independence both in the recent war and during the revolution at the turn of the century.

This is my first public appearance in Cavite since the elections of 1946 when, on the same ticket with our late leader and friend President Roxas, I was chosen Vice-President by the suffrage of the people. I shall, therefore, take advantage of this opportunity to express my gratitude to the people of Cavite for the great number of votes registered for our party and for the majority you gave me in 1946. I pray to God that I may be able to justify your confidence and render the service expected of me when you elected me Vice-President.

Fifty years ago today in this town you proclaimed to the world the independence of the Philippines, perhaps never realizing that for the first time in our history you were not only establishing popular sovereignty but giving evidence to the world of our political maturity.

The founders of the Republic established in Malolos in January 1899 were men in the prime of their youth. Those who are at the head of the present Republic are men in the prime of their manhood. But I shall not make any comparison of the work of the former with that of the latter. The only thing that should concern us is whether our common efforts have been a success. We shall not pause to consider and scrutinize the work of those who in 1898 laid the foundations of our first Republic and the work of those who are now directing the affairs of the present Republic. What is important to remember is that we all, both of the first and the present Republics, are endeavoring to erect an enduring edifice of freedom and democracy.

Nor shall we even recall at this moment whether in the construction of this edifice the materials we have contributed came from the north, from the south, or from the center of the archipelago. Neither shall we take note of whether the first story of this edifice is stronger than the second story. Much less should we consider now whether the posts which we erected yesterday were better and answer our needs more than the rafters we placed today. What is important and what should be of concern to us all is that we have been erecting with our common efforts, with our blood, with our lives, with our properties, with our future, one and only one edifice, and that is the Republic of the Philippines, with the achievement of the past leaders and the cooperation of the present ones.

Providence has made me the principal caretaker of this edifice during this epoch. You have invited me to attend this time-honored ceremony to remind ourselves that the foundations of the edifice were laid in 1898. As chief caretaker of this edifice, I invite you to cooperate with me and the rest of the people at the helm of this Government not only to protect and preserve this edifice but to make it respected by ourselves and by outsiders.

Source : Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1949). The new Philippine ideology . Manila : Bureau of Printing.