Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the reunion of the Class of 1911 of the Manila High School

[ Delivered at the Malacañan Park, November 14, 1948 ]

CLASS REUNION

At the reunion of the Class of 1911 of the Manila High School which took place at the Malacañan Park on November 14, 1948, the President was presented by his former classmates, through General Basilio Valdez, an oil painting of an old family portrait, more as a token of sincere affection rather than a tribute to the high office he held. Touched to the core, President Quirino responded in the following extemporaneous speech delivered in a light vein in keeping with the cordial atmosphere that pervaded the happy reunion.

MY DEAR CLASSMATES, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, AND FRIENDS:

I REALLY cannot describe the emotion that overpowers me at this moment. I know that there are reasons why we should get together once in a while, but to me, there are more than one thousand reasons why I must see my former classmates. When the cares of life overtake us, especially when we want to stay young and live again our youthful adventures of student days, we love to gather our classmates as if they were immediate members of our family and recall those days when we were young and gay. Today, I am feeling that way. I do not admit that I am old. Those who judge me as old or growing older had better talk to me in another vein, because I would hate to talk to them. I would rather have people remind me of my youthful days because that memory is what I really need at this moment. I need to feel young. I need to feel vigorous. I need to feel strong for the task on hand.

We have read the same books. We enjoyed the same literature and solved the same problems during our school days, but when we separated after leaving the Manila High School, each one went his way. We spread throughout the land and invaded almost all activities in our country. I am proud to remember at this moment that we were gratefully accommodated by our respective communities, encouraging us to succeed in the respective lines which we had chosen. But as we travel longer in life, there are really times when we, as tributaries of the great stream of life, meet momentarily somewhere, sometimes face to face, sometimes together, and sometimes converge upon the same dam, and we create power.

Today, as we get together, I imagine that we have joined together again into the big main stream of life, at such a dawn, bringing together all the accumulated strength, all the vigor, all the achievements that we have won during the past 37 years of our existence. And now, we really constitute a power, not only among ourselves but in our country. ( Applause ) It would certainly be a pity, if, having all these advantages in our hands now, we should let go that power without properly utilizing it. It would be a sad commentary on our sense of self-respect if we should destroy the accumulated strength, power, vigor, and enthusiasm that we have built through all these years. Today, as we are gathered here and you show me affection and cordiality, you give me a new source of strength and inspiration. As we are gathered here bound by the indissoluble ties of a common boyhood, I want to tell you, my friends, that I am as happy as if I had joined my late family, the members of my household who are gone. You take their place in the choicest corner of my heart. ( Applause )

The painting that you have presented to me I shall preserve not for my own contemplation but for my children. I have one of them here, Vicky. The other is playing golf. I wish to show you that I have done as good work as you have done, ( Applause ) and I am as proud of them as I think they are proud of me. They will be the ones to contemplate this beautiful painting. They will be prouder still because you accompanied it with the sentiment just conveyed by General Valdez. As they view this picture after twenty or thirty years perhaps, they will recall this occasion when you pledged to me your affection, your encouragement, and your kindness.

My friends, this is not yet my birthday. That is why I said that Doctor Llamas had made a mistake in wishing me a happy birthday this morning. That is advancing my age. I shall be 58 years day after tomorrow, but I want to assure you that those 58 years were well spent—58 years of hard work to make a name. I hope that today you can look of your old classmate and can say “That man was my classmate,” and in doing so feel not shame but pride. Thank you very much. ( Applause )

Oh, yes. This is another sample, another masculine sample of my youthful activities—Tommy (As Tommy Quirino, only surviving son, enters hall from golf link). I don’t know how to express my appreciation for the effort you have exerted in extracting something from your pockets in order that you may buy an oil painting as costly as this. But I feel no pangs of conscience because when I saw each of you rise as his name was called, everyone looked to me, if not physically fat, at least fat in the pocket. You are all successful proprietors or professionals; so I am sure that it did not pain you at all when you contributed to buy the oil painting. Your contribution will not be in vain. I shall keep the portrait as a treasure. I shall be proud of it, and you will, I hope, be proud of me. Thank you very much. ( Applause )

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1948). The new Philippine ideology . Manila : Bureau of Printing.