Extemporaneous Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before Educators

[ Released on December 10, 1949 ]

EDUCATION AND SOCIETY

I AM very glad to welcome you here. I am very glad for the opportunity, in the midst of the pressure of state business, to have this pleasant respite in which to have an intimate exchange of ideas on questions of mutual interest to us.

You and I—you as our educational leaders and I as immediate main servant of the people—you and I have a common concern in the ordering of the society in which we live. As we all can directly observe, it is not a static society. On the contrary, it is intensively dynamic at an accelerating rate. We have only to think of the hopes and anxieties that gather about the awesome development of atomic technology as a peculiar symptom of this age to realize how fast our world is moving. That motion can be either for strength or for weakness, for integration or for disintegration, for building or for destruction.

Our system of education is supposed to be a bulwark in the preservation and continued enrichment of our cherished way of life. It cannot maintain this function without taking cognizance of the dynamic quality of our technological civilization and making the necessary adjustments to have that quality serve a constructive purpose.

This can only mean that our educational leaders must constantly reassess not only the techniques of our educational system but its objectives. In other words, we must constantly ask ourselves what kind of social order we want and find a reasonable measure of agreement as to a basic pattern sufficiently flexible to respond to the contingencies of rapid change.

A feature we would no doubt want to achieve and maintain in the pattern of this social order is equality of educational opportunity. We have already achieved that to the extent that no Filipino child is now denied the chance to have at least an elementary education; to the extent that no qualified child is, in effect and in fact, refused admission in any school.

But with every child admitted in school, our concern still is: education for what? That is the crucial question.

A feature of the social pattern that we expect and believe to be constant, of course, is freedom. We want a free society.

But freedom, like democracy, has come to mean all things to all men. The communists have always been and are ready to jump for the word at the slightest provocation. To them, as to us, it is a fighting word. But what is freedom and how good is freedom? If the communists, or the fascists, are for freedom, and if we are for freedom, what are we set against each other for?

Again, with all due respect to the mystics, what good is freedom if we are all under the ground? What good is freedom if, however dubious its advantages, we are alone in the wilderness and have no one to share it with? If we do not watch out, this business of freedom will be the end of us all.

And yet the urgency and the obligations of freedom we cannot ignore. Upon our educational leaders devolves a great responsibility to fashion and run a system that will teach us to be free and remain free. The task, therefore, is to give us a helpful and creative picture of freedom that will preserve us and preserve the world in a dynamic age because it actively accepts responsibility.

For freedom to accept responsibility is to impose limitations upon itself. There cannot be such a thing as absolute freedom in any free but organized community, and the very technological advances which increasingly bind a widening area closer for organized thinking and action serve to strengthen those limitations.

We as a people have gone through the gruelling ordeal of fighting for freedom. Now that we have it, we must be sure that we can recognize it in our day-to-day experience, that we can recognize its true opportunities and appreciate its real responsibilities. Otherwise our freedom so-called may operate to our profound grief, like the classic mad bull in a china shop.

I think it is the special opportunity of our educational and cultural leadership to help our people live not only in, but with, and for, freedom. The domestic difficulties that we face today challenge our understanding and appreciation of freedom. Freedom can be mistaken as license to induce mutual suspicion, disaffection, and chaos, through organized misinformation and systematic abuse of civil liberties. Freedom can be misused to cloak the cupidity of unhappy and impressionable individuals whose loyalty to their country’s interest ends where their loyalty to their personal ambition begins. Freedom can be taken as an opportunity to undermine and destroy an existing framework without anticipating to fill the created vacuum with a new and better one. Freedom can be invoked to disintegrate our faith in our capacity to plan and work together to raise a national structure responsive to our moral and material needs.

The tremendous advance scientific man has made in improving instruments of destruction both psychological and physical lies at the root of the profound sense of insecurity which cruelly weighs upon all peoples today. This is a part of the picture of freedom or lack of it that our educational leadership must reckon with if we are to be educated for freedom.

Because of the widespread and intense longing for peace and security, among the haves as among the have-nots, among individuals as among nations, there is a new variety of freedom being dangled before men’s eyes and imagination. It is the freedom from responsibility, the freedom from having to worry about the exacting problems of modern living, the freedom to leave such problems exclusively to the state, that is, to all-wise, all-knowing, and all-powerful politburo. It is the freedom to abdicate all personal and social responsibilities to a pure paternalism embodied in an absolute dispenser of bread and authority. The theory is that since men no longer find comfort and satisfaction in being trusted to think and act as men, the burden proving too heavy for them, let them be mice and remain mice as long as they are assured of physical existence. Self-reliance, enterprise, adventurousness become taboo and even illegal except for the state and the elite. That is a kind of freedom that a responsible educational leadership must assess for what it is worth, and warn us about. That is a kind of freedom that we must not confuse with freedom from fear and freedom from want.

Freedom is not meant to resolve and end all problems; it should enable us to convert every new problem into a fresh opportunity for growth and fulfillment, for building and for production.

If freedom is the great boon that we have been taught it is, then we must recognize that it is only authentic according as it requires commensurate individual and social responsibility.

Because we are in a critical period of nation-building, we need to be educated to the positive and creative aspects of freedom. Freedom is not merely to think, believe, or say anything we please. It is to so think and believe and act that we can advance the common good; that we can render barren ground fertile and productive; that we can secure and enjoy the good things of life without having to exploit, oppress, or condemn others to deprivation.

I should like to see our educational system and its dedicated leaders continue to train us and our children for this kind of freedom with creative responsibility and thus develop the kind of good society that will, in consequence, best nourish it to the service and enhancement of the common good.

I invite you to a careful and constant examination of the measure of your effectiveness in educating yourselves and our people for this freedom.

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].