Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines To the delegates of the Philippines-Japan Youth Conference

[Delivered on February 11, 1953]

NEED FOR COMMON UNDERSTANDING

I WAS mighty glad to hear that you wanted to call on me in order to size me up at close range. Personally, I also wanted you to have that opportunity because some of you who have only read my name or seen my pictures in the papers may have been led to believe that I am what I have been represented in the newspapers or articles by critics who, more often than not, are always lambasting the administration or me to such an extent that in many instances they have developed Quirino-phobia.

I am glad of the opportunity to be thus scrutinized by you. So I welcome you, especially those who had not seen me before. Now you can say, “Well, I have seen Quirino. His handshake is not so warm but at least it does not stink.” I am particularly glad to meet the Japanese delegates because I think they should understand us better.

There is a new synonym of peace and that is understanding. Understanding develops into friendship. When friendship is formed the effect is even greater than a formal treaty. In a formal treaty, people only make an effort to clarify their relations. If they are friends, they define their friendship — to what extent they should see each other eye to eye. Genuine friendship or understanding among nations and among peoples is more permanent than a mere scrap of paper signed in ink. The spoken word among men of honor is more sacred than words written on paper and signed in ink, especially when they are not meant to be carried out.

What we need most is closer friendship, better understanding and firmer attachment. We cannot transfer the Philippines to the Atlantic Ocean, to the Indian Ocean, or to the Black Sea. Neither can Japan be transferred to the North Sea or the South Pole. God decreed that we be neighbors. We have had some misunderstandings in the past as a result of which we sacrificed lives and property, and feelings of hatred and distrust were engendered; but neither the Japanese nor the Filipinos would like to bequeath to their children such feelings of bitterness and resentment. So, as we don’t want our children to inherit the hate that had been caused by our recent sufferings at the hands of the Japanese, the Japanese people would not like either to transmit to their children the feeling of aggressiveness or cruelty to which we had been subjected in the recent past.

To avoid all that, we who are responsible for the present and the future, since our leaders on both sides of the China Sea have not found occasion to meet and avoid any misunderstanding, we whose responsibility is not only for the present generation but also for the coming generation; we who are now planning our future national action in keeping with our respective national aspirations, must broaden our views, expand our hearts and open our souls to one another and see if we cannot avoid future unhappy events.

Personally, were I to consider that my wife and my three children were all killed by Japanese machine-guns, I would swallow the Japanese allies now; but I am not living in the world alone. I have my remaining children and their children to follow. I am not going to allow them to inherit feelings of revenge nor will I allow anybody to block any understanding that will make our two peoples happy and will enable us to solve our common problems on a better basis than we have so far discovered.

Japan and the Philippines have signed with the United States two separate mutual defense treaties. We initiated a series of treaties in Washington in August of 1951. When Japan later on signed a similar treaty with the United States, it was with the idea that we would place ourselves in direct contact with the United States — Japan in the north, the Philippines in the south, and Australia and New Zealand in the southeast — so that at a given moment when it is necessary for us to get together and see what can be done to guarantee our safety, this region — the United States to serve as the connecting link — will form a chain of regional understanding in this part of the world.

When I initiated that move in Washington, my intention was simply to form a Pacific Union. My idea then of a Pacific Union had nothing to do with any military alliance or any understanding based on armed defense of our country. All I wanted was to bring together all the countries in this part of the Pacific basin and see how we could protect our common interests. It was a way of inviting neighbors to come and contemplate the real danger as we were then seeing the flames of Communism raging in North China. The object was to prepare ourselves for any eventuality in the future.

We did not have any definite plan at that time. All that we wanted was a chance to bring together all the neighboring nations and consider our respective dangers and regional security as we were facing a world movement threatening to engulf the whole universe in an international conflagration.

If we have failed to get together, adjust our interests and define our attitude due to persistent mutual suspicions or because we are not yet prepared, you, the young men and leaders, deserve to be congratulated for having started this movement which is conducive to the same end.

All over the world today great leaders of states, generals and strategists are breaking their heads to find a solution to the world conflict. But whatever you are going to agree on here, assuming that you are going to agree on something, I am quite sure this conference will be fruitful and that it will require the utilization of the youth today to realize the problem of international action. We — I still consider myself young as I am only old in years — we should not allow ourselves to be mere instruments, mere soldiers, to carry arms and ammunition to fight the macabre plans of nations and countries which are resolved at all costs to realize their ambition for military aggrandizement and eventual mastery of the world.

After all, we of the present generation should assume the responsibility of stabilizing our own life so that we, too, could carry out .what is assigned to us — to make our respective nations stable and to insure the peace of the world.

The all-important object, therefore, of your conference is to have the youth of the land of each country, especially those among us here who are immediately threatened by communist aggression, invasion or destruction, get together and prepare our minds, our hearts and our souls for a common understanding, so that if the rulers, the powers that be fail, we can cushion at least with our feeling of brotherhood, cultural ties and intimate relations, those hates that are now being engendered by the conflict of two world ideologies which may engulf the whole world.

It is, therefore, necessary for you to cultivate a feeling of frankness, an attitude of open-mindedness. Each and everyone of you will be proud of his own native culture. The world today is divided into communities. We are developing now world regional communities. There is no sense reliving those days when Japan enclosed herself within her territory, proud of her culture which was predominant in the region, because she was able to strengthen her institution and had a strong army to assert her authority. Japan cannot be alone, much less can the Philippines. Neither can Indonesia with her teeming millions, nor Thailand. The countries around us cannot stand alone against the onward rush of communism. We have to organize our own regional community. The sooner we start it the better for us.

I don’t know if anything will happen in the near future, but I do sense that something will manifest itself. An overt act of aggression will stir up the long-smouldering hatred in Korea, backed by force. When that time comes we must be prepared — Japan and the Philippines. And you, therefore, as agents or instruments to bring about what other men have failed to accomplish can at least cushion that lack of understanding and the impact of an armed conflict which impends if nations do not reach an agreement in Korea or elsewhere.

Mere membership in the United Nations is going to be meaningless unless we, especially our neighbors, cultivate that feeling of neighborliness, mutual interest, and promote prosperity and happiness. My friends, as far as that is concerned, I belong to your group and you can count on me. ( Applause )

Source : Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].