Extemporaneous Welcome Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines To President and Madame Sukarno

A BENEFACTOR OF HUMANITY 1

MR. PRESIDENT:

YOU HONOR the Philippines with your visit. This is indeed a historic moment in the life of the peoples of Southeast Asia. We find this occasion doubly felicitous because it marks the first time that we are being privileged to receive the head of a state in our midst. The arrival of Madame Sukarno with you gives us added pleasure in welcoming you to our shores. I hope you will find your stay with us both worthwhile and enjoyable.

The Filipinos are bound by the closest racial, historical, and geographical ties with your people. We followed with keen interest the vicissitudes of the Indonesian struggle for independence. In heart and soul, we were with you always in your fight for self-determination. We shared in your rejoicing when that fight culminated in your independence.

If Indonesia is now free, its freedom is due, in large measure, to your unselfish, vigorous, and far-sighted leadership. In thus leading your people, you have become a benefactor of humanity in its fight for liberty; you have raised the stature of a substantial portion of mankind in our part of the world to a higher level of dignity; you have earned for yourself, by your endeavors and patriotism, the esteem of free men everywhere.

My people, having gone through a travail similar to that of your own, can therefore fully appreciate the abiding value of the work you have done and are doing.

It is with a genuine fraternal feeling that I, on behalf of the Filipino people, welcome you, Mr. President, to this country. May you find during your sojourn with us increasing evidence of the kinship and affectionate regard that the Filipinos feel in their hearts for you and your people.

Footnote:

1 Extemporaneous welcome address to President and Madame Sukarno, Jan. 28, 1951.

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].