Extemporaneous Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the Free Election Rally

Mr. Toastmaster, My Dear Friends:

I wish to express my deep appreciation for the opportunity afforded me this afternoon to address this intelligent, non-partisan, and civic-minded group of citizens.

We have long felt the need of civic consultation on the manner in which the elections in the Philippines should be conducted. The development of our electoral system since we established our commonwealth government in 1935 has shown that our people, at the height of political or partisan conflicts, lose sight many a time of the important issues involved in the campaign.

For one thing, there is always that feeling of non-conformity, sometimes of hatred on the part of the defeated. For another, in the confusion and obfuscation among the participants, the political controversy in the national election tends to deteriorate into fantastic distortions.

All this has made our people believe that we cannot have any election in the Philippines without the threat of revolution. The national plebiscite on the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act in 1933 started it.

PERIODIC THREATS OF REVOLUTION

You will recall that in 1935 when President Quezon was a candidate for the Commonwealth presidency, there was a threat of revolution before and after the election. After the presidential election of 1946 there was another threat of the same nature. Again the country was threatened in 1949. That, I think, was the worst threat. Fortunately, the Batangas rebellion was aborted.

Yes, that feeling of hatred, of non-conformity and dissatisfaction of the parties has made it appear at home and abroad that this country cannot conduct any clean, honest, and orderly election without the threat of revolution.

The day has come for us, my friends, and you have ushered it in, when we must clarify the issues before any election and when we should weigh them soberly before we cast our vote. After the election we should imitate, say, England, which showed to us last week how elections should be conducted in a democratic way.

In England everybody went to the polls, as if automatically, to fulfill a national, sacred duty in silence. When the election was over, did anybody threaten to stage a revolution? Did anybody express any regret that he was defeated? Those who lost while in power went to the King and told him, “You have heard the people’s mandate. Choose your new Prime Minister and let him constitute his cabinet to rule this country.” What a beautiful example!

Being young, our Republic has to pass through many thorny stages in the civic expression of the popular will. However, it is not too young to learn. After five years of experience, faced with so many problems and so many difficulties which we must resolve in order to fulfill our civic duty, we should be able to express our will at the polls on November 13 calmly in a peaceful and orderly manner.

There is imperative need of appealing to reason, to sober judgment, that God may guide us in casting our vote in fulfillment of our civic duty to the credit of our people and our race.

I congratulate most warmly the organizers of this huge rally for the opportunity given me and those who are with us for mutual consultation on what should be done at the electoral polls next week.

I was asked to come and state what measures have been taken by the government or its agencies concerned to avoid any act that may vitiate the popular will at the polls. I suggested that the members of the Electoral Commission, the members of the Cabinet, and all the officials who have anything to do with the elections and with the maintenance of peace and order and the education of our people, especially the youth, be invited here because elections nowadays mean not only the exercise of a popular civic duty but an education to our people as well.

The election anomalies alleged to have been committed in the past are attributable not only to one party. Since 1935, and even earlier, cases involving violations of the Election Law were committed by persons belonging to different parties.

If you will search the Philippine Reports and the records of Courts of First Instance, you will find that these cases concerned not only the Democrata party,the Nacionalista party, or the Liberal party, but all other parties. Each had complaints to make against the efforts of the opposing party to terrorize, threaten, intimidate, commit fraud, and violate the sanctity of the expression of the popular will.

I am not charging or accusing any particular party. But it is apparent that there is need of more education—education on character, education for proper evaluation of the men who offer themselves for public service, education on the civic virtues that must be imbibed and imparted to others.

The institutions gathered today, the civic-spirited citizens and the youth assembled here this afternoon, should therefore resolve and help indoctrinate and educate the less enlightened to practice these civic virtues and implement the necessary measures to insure an honest, orderly election, allowing everybody to cast his vote freely and wisely.

MEASURES FOR CLEAN ELECTION

What are the measures taken by this government in order to insure free, honest, and orderly elections?

The members of the Electoral Commission, who are here together with the officers of the national defense and the armed forces, and the officials of the departments having to do with the supervision and enforcement of the law on elections, will bear witness to the measures we have taken to insure honest and orderly expression of the popular will.

I shall first mention the act of the legislature calculated to achieve this purpose. There was some doubt as to whether in the past elections, particularly in the 1949 election, the people fully exercised their right to choose their candidates simply because there was block-voting. On my assurance of approval, the Congress passed an amendment to the Election Code abolishing block-voting and giving the two parties equal representation in the board of election inspectors, the administration thus renouncing its majority in the board which it had been enjoying since the previous elections.

We have also amended the Election Code so that we may have a new electoral census. Beginning this year, we will have a new list duly supervised, scrutinized, or corrected by the proper body conducting the elections. The Electoral Commission was also given more ample powers to make its supervision and control over the conduct of elections more effective and expeditious.

I shall not recite the different instructions issued by the Electoral Commission for the same purpose, for there are numerous instructions to election inspectors and poll clerks, deputy provincial and municipal treasurers, and all other agencies deputized by the Commission for the purpose of securing the purity of the elections.

The Department of National Defense needs no further instructions because all its members are doing their duties well and vigorously. They have impressed the people with their impartiality in the manner of approach or in the consideration of complaints they received in connection with the maintenance of peace and order in each locality.

The Armed Forces of the Philippines are well prepared to meet any emergency, even anticipating the scheme of calculating minds as well as those who are concocting macabre plans to defeat the popular will in the coming elections, the dissidents who would like to sabotage and defeat the purpose of a democratic election. We have captured documents showing such plans. There is one great disadvantage that we have at present: we have no control over the dissidents who are scheming to the last detail in the ravines and mountain fastnesses and wherever darkness induces men to do evil.

The Department of Justice has also been quick to respond to the demands for immediate and impartial judgment on election questions involving its jurisdiction.

So, all the three departments—the Electoral Commission, the Department of National Defense, and the Judiciary, to say nothing of the agencies of the Executive Department,—have coordinated their efforts with a view to presenting an integrated plan to cope with the situation during election day and during the counting of votes.

I have just heard from the Chairman of the Commission on Elections that the Liberal party and the Nacionalista party have been denouncing each other not only for irregularities committed in the appointment of election inspectors, but also on alleged terroristic campaign procedure.

This, then, is not a fight between two parties only. It is a three-cornered fight: between the two national parties, and against the dissident elements.

These, my friends, are the measures taken “by the government to insure a clean and honest election.

THE PRESERVATION OF DEMOCRACY

But what does a clean and honest election mean? It is the exercise of a civic duty designed to preserve our democracy.

What democracy are we preserving or protecting? This is one thing few stop to think about. We often misuse the term democracy without realizing that there are now two types of democracy: the democracy of the free world and the democracy behind the Iron Curtain. The democracy of the free world is the democracy we established here on July 4, 1946. That democracy is only five years old. Why are we protecting it? Why are we defending it? Why are we perpetuating it? We must know why. And why are we not protecting the other democracy? That, we must understand, too.

CONDITIONS AT BIRTH OF REPUBLIC

The Republic of the Philippines was inaugurated on the Luneta on July 4, 1946. I want you to recall the circumstances under which the Republic was born and ushered into the world. Before July 4, 1946, we were hardly able to reconstitute the Commonwealth Government because we had no money. The people were still bewildered. They did not know where to go. Some came to Manila to seek refuge; some, to other provinces outside their own to look for work. Others did not know where to go nor what to do, and just depended upon relief for the sustenance of their respective families.

Immediately after liberation, we barely had 18 million pesos to begin with. This was the remaining sum of the money we had in United States depositories. When we inaugurated the Republic we were not only hungry; we were also in tatters. We still depended much upon relief. Immediately after the war we practically begged alms, food, and clothing from the United States, which readily gave us surplus properties, even candies, cigarettes, chewing gum, and bread.

Those were the times when we needed much help, not only help from ourselves but help from outside. Under those circumstances, our Commonwealth Government was reconstituted. We could not collect more than ₱1,800,000 in taxes the first year. In the second year we collected a little more. Our collections continued to improve thereafter. From ₱1,800,000 in the first year our income has so increased that today it amounts to 500 million pesos.

That, my friends, gives you an idea of how we progressed since the first year of our Republic. But we wanted to rehabilitate our roads, our bridges, our hospitals, ports, school buildings, and other public buildings. We wanted to rehabilitate our industries and our agriculture. We wanted to return to the normal life that we had lived before the war and be happy once more. These could not be accomplished without money. Our taxes were not enough. And so we had to borrow from the United States.

President Roxas had to leave the country before he assumed office in order to secure help from the United States in the form of loans and technical assistance because our own local sources were still depleted. So every year we had to begin with deficits and these deficits were bound to grow. In 1950 our deficit for the year was 153 million pesos. But as of June, 1951, our deficit for the fiscal year was only ₱906,000.

RAPID RECONSTRUCTION

What have we done with our money? People thought that this administration, which is a continuation of the administration of President Roxas, had squandered the money. You are all witnesses of the great and rapid reconstruction we have accomplished.

You only have to see around you the great changes since 1945. Go to the provinces, to the farthest nook and corner of this our land and see the wonderful transformation from the day of liberation. Look at the countrysides, the farms, the factories, the new homes! How could we rehabilitate our farms and industries without spending and investing? What and how much money have we invested for the purpose?

DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS

In economic development, we have 200 million pesos authorized by the Central Bank charter to be distributed for the rehabilitation of different agricultural and industrial activities: Aside from that, we have invested all available funds in order to finance other specific projects, such as, for agricultural development: for fertilizer distribution alone, one million pesos; for irrigation pumps, another million; for abaca disease control, ₱500,000; for abaca loans through the RFC td rehabilitate existing industries, ₱4,500,000; for the Davao projects of the NAFCO, ₱1,843,000; for irrigation projects of the Bureau of Public Works, ₱11,000,000; for rice and corn projects, ₱15,000,000.

For power plant development: Lumot diversion project, ₱5,000,000; Ambuklao hydro-electric project, ₱44,677,000; Maria Cristina power and fertilizer plant, ₱19,000,000.

For industrial development: Ilocos textile project, ₱2,500,000; paper and pulp-making plant, ₱891,000; Manila Gas Corporation, which is going to be rehabilitated by the government, ₱660,000; Philippine Electrical Manufacturing Co., ₱375,000; steel rolling mill, ₱4,500,000; industrial loans of the RFC for rehabilitation of abaca and other industries, ₱35,000,000.

For transportation facilities: We bought three boats from Japan for ₱14,500,000 in order to initiate here a sorely needed merchant marine now operated by the De la Rama Steamship Co. but owned by the National Development Co.; for the Philippine Air Lines requirement for budgetary necessities and to keep at the same time the lines that have given us international name and fame, ₱I, 50 0,000; for shipyard project at Mariveles, ₱18,500,000; and for other income–producing projects, ₱15,000,000.

On top of these, we have reconstructed our roads and bridges, public buildings, ports, wharves, walls, river and flood control, hospitals, puericulture centers,—permanent public improvements of all sorts, in greater number than even before the war. For all these we have spent ₱312,000,000. Only ₱90,000,000 was given us for help from the United States for these rehabilitation projects.

As a result of all these investments, the government finances accumulated a deficit of over ₱348,000,000 at the end of the fiscal year 1950. And at the end of 1951 fiscal year, we had a deficit of ₱906,000, or a total accumulated deficit of around ₱349 million.

I now ask you, are the people being soaked? Are they being required to pay more than what the law provides for this obligation? Has the government mortgaged your personal property so that additional burden is imposed in order to maintain this obligation and keep it on a running basis to enable us to pay each year?

What about the happiness, the contentment, and the opportunity given our people to live healthily and more worthily? What have we done? Have we not increased the salaries of teachers? Formerly the minimum salary was ₱30, now it is ₱140-₱150, depending on whether the teacher is a normal or a college graduate; normal, ₱140, and college, ₱150. We have increased the salaries of enlisted men from ₱14 to ₱50, plus better equipment and surroundings. We have standardized the nursing profession; improved the salaries of civil service employees. We have increased the wages of labor, fixing the minimum average at ₱4 for agricultural and industrial laborers. We have also provided for general retirement and insurance system governing all public servants.

It is not true that our national public debt is ₱1,300,000,000. The net indebtedness of the National Government is ₱593,000,000 payable within our own capacity and resources. We have been able to manage our credit much better than before the war and after we invited the United States to come and make a survey of our agricultural and industrial potentialities. We have been able to show that our country is rich enough to shoulder bigger obligations.

NEW INDUSTRIES

Are we going to be a miser and keep our money in the banks when our people need so much help and relief, to pay higher salaries, better wages, and provide greater opportunities to make a living, when we have to invest in agricultural and industrial projects and enhance each family’s wherewithal? Do you know that 70 new industries capitalized at ₱39.3 million were registered from the establishment of the Republic to June, 1951? And that during the last three months alone, from July 1 to October 31, 1951, we registered 72 additional new industries capitalized at ₱25.4 million?

This means huge investments and these investments have come greatly from government assistance by way of loans. The banks have been given advance money by the government for rehabilitation; the insurance companies also; the building corporations, the same. And this is besides the building program of the government. Before the war we had only 439 low-salaried employees’ houses. Today there are more than 3,000 new ones, and our goal at the end of July next year is 5,000. All this means money.

GOVERNMENT SPENDING

Deficit spending! Look at the United States. Are you afraid to see the United States fall into bankruptcy simply because of this? The United States is lending money everywhere. It has given money in loan or grant, equipment, military and technical assistance to almost all democratic countries of Europe, big or small, extending to Asia and our region, and made the whole world feel more economically and militarily secure. To do this it has incurred billions of dollars of deficit and indebtedness. Will the United States become bankrupt because of this? No, because the United States has sufficient resources and credit. It is promoting international business prosperity, and security because of them. We have made investments for agricultural and industrial development. But we, too, have the resources, the potentiality to back up our credit. We have given capital to banks that have financed many of these development programs. So there is this interlocking of credit on the part of the banks and of the government that has partly increased the public debt of the National Government which is now ₱593 million.

OUR PRESTIGE ABROAD

But, my friends, our country, which has become the envy of the world in its rapidity at rehabilitation and reconstruction, is growing; it is progressing; we have to provide for its growth and security; we have to maintain its early-earned prestige and stature.

Don’t believe that simply because I have to spend on my recent trip abroad I had delayed or thwarted that growth and security, or that I sacrificed the well-being and future of our people. While on the subject, let me digress for a moment.

How many trips have I made abroad since I have been in the government? I shall not include my trip in 1917 when I accompanied President Quezon in his mission to offer 25,000 men of our National Guard to serve in the European theater in the first world war, nor my trip in 1934 when President Quezon and I, as ranking members of the last independence mission, were able to secure the approval of the Tydings-McDuffie Law, in the drafting of which I took part. I shall refer only to my trips since 1947 when as Vice-President I travelled abroad.

When President Roxas and I took office in 1946, we knew that there were two things the country should have—internal security and the establishment of international relations. President Roxas decided that I should leave the country and make preparations for the necessary diplomatic

Relations.

It was necessary for him to remain because the internal situation was critical as the dissident elements at that time, allied with the party in power before us, decided to turn their guns against the government because of their defeat in 1946. They had many loose firearms distributed by the Americans in order to fight the Japanese, and when they decided to defy the government these firearms constituted powerful weapons against the duly constituted authorities. We were still weak and hungry and the people were apprehensive of the dark future of our government.

So President Roxas decided that his duty was to remain and take care of the internal situation and for me to leave for a survey of world situation, especially to familiarize myself with measures taken by the different countries in the effort at world readjustment.

As Secretary of Foreign Affairs I had the duty to prepare for the establishment of our foreign service. You know the story of that trip. I went to the United States. I went to England, France, Switzerland, Germany, and Sweden. I went to Holland. I went to Italy and then back, stopping at the capitals of some countries between Italy and the Philippines. The trip lasted 80 days.

It is true I could not bring tangible results at once; but I was able to sign treaties of friendship, one in France and the other in Italy. I could not wait for the signing of a similar treaty with Great Britain. I was able to confer with ranking officers of many of the chancelleries of Europe and with the heads of states I visited. That was my first visit. What was the net result? I succeeded in establishing: our initial diplomatic relations in Europe.

In 1949, I left for the United States. Why? President Truman invited me to visit his country. That was after General Chiang Kai-shek had paid us a visit. It was suspected that we talked of a military pact. Our political enemies today in the local scene criticized me for discussing military alignment with the countries of Southeast Asia. You know very well that since we established the Republic in 1946 our main concern has been the security of the state. At that time China was still Nationalist. There was no trouble yet in Korea. Japan was emasculated and there seemed to be no danger to the Philippines.

But many of us saw war brewing at a distance, trouble that was going to have its repercussions in the Philippines. The Communists were busy in Indo-China. They were busy in North Korea and in China proper. We were, afraid that some day we might again be the victims of aggression. So we entered into a pact with the United States, the military assistance pact, in order to insure the supply of technical men and military weapons and equipment, to strengthen our local defense system.

PACIFIC UNION

As we saw the war clouds thickening not far from our place, we deemed it necessary to organize ourselves in cooperation with our neighbors for the purpose of checking effectively the southward march of the Communists.

What did I do? I advocated the organization of a Pacific union and because of that I was suspected of being an agent of the United States. So I went to the United States with the commitment that I would not talk to President Truman about the Pacific union.

While I complied with my commitment, I had occasion to address the United States Senate before which I could not refrain from presenting our precarious position so that that great policy-making body might be apprised of our need for assistance and prevent our being gobbled up by a designing nation. It was then that I publicly advocated the Pacific pact. The proposal was not then entertained, but later, when developments in the neighboring countries, revealed the ag­gressive activity and effective campaign of the Communists; when China was already in their hands and! Korea was burning, America thought it best that these nations should be given all the military assistance they needed. So, I sowed a seed, and taking further advantage of that trip, I had occasion to press for more economic and, military assistance, including veterans hospital and other help to revitalize our campaign for peace and order. All these came later. The Veteran’s Hospital costing over ₱18 million will be advertised for bid soon.

I went to the United States in 1950 for medical treatment. You already know my sad plight at the Johns Hopkins hospital when I submitted to a major operation which nearly cost my life.

President Quezon went to the United States not only once or twice or three times, during his incumbency as President of the Senate and as President of the Commonwealth Government. President Osmeña went there also, not once but twice for medical treatment. Why shouldn’t President Quirino go, at least once, for a major operation, on the eve of his assumption of office, in order to be well prepared to assume his obligation to the people?

ASSISTANCE FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

But I didn’t go, there for medical treatment alone. I took advantage of the opportunity to discuss our economic situation with President Truman. I told him, “I am sure that the American people are ready, willing, and determined to help the Philippines but there is some confusion regarding our economic position and potentialities. I would request that you send a group of men to the Philippines to make a general survey of our economic and industrial situation and see if they could assemble enough facts to serve as the basis of a program of economic development for the mutual benefit of the United States and the Philippines.”

So he sent here the Bell Mission. And what did the Bell Mission do? It reported that the Philippines is a good risk for ₱250 million as help within a period of five years.

The Bell Mission has already been able to implement my understanding with Mr. Foster in November, 1950, by remitting more than $1 million with which to initiate the execution of a program of economic development envisaged in our agreement. So, as a result of that trip, primarily for medical treatment only, I was able to bring home an economic program representing $250 million; perhaps it will be more.

My trip this year … I was invited to be present with President Truman at the signing in Washington of the pact of mutual defense with the United States. Of course, I had to follow up the old advocacy of a Pacific union: But I took advantage of the opportunity to discuss with President Truman not only the program of our external security but other matters concerning our relations with the United States, towards securing the permanence of the democratic institutions founded here on July 4, 1946.

That was not all. I made myself available for consultation when the treaty with Japan was being discussed in San Francisco. And I want you to know that it was not only the question of reparations that we had to consider there. Of paramount importance with regard to the treaty of peace with Japan was the veritable unification of the democracies in an effort to more effectively ward off any danger that might come from behind the Iron Curtain.

COLLECTIVE SECURITY

My friends, that alone means our external security, because of the concurrence of the 48 states that joined us in signing the treaty of peace with Japan. The mutual defense pact we signed with the United States means that the United States will defend us in case of aggression, in the same manner that we will participate in the defense of the United States if and when she is invaded,, The mutual security pact signed between the United ‘States and Japan means practically the same thing as between these two countries. And this virtually amounts to a non-aggression pact between the Philippines and Japan. Japan cannot invade the Philippines without involving America because of the latter’s mutual defense pact with us. So the two pacts serve as a moral deterrent to Japan. They remove once for all the so-called yellow peril which has been the concern and obsession of our country ever1 since we wanted to establish our own government.

MORE FRIENDS

So from that last trip I brought home to the Philippines external security for our country.

That was not all. I went to Spain. I went to Italy. I did not go there just for curiosity. I was invited by the heads of Spain and of Italy. During all my stay in both countries, I did not spend a single centavo of your money. I was an official guest of the Spanish government, I lived in the El Par do Palace of Generalissimo Franco and, even for those who were with me, my official entourage, their expenses were paid by the Spanish government.

And what did we get out of all that? We were able to renew, revitalize, perpetuate, and solidify our spiritual and cultural ties with Spain to the limit that we can feel sure that whatever ails us also affects the Spanish government and people. The honor accorded us, the enthusiasm with which I was received, and the love lavished upon me while I was there, speak eloquently of the high regard of the Spanish government and people for their former possession.

I went to Italy. The same thing happened. I stopped at the Quirinal. The Quirinal is the former residence of kings, emperors, and popes. I didn’t spend a single centavo during my stay there. I did spend out of my own pocket to go to the Hotel de Roma and prepare for my plane the following day, but even during my trip to see the Pope, I went on an official car of the Italian government. And if I was received in Spain like a conqueror, I was received in Italy like an emperor. I did not collect anything extra from you or from anybody else to pay for that.

Should I give an account of my expenses s against the benefits that we have been able to derive and the great friendship that we have been able to cement hi Europe? Are we going to put a dollar sign to all that? , Are you going to dicker on the amount of money I spent? “Why didn’t you dicker with President Quezon and President Osmeña?

TO SUM UP

My friends, I shall not prolong my remarks. In establishing here the kind of democracy that we established in the past five years what did we accomplish? Let me sum up.

We inaugurated the Republic of the Philippines, prepared the blueprint, and laid the foundation of a stable government.

We reconstructed the financial and economic structure of the country.

We arrested inflation and avoided devaluation of our currency.

We solved the backpay law and redeemed the emergency and guerrilla notes.

We solved the yearly school crisis, and prevented the recurrence of the rice crisis.

We have gone much farther.

We have crushed the Communist-inspired rebellion and restored peace and order.

We have emasculated Communism and stopped wholesale pillage, rape, massacre, and untold human acts that victimized innocent, defenseless people, children, old people, hospital patients, nurses, and numerous women and virgins.

We have not only rehabilitated and reconstructed public buildings, roads, bridges, schools, hospitals, puericulture centers, ports, wharves, and seawalls, water systems and sewers, irrigation systems, and flood land river controls, but have also built more of them than before the war.

We have also increased our agricultural production and set up more industrial establishments and expanded our foreign trade. Our foreign trade balance before the war was only ₱50 million in our favor. We have had deficits ever since, but during the first six months of this year, the trade balance in our favor amounts to ₱77 million.

We have fostered the increase of our population and promoted the health of our people by improving the birth rate and reducing the death rate.

We have had no epidemics, no hunger; and the standard of living of our people has become better and better. We have minimized unemployment, built more houses for the low-salaried employees, and fixed minimum wages for the industrial and agricultural worker. !’

We have increased the salaries of teachers and enlisted men, standardized the nursing profession, improved the civil service, and provided a general retirement law and insurance system for all public servants.

We have adopted a program of development that will insure our economic stability.

Our internal security is controlled and our ‘external security is secured.

We have established a foreign service worthy of our name.

Our national prestige has been greatly enhanced, our national stature is established, and in the rapid and effective rehabilitation and reconstruction of our country after the war we have become the envy of many countries.

In short, we have made democracy succeed on our soil; our Republic has survived, and we will endure as a people, determined to make the succeeding generations stronger, happier, and more contented.

This is the democracy that we have established and to which we have devoted all our energies, our efforts, and our soul to preserve and to protect.

This is the democracy we are maintaining, the democracy we are defending, placed at stake in the coming elections.

What is the democracy that we have to contend with? It is the so-called democracy fostered behind the Iron Curtain, the democracy that legalizes murder, pillage, rape, terrorism, solely to gratify the lust for power of leaders who would trample and shame the name of this country and destroy all that we have been able to build in the last five years.

My friends, that is the kind of democracy that is being foisted upon us; that threatens and terrorizes our people in the cities, in the villages, and hides in the mountain fastnesses and ravines; that subverts our government and all our own democratic institutions.

Our choice as a people has been made. Wei shall reaffirm it at the polls.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Extemporaneous address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, at the Free Election Rally, Rizal Memorial Stadium, November 5, 1951. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(11) , 5571-5583.