Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines During the National Heroes Day celebration

[Delivered at Fort Santiago, November 30, 1950]

Mr. Chairman:

Your short introduction flatters me beyond measure. I have come to this hallowed spot for the second or perhaps the third time ever since I was released from confinement in this grim compound together with many whose faces I now see before me, and who suffered with me in the dungeon cells not as mercenary prisoners as many here seem to have tried to disparage our confinement but because of our connection or suspected connection with guerrilla activities in the city of Manila. The surroundings have not changed since then. There is only one mark changed and that is that in this area there no longer flies another flag but ours.

True, I gave my pledge when I first visited this place, that this should not be made a military reservation for any country because this spot is so precious, so historical. It is a monument to our struggles for freedom, and enviable monument to our triumph over tyranny and oppression. During this short fleeting moment that I sat with you on this spot, I have tried to relive those moments of anguish when on top of that wall I was confined as a political prisoner and later on was transferred to that building in a cell next to the cell of Colonel Santos who used to commune silently with me about the grim happenings outside of these cells. There has been no change either in the atmosphere or in the walls. They still look grim. But I look with witnesses at the blood and tears with which we distilled the sacrifices and sufferings of those who were detained during those days.

I have not come to dwell on those details which only covered an insignificant portion of our life as a nation because today we turn our eyes on high and remember the heroic dead, not only of the recent past, but all past generations as well. We pause to remember at this moment their great deeds, their noble examples, their exemplary conduct, and the patriotic fervor with which they suffered in their struggles for our liberty and freedom. Unable to erect to each and everyone of them a monument as a fitting resting place, or to erect a tomb where we could enshrine our eternal gratitude for their heroic example, or unable to write in detail the endless stories of their untold sacrifices and sufferings, we now erect a tomb in our hearts and try to emulate in our future actions those which have distinguished our heroes and martyrs.

It is not true literally that what we need today are the heroes of yesterday. Every epoch has its own heroes and every hero has his own epoch, I once said, and I love to repeat it, as it is fitting to repeat it at this moment. The sacrifices of our heroes of yesterday are good examples. However, their manner of conduct, of living, of trying to unify this nation, and of erecting a substantial country in order to provide us with a life of contentment and peace for our country and people—this is no longer the same. The circumstances, the climates, the problems and the peculiarities of each and every leader in his respective time—not all of them fit on the present occasion. True, we must have the same spirit, we must emulate the same character, and we must be fired by the same determination with which they fought for us in the past, but to call them back to life now and tell them “You lead again,” I am afraid they could not live the same life that they lived if they lived today.

It is for us to stand where they left off, to proceed and realize the ideals which spurred them to patriotic action. Our life as a nation must be taken as a unit. During those days as in our days, they, too had their own problems; they, too, had their own divisions, they, too, had their own fratricidal fights and conflicts; and there were tales also of killing one another. But we don’t judge them individually by their actions. We judge them by what has been accomplished by their epoch, by their generation, by their history. So we today who still live in a heroic age must also do something, not merely imitate but even surpass what they did, because our country has progressed by leaps and bounds ever since it has been known to exist as civilized nation.

The problems of today are so complicated, so multifarious, so difficult, and so hard for us after going through innumerable vicissitudes in the recent past. For a time we have become bewildered, not knowing the direction to take when we come to the crossroads. And yet the instinct of our race, the strength of our character, and the patriotic fervor which has inspired all leaders of the past as well as the leaders of the present, are still there; and so long as this nation retains all these characteristics of the race, I am quite sure we will further broaden the horizons of freedom and liberty and achieve what is assigned to us to make of this country greater, happier, more enduring and eternally sovereign. This is our mission. This is the challenge of the day. We want to do something so that the past can be proud of the present. And, in our endeavor to improve always on present accomplishments, we want to be worthy of a bright future.

So, my friends, as we gather here today, we rededicate ourselves to those principles which made our heroes of the past the recognized leaders of the nation, leaders whose character and examples ought to be imitated or emulated; and as we accept the challenge of this age, we, too, want to be the heroes of this epoch. Who knows, here in this congregation today there may be another Rizal, there may be another Bonifacio, there may be another Mabini, another Del Pilar, another Antonio Luna, or another Quezon. Who knows but that we may have such men in this congregation if we just preserve the pristine patriotic character of our race, a! race that has known to fight for its freedom and liberty, a race that has made crimson of its shores, its mountain fastnesses and even the rivers in the mountains simply because it didn’t want to succumb to foreign invaders, a nation that, although penniless, still looks on high arid expects the Almighty to shower on us the blessings of national life because we believe in Him, we, the only Christian nation in this part of the world.

With this history, with this tradition, with this historic past, my friends, and the exemplary conduct of the heroes whom we remember today, the new Philippines has great prospects.

Let us now be guided by a different atmosphere. Every time that we celebrate the National Heroes Day, every time that we remember the dead, every time that we remember the vicissitudes of the past, every time that we look upon our grim present and become desperate of our future, we seem to erect around ourselves, produce before our eyes, figures that terrorize our own populace and make our future look dark and gloomy.

This country is not a country of perpetual Halloweens in which one gets a skull to scare the others, for that is the only thing we do: use figures or objects to scare others or make others shiver by means of skulls of the dead or skeletons. This Halloween party must be stopped. Our country’s atmosphere must be changed. There must be something, some transformation from negative to positive action. Positive action is what our country needs today. We have grappled with many problems of yesterday. We have gone through all these vicissitudes with victory and triumph, and all the world recognizes our efforts. Why stop and brood over our dark past when a bright future is within our reach? My friends, I invite you on this solemn moment to rededicate ourselves to the high principles of patriotism, to the great examples of our heroes of yesterday. Let us adopt a new norm of conduct of positive action and cooperate and do something to make of this country substantial, enduring, brighter and happier.

This is the message to you. It is not a message to those who no longer listen to us because they are dead. But it is a message to those who, by a fluke of fortune have been spared their lives in spite of the many sufferings they have gone through and who continue to suffer and sacrifice although they may as well be considered dead. I am addressing myself to those who, although they have not fought yesterday, have a chance to fight today. I am addressing myself especially to the youth of this land who, tomorrow, will bear the same responsibilities that now weigh on us, so that we may be able to show something of the pristine character of our race and be conscious of our great responsibilities for which they are now being trained by circumstances and by education. They should grapple with the problems of the day with determination so that this country may continue to be free and happy.

Thank you. ( Applause. )

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Extemporaneous speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, during the National Heroes Day celebration at Fort Santiago, November 30, 1950. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46 (11), 5417-5420.