Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before signing the Magna Charta of Labor

[Delivered at Malacañan, June 17, 1953]

My Fellow Laborers:

You have every reason to rejoice over the signing of this bill. It is designed to secure industrial peace in the country. The rights, duties, and obligations, as well as privileges of both the laborers and the management are well defined, calculated to be the basis of an intelligent interpretation of the intent of the Legislature which is far reaching.

You may not believe it, but this bill will spell success in our industrial program if carried out in the spirit and to the letter of the law. Of course, there is that human element, that human equation which must come in to complement or supplement whatever deficiency or insufficiency the provisions of this law may have, in order to adjust ourselves—management and the laborers—to conditions obtaining in particular localities.

Both management and labor need a little bit of restraint, physical as well as moral, mostly moral, because it is this that dictates the acts of men. So, in providing for the elimination of the rights, duties, and privileges of management and labor, it was intended by the Legislature that this country would be stabilized with the cooperation of both management and labor, and allow us to carry on our huge program of industrial and agricultural development which is the need of the country today.

No matter what people say to the contrary, no matter what people denounce to the skies; no matter how critical our opponents in politics may seem, regarding the accomplishments of the Legislature, we are on record as having established here a regime openly, decidedly, in favor of labor.

I shall not cite instances where the administration has been able to implement this policy.

With the approval of this law, therefore, I have great hopes and confidence that you will do your part in the fulfillment of your rights, duties, and obligations, considering the rights of management, which after all is your associate. And my friends, before I sign this bill, I want to stress on your mind that I do it in the spirit of cooperation for the security of our industrial pursuits and efficiency in the management of labor in our agricultural and industrial development.

In this spirit, I am going to sign the bill and I hope that you will do your share without stint or reservation. (Applause)

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Extemporaneous speech of the President immediately before signing the Magna Charta of Labor at Malacañan, 5 p.m., June 17, 1953. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49(6) , 2226.