Extemporaneous Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before the Catholic group’s demonstration

[Delivered at the Malacañan grounds, February 15, 1949]

PRESIDENT LIM, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I am very glad that you have given me this opportunity to express my feelings and define my stand not only as a true Catholic but also as a freedom-loving citizen and the highest representative of this Government, on this momentous question which is troubling the consciences of the Catholic world today.

I have had occasion to read the life history of Prince Primate Mindszenty: of his remarkable rise to the primacy within a period of three years from priesthood to a high position in the Church, I have read about his sturdy character and his unsmiling personality which denote seriousness of purpose and concentration of his intellectuality and high objectives in the Church. I have heard how brilliantly he fought against anything that was considered an enemy of the Church as well as for everything that had to be done to promote the interests and welfare of the common man, the poor man, the vilified and downtrodden in Hungary.

I have heard of his trial as shrouded with mystery and suspicion and the employment of all those things that are extraneous to court procedure and which made the people feel that he was outraged in court.

Certainly, a man with such courage, sturdy character, and dominant nature, could not have adopted a meek attitude at the moment when he could have exhibited all his qualities to become a martyr of the Church. For I am told that he aspired to be a martyr and not to be a mere suffering individual living in the streets of religious duty. The whole world therefore was astounded and everybody believed that there was an outrage because of this obstreperous decision to confine him to life imprisonment instead of sending him to the gallows and allowing him to die a martyr, thus robbing the Church of another martyr. He certainly deserves to be remembered by ah ages.

I want to join the whole world by expressing my condemnation of such a procedure not only as a true Catholic but as a private citizen and a lover of individual freedom. I want to express my condemnation as the head of the Government because I don’t want that tragic trial of Cardinal Mindszenty repeated in our home country. This is a free country. This is a democratic country. There is religious freedom, absolute individual freedom, here. I am not bent on protecting any particular sect or court in this jurisdiction but I would condemn any attempt by any branch of this Government or any group among us to curtail religious freedom and to set the law only in an effort to enthrone in this country a new god—what they call the Red God. [Applause.]

My friends, this will give you an idea of the great task and responsibility before us. All around us today the same influence that sent this dutiful cardinal to life imprisonment is pervading not only our neighboring atmosphere. It is in our very midst. There are people who are aligned with those who believe in this procedure and if you do not help the Government, if you do not help your own countrymen to eradicate such an influence, God help us!

This is one of the greatest dangers not only to our religious belief and the principles of democracy but to our very life as a nation . . . The trial in Hungary may be repeated here with more serious tragedy to ourselves and to our posterity.

So, ladies and gentlemen, I am very happy that you have given me this opportunity to express myself thus, because it is necessary to announce to the whole world and to drive home into the heart and soul of the populace the great danger of that way of thought, of that practice, of that dogma, which are derogatory to our individual life as a nation and to our individual rights as private, freedom loving citizens of this country. [Applause.]

I congratulate you for approving this resolution. I already had a statement prepared on this matter, a statement that I was only finding an appropriate occasion to release. You now have given me that occasion and I voice our protest from the deepest recesses of our soul: The true Christian Filipino people are against this travesty of justice. [Applause]

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Extemporaneous address of President Quirino before the Catholic group’s demonstration on the Malacañan grounds, at 5 p. m., February 15, 1949. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45(2) , 671-672.