Extemporaneous Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before the University of the East

[Delivered on March 5, 1953]

WHO OUGHT TO LEAD?

I WANT to thank you, Mr. President, for your inspiring speech of introduction. You have so overwhelmed me with your expressions of recognition of what I have been able to accomplish during my term that I am at a loss to know how to begin this afternoon.

We are living at a time when long speeches are not in order. We have graduated, in fact, from kilometric and tedious dissertations in the course of which we often found ourselves lost in the maze of our vague constructions.

What impressed me most on my arrival here is the astonishing growth of this great university. I am proud to have acted as a co-sponsor in the blessing of this building and this institution. Since then I have considered myself the padrino of this university. My concern in its growth and development is therefore natural. In two or three years, I have seen it grow in enrollment, in prestige and in importance to the nation. It is now one of the leading institutions of learning in the Far East. It bespeaks the wisdom and foresight of those who founded it. I am sure the contribution it is making will long be remembered in the history of our nation.

You challenge me, Mr. President, to speak on very important and delicate topics of the day. I am afraid it will not be possible for me to pick up the gauntlet because my personal career as a public man is involved. I feel like a prisoner enclosed in a circle and compelled to tread a slippery floor of embers.

The two delicate questions which you propounded to me and on which I believe you expect me to dwell refer to my re-election and the burning issue of religious instruction in the public schools. I will have to summon all my calmness and composure, my prudence and self-control, to speak objectively on them.

On this issue of election of the persons who are to hold the reins of government, I would like to invite you to consider the position of this country first and then determine the qualities of the man who should lead it. The question is not who wants to lead but who is needed to lead.

In the different epochs of our development as a people and as a nation, several types of men have been called upon to face the country’s problems. Let us begin with the first epoch, the epoch of idealism and nationalism. Our prime consideration then was our people’s real ideal: What kind of men should lead us and what principles should guide them? Such questions suggested themselves. In that period, the most logical leaders were Burgos, Rizal, Del Pilar, Lopez-Jaena, and others.

The second epoch was the epoch of implementation of our nationalism. It was a revolutionary epoch. It claimed among its leaders Bonifacio, Aguinaldo, Mabini, and others. They were responsible for the establishment of the short-lived first Republic at Malolos.

The third epoch covered the whole period of American occupation. It was characterized by our relentless struggle for freedom. That was the epoch of Quezon, Osmeña and other members of this generation, some of whom are still with us while others have already gone like Roxas and Abad Santos. Among those living, I must mention some of my friends: Bocobo, Romulo and you, Mr. President, and — shall I add? — myself.

The next epoch represented a dark period in our history. I don’t know if that epoch is worth remembering. We are just emerging from its shadow as we enter upon the threshold of a new era, the industrial era, an era of rehabilitation and reconstruction and development. It is an epoch beset with so many complex problems — problems of world readjustment, of a world threatened by communism, and of survival. Such problems we must solve if we are to preserve our country and deliver it to the next generation free, happy and prosperous. The present epoch concerns us most because we are living in it and are taking active part in the drama that is unfolding before us.

The question, therefore, is, “Who is going to lead our country? Will it be the type of Rizal? Will it be the type of Aguinaldo? Will it be the type of Quezon? Will it be the type of Osmeña or will it be the type of Roxas? Or should it be another type, one who combines quality, experience of modern trends, and knowledge of present conditions, with a broad background and outlook?”

So the question is not who wants to lead this country, but who ought to lead it?

My friends of the University of the East, you have entered upon an educational career at a time when our land needs most your brain and brawn, when we need you to help build our country with your constructive contribution.

You no longer have to recite in your classrooms meaningless words which yesterday sounded eloquent and impressive. Gone are the days when we preferred to read novels, poetry and philosophy in order to exhibit our versatility. These are days of deeds and not of words, days when we must find out in purely mathematical equations what we should do to meet our pressing problems. We are faced with facts, not with theories.

We have made tremendous headway in our program of national action. We have so solved our problems that we can point out with pride the tangible results, of our activities.

Many people still compare the progress we attained before 1941 and our present progress, as if there had been no intervening period between 1941 and 1953. They forget that when this government was reestablished in 1945 as a commonwealth government, we really had nothing. We were practically food-less and shelterless. Our rice farms were devastated, our industries disrupted, our economy in general was so destroyed that it needed supernatural efforts to reconstruct it.

Many of us still remember those days when our countrymen used to go from one street corner to another begging for alms, expecting American soldiers to throw them even the stubs of their cigarettes or a piece of chocolate or bread. They were reminiscent of the dark and cruel days of Japanese occupation. It was shortly after liberation that we started. Not till then did we begin to show new determination, new enthusiasm, new vision, and new genius, all of which are manifested in the great success we have achieved in the administration of our country’s affairs.

Today, our production is much bigger than before the war. So is our international commerce and foreign trade. And so is our income. When we reconstituted our Commonwealth Government, we had in our coffers only P1,800,000. By June, 1952 we had more than P611 million in our treasury.

I shall not compare our standards of living in 1945 and in 1953. I may say, however, that our standard of living today is higher than before 1945. And the strange thing about it is that prices have gone down. Our peso’s position has been maintained. It is still one of the most stable currencies in the world. And the name and prestige of our Republic — I invite you to hear them from the lips not of our detractors but of friends who are with us in this country and of those who have learned and read about our present strides in our international association. Not only have we rehabilitated our country, but have gone farther. We have built an entirely new country, an entirely new people with a different and broader outlook, people who are resolved to make our land greater, stronger and happier.

We must not lose, therefore, the momentum in the national upsurge of our development and aspiration. To maintain that momentum we must consider carefully who is going to lead our country today. I shall revert to my old observation, Mr. President. It is a question of whether I am needed. That question only the people can answer on the basis of achievement, experience, and determination.

There is one phase of our national position that must not be minimized. That is our security as a nation. We have made notable advances in our work of rendering our country economically and politically stable, but we all know that we are again being threatened with disruption, if we fail to preserve those institutions which we have established, the democratic processes which we have discovered to be the real source of our strength and happiness.

Communism is rampant throughout the world today. It is extending its tentacles in our country. In our very midst we feel its malignant influence. We see the havoc being wrought in the country-sides by those who conspire to sow fear and confusion and pave the way for the delivery of our country to foreign power. What is happening in our country, Mr. President, is not a civil war. It is not like the Civil War in the United States, when the South wanted to secede from the North and establish its own government side by side with the free North. Our trouble is caused and inspired by an outsider. Communism in the Philippines is not merely the desire to subvert the government in order to acquire power. It is not merely the desire to run the government but to have it run upon the dictates and orders of an outside power. This is the great difference between the Civil War in the United States and the war that our own forces are waging against those operating in the mountain fastnesses and ravines in different areas of the Philippines.

There is need, therefore, for a firm, determined hand to repel all these movements designed to overthrow our government and deliver it to an alien master. Thus, we need men who are resolved to fight communism to the last ditch, and not men who help communists fight for their acquittal when they are charged with treason and for their release when they are confined in the stockade. So for the effective, prolonged and reliable leadership of this nation, the choice is between one who can continue building this nation and openly thwarting every effort to overthrow the government and one who is willing to deliver our nation to another power. ( Applause )

That is my answer to the question of whether I should run for reelection or not. ( Applause ) You have to approach the matter in an objective and impartial manner so as to arrive at a wise decision.

You suggest that we touch on the question of religious instruction in the public schools. It is my sworn duty to execute the laws and the Constitution of the Philippines. I can not go beyond the words and spirit of our fundamental law. Irrespective of my personal feelings, I stand above the religious conflict that threatens our country. The question must be settled in the calmest and most prudent manner. Our Constitution provides for optional religious instruction. That provision must be enforced. It must be implemented.

I have already issued directives in addition to the circulars of the Bureau of Education, implementing this Constitutional mandate. A convenient hour for the teaching of religion in public schools should be fixed in order to carry out the spirit of the Constitution. A convenient hour to me is an hour when students can really and physically attend. And that convenient time cannot be determined by the pupils alone. The wishes of their parents must be considered as well.

So, I have given instructions that in every public school where religion is to be taught, the representatives of the Bureau of Education, the parents and children get together and decide what is the most convenient time for the teaching of religion. Such conferences, I am sure, will result in a common understanding.

We must teach our children, no matter what religions or religious tenets and moral principles their parents profess. If the Moros want to continue with their Koran, they may do so; but those who are Christians, those who need a new moral regeneration, ought to welcome the opportunity to prepare their youth for a more orderly life in the family, in the community and in the nation. Nowadays, we often speak in a disparaging manner, even using nasty words sometimes in the discussion of important problems affecting the nation and the family. We need therefore not only mental but also spiritual prophylactic to cleanse our mouths and our souls. We need to be guided by moral principles which can be taught only by embracing religious beliefs that are most in consonance with our conscience. So, in implementing that part of the Constitution providing for optional religious instruction, I expect the Department of Education to come to an agreement with those who want to have religion taught in the schools regarding the convenient time for that purpose. I am one of those who believe that it is necessary to go back to the days when we worshipped God, respected our parents and the traditional practices which made us responsible, peaceful, and law-abiding.

There has already been too much unchristian feeling among us. Something fundamental in our intellect, in our soul, something that will redirect our spirit to more elevating levels must be effected. This we can do only by instilling into our people’s minds the teaching of God and the sacrifices of Jesus. So the problem must be approached in a dispassionate manner in order not to divide our country unnecessarily into two camps — those who want and those who do not want religion taught in the schools. I think all of us want to be taught how to be good citizens and Christians. On that point there should be no disagreement.

Now, Mr. President, I don’t know how long I was expected to speak this afternoon, but before leaving this quadrangle I should like to impart a message which comes freely and directly from the bottom of my heart.

Today, we face not only those problems mentioned by you and by me. There are greater, more far-reaching problems that affect the continued existence of our nation. We have barely begun to stand on our own feet. We have barely laid the foundations of our new republic. We have barely inaugurated the first numbers of our program of national action — and there is yet much to do to enable us to fulfill our mission. What we need today is for our people to concentrate on the national objectives, and not to distract them into petty political or partisan fights. Only thus can we establish a firm and enduring republic.

I would, therefore, appeal to you as leaders of this institution and to the great body of students of your university to concentrate on constructive pursuits, the things for which this university was founded. I know the great constructive work you are doing to make this institution a useful force for the strength, power and stability of our government and people. I would, therefore, ask you and the faculty members, to canalize your efforts and your thoughts in such a manner that you will be able to contribute your bit not only in the halls of this university but in your farms, in your barrios , in the factories; in short, in every constructive pursuit in which you may be engaged. Thus you will help provide an ample and strong foundation for our new government.

Heretofore, we have been paying much attention to organizing big institutions in the poblaciones — clubs here, universities there, factories here, industries and establishments there. The day has come for us to spread out and reach the outlying districts so that the mass of our people may also become beneficiaries of the advantages and privileges of the civilized life that we enjoy. I invite each and every one of you to do some pioneering work. Let us go out and see what lands are still unoccupied, mines undug, and potentialities still untapped. This big body of students — millions of students in universities and colleges public and private — if properly organized, not for rallies and demonstrations, but for constructive work, could be an effective means of mobilizing all our resources to make our country stable, strong, and prosperous.

I invite you all, I repeat, to spread throughout the country. Let us not concentrate in one town or city alone. Manila is already overcrowded. Let us populate our country methodically, systematically and earnestly. Let us cultivate lands that are idle. Let us find ways and means of cooperating in the program of developing this country now that the government is in a position to contribute even initial capital to open up lands, farms, and help develop our cottage industries.

Rural banks are being established everywhere. The ACCFA provides means with which to organize cooperative associations and finance our cooperative activities in outlying districts. Lands we have. Financial help from the government is now being made available. The whole national attention is centered on the development of every nook and corner of the Philippines.

It rests with you, therefore, to brace up and find your logical place in this national movement, in our program of economic progress and advancement. I am not asking you to be all farmers, to be all merchants. I am not even asking you to neglect your respective careers. But there is always a time to be devoted to productive or creative purposes. Let me extend my hand to you. Let me open to you the lands and the opportunity and the financial help of the government so that you can help me, help the government and the country to make the Philippines, the new Philippines, a mighty bulwark for the continued enjoyment of the liberty and freedom that we now have. Thank you very much. ( Applause )

Source : Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].