Extemporaneous Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the University of Manila Homecoming

[Released on February 18, 1951]

THE HUK PROBLEM

I WAS thinking whether I really requested the committee in charge of this affair not to require anybody to deliver any formal speech. I did say that the cares of State were overtaxing me; that it would not be possible for me to prepare any speech. But I didn’t say that nobody should deliver any formal speech such as the speech you have just heard from Mr. Santos. ( Applause )

This reminds me of what happened to Mark Twain and one of those after-dinner speakers, whom he used to meet on every occasion. Tired of writing after-dinner speeches, they agreed to swap speeches, so that while one delivered a speech believed to be his own and for which he would be highly applauded, the other would deliver his companion’s speech and later on in the confusion both of them would be applauded. Thus the spirit of rivalry would be erased from the mind of the audience.

Once Mark Twain appeared at a big dinner, perhaps bigger than this, with so many ladies present and, of course, he wanted to shine just as his colleague wanted to shine. But his partner had to speak first and he delivered a very beautiful, convincing, eloquent speech, fundamental in all respects, and he was greatly applauded. So Mark Twain, not to be outdone, confessed that he had an arrangement with the previous speaker to swap their speeches so that one would deliver the other fellow’s speech, and vice versa. So when Mark Twain got up to speak, he said, “Ladies and Gentlemen, you have just heard my speech. I am sorry that the speech of my friend was left in my drawer before I came here from my hotel, and I have nothing to say.”

Doctor Santos has just delivered my speech ( applause ) and I am sorry I forgot his speech.

I want to thank you for this honor accorded me this afternoon because this is an opportunity to be with you, in an atmosphere so different from that which prevailed when you conferred upon me the first honor in your university compound. It was at a time when President Roxas was still lying in state at the Malacañan Palace and in reverence to him and to the presence of his unburied body at the Palace hall, I could not devote more than five minutes of my time to say a few words in justification of the honor accorded me as the sixth honorary alumnus of this now famous college of law of the University of Manila. The atmosphere was so sad, so distressing, and on top of that I had just returned from a trip down south in order to recuperate. So it was no exaggeration to say that I was living on borrowed time. I was going to initiate my duties as head of State on borrowed term; I had borrowed two years of President Roxas’ term. It was fortunate for me though perhaps not for the people, because many do not agree that I am doing just the right thing — one of my intimate friends who said that is my friend Judge Guevara, who is here. ( Applause )

I will attempt in a few words, giving at random my views on a certain aspect of the national work that we have accomplished in order to place this country in a more stable, enduring position. It is difficult indeed to mention the fact that among the chief executives of this country I am the least favored by circumstances to hold the reins of government. I inherited so many ills, multiplied or increased by some people who were associated with me but who did not realize that they were doing a little bit more harm by increasing the unhappy burden placed upon my shoulders. But I shall attempt to show you that I am determined to remove this.

The honor conferred on me upon my assumption of office was a reward for past accomplishments. I had to leave this country, cross the Pacific and the Atlantic, go to Asia, and return to the Philippines within the period of eighty days seeking conferences with the heads of State in the cities I visited. I consulted with all the chancelleries of Europe in Berlin, London, Paris, Stockholm, Berne, Rome, and Cairo.

I had to do all this in order to be well informed of the measures that were being taken by countries which were reconstructing or rehabilitating themselves. My purpose was that when I got back to the Philippines I might be able to readjust our own reconstruction and rehabilitation in line with the world readjustment. I had to work as nobody else had ever worked on matters touching on our foreign missions and I had to travel far to merit what you call a reward at that time when I was still Vice-President and Secretary of Foreign Affairs. But whether you consider this a reward or not, I want to confess that, more than a reward, I took it as an inspiration, as an encouragement to proceed with my new duties as head of the State.

From that time on, I worked hard and long to be able to justify the honor accorded me by the electorate during the last elections, in view of the fact that there were so many misgivings, so much expectation and recrimination. I began to discharge my duties in an atmosphere so depressing, so disadvantageous, and so discouraging that I was harassed, attacked, and criticized everywhere. One could have lost his head. Thank God I did not lose mine. You will pardon me if I speak longer because this is my only chance to make a comeback on Judge Guevara. ( Applause ) Even Congressman Pelaez there has criticized the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus . All the rest seemed to have looked with disfavor on this executive action which they thought would be curbed by the legislature or by the court. It is only my heart, my conscience, my own interpretation of the Constitution that dictate what I should do on this matter, and that I cannot renounce. It is my responsibility as long as I am placed in a position where I have to answer for the rights and the protection of the individual liberty of the citizenry.

I want to bring you back to the old days in order that you may make comparison between the time of Quezon, the time of Osmeña, the time of Roxas, and all the other Chief Executives of the past. It is not true that the habeas corpus was never suspended in the Philippines before. Just for banditry and cattle rustling at that time, the Governor General suspended the writ in Batangas and Cavite. The case was taken to the Supreme Court; it was sustained. Mere banditry and cattle rustling! Today what do we have? Men who rob you not only of your cattle but also of your property. They rob you of your lives; they rob you of your children; they rob you of your wives; they rob you of your daughters, most of whom they rape, kidnap, and murder.

I do not have to repeat here the news that you read daily. You must recall those places where people have deprived our citizens of these fundamental rights to live and to enjoy liberty and freedom. I shall return to this point later on but for basis of comparison, I want to repeat that this is not the first time that the writ of habeas corpus has been suspended in the Philippines. The American Governors-General who came from the country where democratic ideals and principles rule and where all the freedom of speech and of the press has been enjoyed, established the precedent here. For what? For banditry, lawlessness, and cattle rustling.

During the time of President Quezon no such thing happened. But remember that in those days there was no revolution. The organization of the Socialists in Pampanga headed by Pedro Abad Santos was still in its incipient stage. We used to go there; I used to go there myself. I visited almost every municipality in the whole province of Pampanga to dissuade the Socialists from their attempt to organize a body that would cripple the government because they had been disgusted with the life in that province. The feudalistic system that was established there and elsewhere in the vicinity they threatened to eradicate. They were right. I still believe they are right in destroying that feudalistic system. But we went there; we helped them; we asked them, “Why did you destroy that cane field owned by an absentee landowner ?”

They answered, “He reduced our wages.”

“Who was he?” We called him to correct the wrong, and he corrected it. They engaged in organizing themselves in the dark. During the time of President Quezon, we had the Socialists in Pampanga, the Ganaps, and the Sakdals elsewhere. There were also attempts to kill people. If President Quezon did not suspend the writ of habeas corpus at that time it was because the troubles were sporadic. There was no plan of overthrowing the government; there was no overt act of rebellion; and there was no danger national in character in accordance with a pre-conceived national plan to seize the government and place the plotters in power and deliver this government to another power and make us lead the life that we now detest — communism. It is only recently that communism has come to control these organizations and implement them with subversive plans and acts of general violence, atrocities, and inhumanities.

During the time of President Osmeña, there were Hukbalahaps, but they did not constitute a danger to the government. On the contrary, they were associated with President Osmeña. You remember when Taruc went to Iloilo accompanying Mrs. Osmeña in the campaign of 1946? You remember Secretary Confesor who went to the extent of making love to the Huks in Pampanga and of converting them into allies of the party in power then? How could you suspend the writ of habeas corpus at that time when our officials were associated with these people who are now wreaking vengeance on us; doing havoc in our country, sacrificing lives of the people whom we have sworn to protect, and destroying the liberties we have pledged to preserve?

Now you come to my time because the interregnum between President Roxas’ assumption of office and his death was marked by prejudice which had it lasted up to the last election of 1949 would have marked the fall of the party in power then and would have changed the whole country’s situation. There were the Huks, but we were able to curb’ their inhuman activity, unholy designs, and dangerous attempts on the government.

I personally went to the very heart of Huklandia. I went to Bahay Pare without any arms and conferred with Taruc and all his associates surrounded by men who were armed, with all their banners, red flags. I just went through the line. I was not exactly afraid but I was confident they would not harm me and that confidence gave me strength. Right there I delivered a speech. Openly they voted to cooperate with the government. I could not suspend the habeas corpus then because they offered their cooperation.

Afterwards, I was double-crossed, so to speak. Unwittingly I gave them an opportunity to get together and organize themselves better. And when the time came for Taruc to go back to the hills after collecting his salary, his allowances, his per diems, and all the emoluments attached to him as a member of Congress, and after treating him as my personal guest in my residence and shaking hands with him as a gentleman, he went back to the fields, the mountains, to do what? Not to commit vengeance against me as he has no personal grudge against me, but to carry on the policy or program of wresting power from the government. I defy any of those people who went to the field to prove that they have any personal grudge against me. On the contrary, this hand — the left hand — which I have been using all the time, has always been the dispenser of charity — food, medicine, shelter, schools, bridges, even mobile units to entertain these people.

That was the help that was extended to them. But believing that all my smiles, my friendship, my humility, my high consideration for them — because it was my endeavor to win them over — believing that my attitude was an expression of weakness, they began to defy the government. From 1950, their system of campaign has developed into one of revolution. We have gotten hold of a record of their complete plan of revolution. They have their own politburo; they have their own military organization; they have their own men to do all these violent actions in order to sow hate and confusion, capitalizing quite often or all the time on our financial crisis for which I alone cannot be held responsible.

If I spent more money in the early days of my administration, it was because that was the only way we could get P200 million from our deposits from the United States with which to implement our program of reconstruction and rehabilitation. In the expenditure of this 200 million pesos, what did we do? We gave impetus to the reconstruction of our bridges, roads, hospitals, puericulture centers, and schools. Wharves, custom houses, irrigation systems were rehabilitated. The money we spent was for capital investments and I challenge any of you here, including Judge Guevara, to show me that I spent more for myself than any of my predecessors or that I was more extravagant than I should have been.

The daily expenses of Malacañan when I assumed office were from P400 to P700. How much do I spend now? Around P100. What do I eat? Sinigang, pinacbet , and sometimes saluyot . ( Applause ) I never wanted to make pasikat . I was never spectacular and people thought I was not doing much. But I want you to scan the record and check up on the accomplishments of this administration and be fair in the estimation of the values in the final evaluation of the actuations of this administration or this government. I am not very proud of my accomplishments but I have three years more within which to present my final accounting. We are going to spend more because this is the time when we have to spend. When will you spend your money? Why do you keep your money in the bank? Why do you keep your money in the alcancia ? Why do you keep your money in the folds of your wife’s dress? Why do you buy so many earrings once in a while? When do you pawn them and when will you spend all that money? It is during the time of crisis. What is the purpose of saving money? Save for what? To be a miser when you are already hungry?

And remember that our expenditure today is not for any other activity than for national defense, for the maintenance of peace and order, which represents 48 per cent of our total appropriations. Thirty-eight per cent is for our schools, for education. Why do we have to spend so much for national defense? I did not provoke these gentlemen in the fields now hiding in the mountain fastnesses and ravines, lurking in the dark, coming down to forage once in a while and hiding their counterpart among these intellectual forages in our own midst. ( Applause ) All this has come to pass because of special circumstances.

My friends, the arms they have—who gave them? First, they got them from the Japanese, they got them from the Americans, not officially but surreptitiously and through the intervention of some calculating members of the Armed Forces not only of the Philippines but also of the United States. All the junk that we have here—the depots containing arms and ammunition — we didn’t give those arms to them. They connived with some of our own officials, Americans and Filipinos alike, in charge of those depots.

These things never happened during Quezon’s time, nor during Osmeña’s time. President Quezon could not issue a proclamation at the fall of Corregidor suspending the writ of habeas corpus because he had no jurisdiction over the whole territory; it was already in the hands of the Japanese. Osmeña could not suspend the writ of habeas corpus during his time because the men who are now harassing us were on his side.

Shall I follow the examples of others who were guided by different circumstances? I have to judge things as I see them under my very eyes and my very nose, and interpret them in the light of recent and current events. My friends, the movement in the Philippines is not confined to our territory. It is part of a world movement; it is part of a world program of aggression. We who aspire to establish here a permanent, secure, enduring government, must establish first internal security. Our token force to Korea of 1,200 men cannot compare with the great force that we need here to maintain internal security and tranquility. The war is here. We are just contributing our forces to the war effort to curb that world movement of Communist aggression. But the essential thing, the most immediate thing to do here, is first to protect our homes, our children, and our future. That is what concerns me immediately.

When the Constitution of the Philippines was being discussed, it was President Quezon himself who wanted to clothe the Chief Executive with power even greater than that of the President of the United States. He knew the idiosyncracies of our people. He knew the danger ahead and wanted to place in the hands of the Chief Executive the greatest power possible so that at a given moment he could utilize the executive arm to stop anything that might be considered as an obstruction to our continued enjoyment of liberty and freedom. That is not only the spirit; it is the letter of the Constitution.

When shall I exercise my power to suspend the writ of habeas corpus ? Shall I wait until the dissidents have exterminated the people in the outlying districts? Shall I wait for the Hukbalahap revolutionists to enter Manila and howl in the streets? Shall I wait until they have razed to the ground all public buildings; have burned down all our hospitals; have raped, kidnapped, and killed all our women? Not I. ( Applause )

My friends, this is a practical question. It is no longer a question of party, to be the object of a fine, hair-splitting constitutional dissertation on principles of government. It is a practical question which we have to face and we have to face it with practical measures. One such measure was the rounding, up of the members of the politburo. Was the detention of these plotters in Manila haphazard? It was not. One of their own members came to me and said, “Mr. President, I have long suffered following my comrades in the fields, in the mountains, in the forests. I have come to realize that I am just being dragged into a movement which will take us into an international conflict.”

“Our plan was to overthrow this government. Here are my associates.” He named them.

“Where are they?”

“In such a place.”

“What are they doing?”

“This is in charge of research. The other is in charge of military action. The third is in charge of robbing trains. The fourth is in charge of our treasury, to get funds to finance the campaign. The rest are employed to harass the communities so that there will be confusion. This group is in charge of proselytizing, increasing the membership of our organization by bringing one in every three month.”

“Where do they get together?”

“In such a place.”

“When can I round them up?”

“Any time you want.” So I told the MIS (Military Intelligence Service), “Come here, listen to this gentleman. So and So is in the list; so are others. They are all in the group. Their program of revolution is complete. I don’t want you to do any piecemeal detention. Simultaneous action in one day.” And they swooped down and they arrested more than one hundred. Of course, there were some in the group who were not actually affiliated with that nefarious activity and macabre plan. They were released. But those who were actually engaged in that movement were taken to court.

The very confession of their own scheme was a fact. The plan is not only clear: it is complete, it is dangerous, and it is imminent. There is revolution now. There is not only imminent danger thereof; and under the circumstances, the Constitution gives the Chief Executive the power to suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus so that these people, once they are detained, may be locked up somewhere because if they are turned loose, they will go to the mountains and continue coming down foraging, harassing, killing, and murdering our people in the outlying districts and even here in the very heart of Manila.

The suspension of the writ is not against the Constitution. They say it is lawless. If it is in accordance with the Constitution, how can it be lawless? How sarcastic is the attitude of some people, those newly discovered political philosophers of the day who only address themselves to the galleries. I am not answering them individually. But I want to warn you, my dear friends, that this campaign of discrediting the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus is part of the program of these revolutionists in order that we may restore the writ and give them a chance, ( long applause ) give them a chance to meet with us again and continue their nefarious activities.

If you love your country, if you love the liberty of your children, if you love the liberty of your own future, be more sober in assessing the facts and circumstances surrounding this executive action. And I want to tell you, my friends, that that is not the only concern of the day. We have to clear this country of these dissidents—political, intellectual, business dissidents—because there are also business dissidents, those who made a campaign against taxes—lawyers who lobby against the approval of certain taxes to pay, not their own, not the small fellows’, in the street, but the big corporations’; aliens’;—selfish motives! Nobody is going to be affected by the 20 per cent exchange tax among our people here—only the big corporations. It is true that ultimately but in a smaller degree they will affect prices but the government is also establishing agencies to control prices. That is what the PRISCO is established for. That is why we have arms of the government keeping close surveillance over those who; pocket money at the expense of our own people. They can be curbed.

In negative talks they attack here, illwish there, and even wax sarcastic. ( Applause ) Once in a while, you know, you have to hear and to be gracious and to be generally good natured to these people. But they seem to interpret tolerance, humility, friendship as a confession of weakness—of lack of courage. But they will see now. I have closed my fists and you will see my action. Thank you very much.

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].