Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the surrender of Sulu outlaws at Jolo

[Released on May 21, 1951]

OURS IS THE PEOPLE’S GOVERNMENT

IT IS time we thought of more pleasant and happy things in this period of our national life. For centuries and centuries past, we did nothing but fight the invaders or fight among ourselves. Innumerable people of other countries who invaded our territory were stoutly met on our shores which became crimson with their blood and with our own.

The three most important nations whose invasions we fought to repel were the Spaniards, the Americans, and lately the Japanese. The first two left our country not as enemies but as friends. Our continuous struggle with people, both Oriental and Occidental, who tried to encroach upon us as they came in successive waves, seems to have given us the habit of fighting so that when there were no more invaders in our country we had to fight among ourselves.

The Moros of Jolo have acquired the reputation of being the fiercest fighters among the Filipino people. I remember well when I was still in my tender years how my father used to recount to me his adventures in Jolo fighting the outlaws in your mountains during the Spanish occupation. I was simply entranced when he described to me how he escaped one day from a Moro attack. It was unbelievable how he escaped death when a Moro thrust his bayonet at him. I made a mistake; it was he who thrust his bayonet at the Moro who wanted to reach him with his kris. The Moro outlaw, instead of escaping from that bayonet thrust, got hold of it and pulled it to his body so that he could reach my father with his kris. I don’t know how my father escaped but he lived to tell me that wonderful story.

From boyhood I have learned how to admire the bravery, the gallantry, and the determination of the Moro fighter. During those years of occupation by other nations, you showed and made patent that bravery. But now that we are free and independent, now that we are no longer fighting a foreign enemy on our soil in order to establish national tranquility, we should get together and pool our strength so that our people, especially the wage-earners, may be able to concentrate their minds on some constructive work and provide the wherewithal of their families.

The government established here is administering the affairs of the Moro people as well as of the Christians elsewhere. It is the same government that all of us are bound to defend, whose authority we all must acknowledge, and to whose rules and regulations we all must bow. It is your government established, not to subjugate any particular group of Filipinos, but to serve all groups and all our people. It is a government that would like to encourage and give every opportunity to all to earn their living and build their country into a strong nation so that we can continue enjoying the freedom that we now have. We have given opportunity to all groups of Filipinos in this country to have their voice in the government and participate in the exercise of its power.

My principal concern today is to prepare each province, each municipality, each barrio , and each sitio so that it can well feed, protect, and administer its affairs for the prosperity and happiness of every individual as well as of any other citizen in this country who aspires to make our country worthy of our own name.

Your brothers in the north and those in the center of this archipelago, and even in the greater portion of Mindanao, are now busily tilling the soil, cutting trees in the forests, converting waterfalls into hydroelectric power, and cultivating all beautiful plains and valleys of this vast country of ours in order to bring forth the wealth and treasure with which to maintain our government and enrich our people.

Even the Americans whom you used to fight during their occupation of this country have now been kind enough and liberal enough to show their interest in our welfare and future by giving us millions and millions of dollars with which to help us develop our land. And the object of my visit in the South today and in the Visayas tomorrow and elsewhere the next day or in the future, is to see that every community contribute its efforts in making this nation richer, happier, and more contented. I came to Sulu to hear from you and to observe with my own eyes in what manner we can develop your province faster and more effectively. It is my understanding that a great portion of our rich soil in Sulu is now being abandoned because people are afraid to venture into those places and plant rice or cassava. Many of our people are afraid, afraid of you, my friends, who presented yourselves this morning. I really do not understand why you should go to the hills, hide behind the trees, and suffer in the mountain crevices and fastnesses when the government is not molesting you, when the government wishes nothing but your happiness and prosperity and your safety.

If you have any differences among yourselves, I want you to be frank and tell them to me as the head of this nation, as your chief executive, and as an adopted son of this province and datu of Jolo. Tell me how I can settle your differences and give me a chance to make you happy and contented again. ( Applause )

I visited you today in a helpful spirit. Do not hesitate to open your hearts and your souls to me. I have many means with which we could solve your problems. I am not going to tolerate any further the use of gun, kris, kampilan, or any other weapon to settle your differences, because we need weapons only to protect our country from foreign invasion.

At this moment we have more than 1,300 Filipinos fighting on the plains of Korea, fighting for the liberty of other nations. We need every able-bodied individual, the brave population of this archipelago, to prepare themselves now for a great fight once the Communists, the enemies of our independence and our democracy, invade or try to invade our country in the future. I will see to it that those guns that you have turned over to General Duque be repaired for good use to meet our enemies from outside, not against you or any tribe or group of Filipinos in this country. ( Applause )

I came here armed with another weapon to help you wage your life’s struggles. Instead of your guns, your kampilans, and the other weapons that you delivered today, I would like to give you plows, tractors, and other implements that will move your soil and make it more productive so as to give you and your children sufficient food. ( Applause ) The rich soil of Sulu must be utilized for productive purposes and not for burial grounds for your own brothers or for yourselves. Your soil is so rich it does not need to be fertilized by human blood. ( Applause )

I will go from province to province, from municipality to municipality, to find out how we can distribute those constructive weapons so that you can rise from your misery, poverty, or suffering. There are many places here which you can well exploit if you devote your time to constructive activities. I am going to Siasi, to Tawitawi, to Sitanki, and the Turtle Islands and back to Palawan. I will want to know how the national government and you yourselves can help in this enterprise — exploit fishing business better, cultivate the soil in neglected islands, and promote the development of that mine in the Turtle Islands where we are now digging turtle eggs with which to supply the great demand for them in our neighborhood.

I repeat, I came here in a helpful spirit. To those of you who have decided to present yourselves today in the hope that you will be unmolested and be given your freedom, I want to extend my congratulations because at long last you realize that it does not pay to be continuously hiding in the mountains waiting for your enemy who is no other than your own brother. I congratulate you for your timely awakening because right now we need your brawn, your brain, your muscles, your experience to make of the soil of Mindanao and Sulu, especially Sulu, the depository of wealth. You await the normal procedure in court. We will take care that nobody will hurt you, that you will be under the protective custody of the government. If the court proceedings acquit you, immediately you go back home. If the court convicts you or you plead guilty and the court’s decision becomes final, I will see to it that you are given parole so that you can go home. Keep this clear in mind: I am not giving you amnesty right now, because amnesty requires the concurrence of Congress. I alone cannot give you amnesty but I alone can parole or pardon you, if the court convicts you.

In the meantime, I want you to communicate with your respective relatives and friends and tell them that the government is now taking care of your case so that you may be given freedom as soon as possible. Tell them not to be afraid to come to town, to the poblacion , to speak to public officials because such officials are their protectors. I know that because of the misconduct of some members of the Armed Forces, you may have developed certain prejudices against the uniformed men of this government. But those are individual cases of officials who were not following the rules and the policy of the government. I want you to understand that the man dressed in the uniform of the Philippine Army is your protector, that he is your brother who will take care of you and help maintain peace and order in your home, and that he will let you go back to your home and make a living for your respective families. He is the one who drives away those who molest you, your enemies. He does not come to the vicinity to kill just for the lust for blood. He is my representative when he comes to your community, and because my ambition is to make you peaceful, productive citizens, you should respond to the new policy of the government, which is to make you happy and contented and not to languish in misery in the hills and mountain fastnesses and in the ravines.

My friends, I am very happy to see such a big crowd that met me this morning. Some people said I would not come here because I was afraid to present myself in Sulu or in Jolo. But why should I be afraid of Rasul? Why should I be afraid of Ombra? They are my eyes. I am going to help them make the people of Sulu get united. I came so that the people of Jolo may rise as one man in defense of your rights against a foreign invader, and not against your own enemies in the vicinity. Why should I be afraid to face you when you are my brothers, when your province adopted me as her son? And why should I be afraid of the people whom I love, especially their female population? Let us rise in one enthusiastic cheer for the unity, the understanding, and the love of the people of Sulu toward one another and toward the administration. ( Applause )

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].