Extemporaneous Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before the college students

[Delivered on March 27, 1951]

YOUTH AND ITS ROLE 1

I PURPOSELY remained in Baguio instead of going down to Manila and holding a cabinet meeting there today, to do honor to this, the first congress of collegiate student youth organizations of the Philippines. In doing honor to the delegates, I have been highly honored, not to say flattered, by your vice president who said the youth of the land is at my command. No greater, no stronger encouragement can be given to me at this moment than to hear that the youth of the land is solid, not behind me but behind this administration.

You represent the cream of the youth intelligentsia of this country. I see before me the material for leadership of this nation. It was time that the youth of the land got together, as you did this morning, to realize your great responsibility and to play the role that you should play on the national stage, because whether you like it or not you form part of the national community.

It is my understanding that many of you are working students or are working through college. So did I during my college days; those days were working days, not only student days. Many fail to realize that the great majority of the youth of the land today, either in their respective activities or as humble workers in the different offices and political subdivisions of the Government, are actually discharging their duties of citizenship and that they are as much nation-builders as those who are older in age and have been placed in high positions in the government. Many of those who are non-working students fail to realize that they too constitute the necessary element in the formulation of public opinion that should gauge the activities of the nation.

Many of you are electors and as such have a voice in your government. When you elect your representatives in the government, you exercise your civic duties not only because the Constitution so imposes but because it is necessary that having reached the age of maturity you must express your will and assert your individuality in the formulation of national policies. So, either as working students or as regular students, you can not escape your responsibility in nation building. Such being the case, you might just as well get together and discuss among yourselves in order to determine in what manner you could make more effective and efficient your participation in the affairs of state.

I still remember I was denounced during the convocation of the University of the Philippines student body where I expressed my surprise that the youth of today are no longer as militant in participating in the discussions of national issues as they were in the last days of our struggle for independence and sovereignty. In those days the University campuses not only of the University of the Philippines but also of other higher institutions of learning were converted into sounding boards for the analysis of the quality of independence that should be granted to the Philippines, and for such other national issues as those affecting our sovereignty as a country, the broad local problems affecting the form of government, and those issues that arose immediately after the grant of our independence. I recalled particularly the days when the country was divided into “pros” and “antis” on the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act, and those days when the question of national leadership was widely discussed throughout the country in order to determine which was more adaptable to our idiosyncracies and character as Orientals, whether the leadership of one person which we call Unipersonalista , or the leadership of a group of persons called Colectivistas .

In those days I enjoyed observing how active our young leaders were in participating in those important issues before the country. But the activities, the enthusiasm, and the aggressiveness of the youth during those days lagged behind for some time, perhaps because our country was more concerned with individual and the collective rehabilitation of our home life and of our country immediately after liberation and they found no time to engage in discussions regarding the new issues that had arisen after the grant of our independence.

But more than five years have passed since then and I still observe, in many quarters, that perhaps because of the great sufferings we went through during the last world war, or feeling the need of forgetting the worries of the home and the worries of the country, the youth, and, I might add, the general populace have thought it better to indulge in a spirit of cheerfulness, of hilarity, and of enjoyment.

It is a tribute to the high sense of responsibility of our youth that now the leaders of the youth association or student council of each university have found time to get together and consider the serious problems confronting the nation in the face of universal commotions. Youth certainly cannot stand still, with your arms folded in contemplation of the sad spectacle to which our country is now exposed, especially in isolated districts, in the outlying barrios, where people are toiling hard to rehabilitate themselves after the ravages of the last war and while they try to rise from their prostration are being victimized by our lawless brothers who prey upon the toils, earnings, and even the lives of the weaker members of the community. You cannot fold your arms while this national tragedy is being perpetrated.

I remarked during my recent appearance before the University of the Philippines that so many of our people were engaged in scrutinizing, in hair-splitting discussion of the minutest details regarding our Constitution, in an effort to find fault with the suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus . They give the impression that somebody has a monopoly of patriotism in this land and that there are only a few people who can interpret the Constitution rightly, justly, and timely, forgetting that individual rights which the government seeks to protect are being endangered, sacrificed, and nullified.

Those of you who, during your daily toils in your schools, devote your time to scanning the pages of human knowledge through your textbooks, have been led to believe that the constitutional rights of citizens have been trampled upon because of the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus privilege. That is not the right approach to the matter. It is the permanent, general interest of the country that must determine in the interpretation of whether it is right or wrong to exercise any power granted under the Constitution. The Constitution reserves to the Chief Executive the exclusive privilege to determine when such suspension should be decreed or promulgated. Not even the Courts, much less the Congress, can interfere in the exercise of that privilege, unlike in other countries like the United States where the Constitution provides that the exercise of that power is conferred upon the President with the concurrence of the legislative body.

In our country, only the President can determine that. Acting in all consciousness of my immediate responsibility, observing how many thousands of people are being sacrificed every month—small children, pregnant women, old men, even patients in the hospitals being murdered, virgins kidnapped, whole populace massacred, their treasury ransacked, public buildings and churches reduced to ashes—I decided it was my solemn and inescapable duty to exercise my constitutional right. All these rampant destructions by the lawless elements of today, all these appalling and blood-curdling spectacles, all these unpalatable facts nobody can deny or ignore. Rather than pay attention to those poor, helpless victims in the outlying districts, many of our friends devote their time in their cloisters, in their rooms, in their law offices, and even in their political meetings to discussing or questioning the constitutionality of the suspension of the habeas corpus . Why don’t they cooperate effectively and immediately instead in curbing the crimes and atrocities of the misguided elements of our country?

Yes, I admit, Mr. Chairman, that I was one of those who expressed surprise that the youth, the civic minded citizens, and the so-called patriots should pay more attention to scanning the Constitution and less to protecting the lives and property and the future of the poor people who, every day, are being sacrificed on the altar of power in order to deliver us to a foreign country. ( Applause )

I am glad that you have come to your own. I hope that this 27th of March, 1951, will mark the beginning of a period of systematic study, intervention, and cooperative effort on the part of the youth and that as a result of that new spirit we shall be able to lift the burdens of centuries upon centuries which we have been carrying ever since we struggled for freedom and independence in this, our land.

There are three things that should occupy your minds from the beginning, three fundamental things that should guide your immediate action, in fact your every action: first, domestic tranquility; second, economic development; and third, national unity and national discipline. Your country today is being put to the severest test for survival. After centuries of struggle for our right to forge and shape our own destiny, we finally have that privilege today. But the freedom and independence that has been placed in our hands is again at stake. The whole world is struggling once more for liberty and freedom. The old democracies of yesterday are crumbling one by one at the advance of a new imperialism, a new slavery trying to get a foothold in our own land. You don’t have to cross the China Sea; you don’t have to cross the Pacific; you don’t have to cross the Atlantic; in short, you don’t have to go from one country to another in order to see the great struggle for that liberty and freedom. It is right here in our country.

Not far from Baguio, it was reported to me that fourteen inhabitants of Candaba were captured in the swamps of that municipality. How did they look? With long hair and a peculiar earring, with a pin looped through the left ear and kept there—the hammer and the sickle. What strange fanaticism is creeping into our country today!

There were days when the colorums of Pangasinan were busy with a fanatical practice almost similar to that of the time when the bandoleros around Cavite and Batangas banded together to wrest from innocent people what they could not earn themselves honestly and justly. There were days when in Samar and Leyte the pulahanes were also engaged in similar depredations, robbing and killing people; when the ganaps or the sakdalistas , emboldened by the new theory of socialism which our country was trying to foster in the beginning, took socialism as an excuse to wrest power from the government so that they could continue propagating or extending socialism as a repudiation of the existing form of government; days when President Quezon himself had to go from province to province in Central Luzon in order to induce the misguided elements to surrender—the sakdalistas and the ganaps who staged bloody encounters in certain towns of Laguna, Tayabas, and in the vicinity of Manila. But never in the days of the colorums , the sakdals , the ganaps , the bandits of Cavite and Batangas, the pulahanes of Samar and Leyte, not even in the days of the Mores when they continued to rise against the established government, did we see such systematic, bloodthirsty, heinous, inhuman, atrocious activities as are now being perpetrated by the new fanatics, monsters in human form, wearing earrings adorned with the hammer and the sickle.

The country is confronted today not only with social revolution but also with fanatical aggression which sweeps aside human liberty, human feelings, and the Christian faith. My friends, if this country has to survive, we must eradicate those elements right now or we shall perish.

We thought at first that this tendency was only the fruit of dissatisfaction or maltreatment suffered by some humble farmers in Central Luzon who were once the victims of an old, outmoded feudalistic system. But we have discovered to our sorrow that these deluded fanatics have been steadily indoctrinated with something worse, that will spell national disaster if we don’t look out and stop a dangerous campaign of general massacre and inhuman acts on the part of our misguided brothers in Central Luzon who through deceit and false promises are now trying to get fresh recruits from all parts of the country.

It is not only the loss of life; it is not only the loss of property; it is not only the loss of liberty among the people affected, but the permanent interests of the state that are being jeopardized. Our lands are laid waste and the farmers are being systematically driven away from their homes in outlying barrios. Agriculture is paralyzed, our industry is paralyzed, and everybody becomes jittery at the approach of these Soviet—indoctrinated outlaws. It is necessary that today the entire country should act. Please don’t leave the whole responsibility to the government. The government does not have sufficient means. It is powerless on many occasions to cope with the situation because of lack of funds, lack of ammunition, and lack of active support from the public. The innocent, ignorant people in the outlying barrios should not be allowed to suffer.

Huk propagandists say that this government cannot be trusted; that it is a government of crooks; that the officials help themselves instead of helping the people; that this government is composed of men who monopolize all the privileges and powers derived from the government, ignoring the laws and even trampling upon the rights of individual citizens outside the government. More brazen lies can hardly be conceived. These maligners of the government are worse than those who, seeing a man construct an edifice, throw stones at the builder, and when he comes down, they get sticks and club him—mock at him and hold him up to public ridicule here and abroad. These detractors degrade their government and the individuals who compose it, and besmirch the honor and dignity and prestige of their countrymen and their race.

This must be stopped. Nobody has the monopoly of thinking right every time and nobody has the exclusive gift or foresight of choosing the right path every time he moves. There must be respect for individual rights, respect for the collective rights, and respect for the name and dignity of our country and race. This is part of the national discipline that we need to impose upon every Filipino. Until we have imposed this obligation upon ourselves and unless we show respect for the state, for our people, and for the future, we shall never have in this country that peace of mind so necessary to a man engaged in the constructive work of nation-building.

The three essential things we need today, I repeat, are: domestic tranquility, economic development, and national discipline. Economic development is the mainstay of this nation. Gone are the days when we had to lean upon our successive masters because we were unable with our own talent and our limited means to develop our country. We have enough men and enough means in our country today. If we can only employ our men and exploit our means we shall need no assistance. National dignity requires that we stand on our own feet. We were not born as a nation to be guided by others. The privilege of shaping our own destiny is in our hands and we should prevent as much as possible any foreign power from telling us where to go, when to move, what to say, what to think and what to aspire for.

Those who come to help us have studied our potentialities and have the know-how to exploit them while we, the owners of all these lands that God has given us, are engaged in petty local bickerings, quite often attaching more importance to insignificant partisan political advantages and sacrificing the whole permanent interest of this country and of the people. We should no longer import articles for our consumption. We can be self-sufficient. I don’t say that we should not admit any other imports into this country, but our potentialities and our means of developing them can make us a self-sufficient nation. If an ambitious program which I used to call — and I think I should still call a program of total economic mobilization — must be realized, we must study how you fit into this national program of action. Lands we have in abundance. The quality of our soil is superior to that of any other country. As you all know, our rivers and lakes abound in food resources and electric power. Our population is growing steadily; we have an increase now of a yearly average of three hundred thousand people. We are barely 20 million today but soon we shall be thirty, forty, or fifty million, and with fifty million people busily occupying themselves in the exploitation of our fertile lands and our vast potentialities, and with our determination to fight for our rights as a nation, I am quite sure that with the international ties which we have established and the great recognition that was given to the Filipino people, this country will rise as one of the powerful countries in this part of the world. ( Applause )

Remember that countries today are not respected simply because of territorial sizes. It is the moral leadership, the principle of how a country should be run, the integrity and the character of the people that determine its greatness. Those who only love military aggrandizement, who aspire to rule the world are transitory. It is the thing of the spirit that lasts. As long as this nation has honor and faith, as long as it occupies itself in building for its future and can stand the test not only of civilization but of culture, it can and will be great. And that is what I envision of our country. ( Applause )

But, my friends, we need to be united. The peculiar position of our country, divided as it is into so many islands, must be supplemented by something that will mean closer attachment and stronger union of our people. Our country should be better united, especially if our youth realizes that unity and national discipline are necessary for the establishment of a stable, strong, and enduring Republic.

My friends, I know that you have come from different parts of the country. You are all imbued with one national purpose so well and eloquently expressed by your vice-president. If what he says, which pleased me highly, is the guiding principle of your organization, I hope to establish in these Islands with your help a life of freedom, of dignity, of happiness and contentment.

Footnote:

1 Extemporaneous address before college students, March 27, 1961.

Source : Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].