Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At his induction as honorary member of the Overseas Press Club

NO IDEOLOGICAL ISSUE IN THE PHILIPPINES

On September 8, 1948, His Excellency, President Elpidio Quirino, was inducted as honorary member of the Overseas Press Club. To express his appreciation for the honor conferred upon him, the President delivered the following extemporaneous speech.

Mr. BOGUSLAV, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, AND FRIENDS:

I REMEMBER having visited you twice in the past, for the first time in Pasay, the second time on Dasmariñas, and this is the third time.

While my first meeting with you was not only pleasant but very cordial and enthusiastic, I have a very sad recollection of my second visit to you at your affair at Dasmariñas because it was there where your members fleeced me of P800. And I think that, perhaps, it would have been much better if your M. C. had continued speaking in order to leave less time for another round table meeting this evening to which I expect you will invite me again. This time I promise you that I shall not be a sucker. When I was at dinner with the Press Club in San Francisco last year, there was a gentleman sitting about two yards from me who asked me if I didn’t remember having played at a round table at the Press Club in Manila where I was divested of “a couple of hundred pesos.” I said, “Yes.”

Perhaps it was with the idea of making the people around us know that I was a very poor poker-player that the gentleman asked me the question. But I retorted that I had wanted to “deposit” part of my winning in a previous game in which the American ambassador had lost P1,500, which I had won, that I was quite willing to give away P800 to his fellow members.

Well, I hope I can repeat that feat today, and that I shall make good my promise not to be a sucker this time. I do appreciate, Mr. Boguslav, the great honor conferred upon me this evening, not so much for its intrinsic value, as it falls short of the amount that I left with you last year, but for its sentimental value which may enable me to forget the sad experience I had with your club members last year. This honor also has great intrinsic value and will be a source of encouragement to me.

I feel highly flattered by the motive which prompted the club to confer this honor on me. I want to tell you that it will be my ambition to justify, if I have not yet justified, your pronouncement that I have rendered service to my country. You asked me whether I would like to say something tonight or not. I chose to say something because I think I have something to say to you members of the Overseas Press Club.

I am glad that I have been given this opportunity because we seldom get together to exchange views on matters Philippines as well as on matters overseas. This is a splendid occasion. I appreciate the opportunity you have given me because I do not think there are many things that we have to agree upon regarding conditions obtaining in the Philippines today. My only regret is that we have so many ladies here present and perhaps we cannot speak so freely.

When I was once challenged to a bridge game, I was asked whether I preferred to play bridge or poker. I answered: “With the ladies I prefer to play bridge; with men I prefer to play poker.”

“What is the reason for your preference for bridge?” some one may ask.

“I prefer bridge because I would have more time to be with the ladies. Bridge is so slow a game that it gives me ample opportunity to be with ladies and feel not so forlorn as I have been for the last two years.

I have been frequently asked about local conditions since my assumption of office. I have been invariably asked to explain what has transpired in the country during the first few months of my incumbency. I have been very cautious, as I wish to guard against any misstatement of the true situation in the Philippines. I have been afraid that I might overestimate what was accomplished by the Government during the time of our good and mutual friend, the late President Manuel Roxas.

Perhaps I have been too modest to my friends who have seen me on many occasions and asked what we have accomplished in the last few months. I think the time has come, however, for you and me to talk in unequivocal terms about what has really transpired. Evidently there has been talk, loud talk, big talk, about things happening in the Philippines which seem to have beclouded the real condition of peace in the country in the eyes of the world. Dispatches arriving now and then from abroad, especially from the United States, have conveyed the idea that this is a country where commotion and confusion rule. Some of them even express fear of disintegration in our country.

Of course, as a Filipino and as head of this nation, I have cause to suspect that many of those dispatches have been nothing but reflections of slants on news by local newspapers. Here in the Philippines they may not mean much but outside they are given so much importance that they may affect our national or even international standing.

There are reports, for example, that there has been a growing threat to the stability of this government when as a matter of fact this government—I do not have to state this, you go out to the provinces and you will find out for yourselves—this government is stable and strong. I am not very proud of some of the happenings in some places, but in general I am proud of the situation in the country. I would invite you gentlemen who have come from over the seas, and even those who are from Manila, to make a trip, go beyond the mountains, cross our seas, to far-flung communities and learn from the people what are the thoughts that occupy their minds. It is only in certain isolated places where there is commotion, and it is only because some people, in order to gain their selfish ends, would sacrifice the very name, the dignity, and the prestige of the Republic of the Philippines.

We are not confronted by an ideological issue in the Philippines. If you gentlemen go out in the country and ask the people about their needs, you will never find them talking about communism or democracy. They talk of practical problems. And it is this fact that has guided me in my actuations since my assumption of office. I have never taken my feet off the ground. I tackle problems as I find them.

Unfortunately, it was perhaps one of my greatest disadvantages that when I assumed office we were on the highest crest of a wave of agitation, suspicion, hatred, and disintegration. I thought that after the wave had gone down, peace would be restored, but instead the ship of state was caught in the backwash, and we are now in the whirlpool of that backwash. But the boat has not been shattered. The government has not been destroyed. We have survived the crisis. Our people are going about their duties normally and cheerfully.

I would invite those who have not yet seen the rest of the post-war world to go and visit other countries and compare our situation in the Philippines with theirs. I am quite sure that when you return you will say almost unanimously: “The Philippines is ahead of them all in liberty and freedom, in prosperity, in cheerfulness, in contentment.”

But we are not satisfied with the present situation. I am not satisfied and I propose to improve it, but, Ladies and Gentlemen, the laws, the executive orders, the programs and policies that we have initiated here are not self-executing. More often than not, they have to be carried out and followed through for a period of years. What Quezon could not do, what Osmeña could not do, what Roxas could not do, what any other head of state could not do in the last two or three decades Quirino should not be expected to do in five months of incumbency in the face of all those difficulties that I have mentioned. ( Applause )

I want to assure you that I am concentrating all my attention to the solution of these problems. The reason why I have not said a word about them before is that I have been very busy with my shovel, breaking the ground instead of talking aloud as others would have done or are doing now.

Ladies and Gentlemen, I believe that the time has come for us to realize that the Philippine Republic is a new experiment in democracy in the Orient, or for that matter, in the world. If you are going to let us down, if the correspondents of newspapers all over the world who converge in the City of Manila do not help us picture the real situation here, if we lose prestige and disintegrate, the failure of this experiment in democracy will be a reflection not only of our incapacity but also of the lack of support, moral and otherwise, from other democracies which are duty bound to help us, inasmuch as the success of this experiment will redound to the success of democracy throughout the world.

I mean by this that with your endorsement tonight, with this symbolical heart, I shall be encouraged to go on and march forward. People will heckle me. People will attack me. People will ridicule me. But still I remember that the sky is not always bright. On this occasion I recall what I wrote when still a youngster trying to catch up with the budding poets in my class:

I cannot see but what the world may seem,

I do not care if there is sun or there is light,

I do not care for the pangs of years,

Or tell of hours I spend in tears,

Because I know:

I know God sends the light and the warmth that I may need

I know that God blesses the joys and tears that make my creed.

And my creed is to serve and serve, and not to talk. Thank you very much. ( Long applause )

Source : Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1949). The new Philippine ideology . Manila : Bureau of Printing.