Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before the Baguio meeting of the Liberal Party’s National Committee

[ Delivered on May 7, 1949 ]

OASIS IN THE DESERT

I APPRECIATE more than I can express your vote of confidence in my leadership. The yearning of my life is to so conduct myself that nobody will ever consider it misplaced. It came to me like a gentle flower from the filth and mud to which I have been dragged in our recent political and partisan bickerings. I have a feeling that at long last I am coming upon the oasis in the desert years of my public life.

We are gathered this morning to exalt our political institution. The successive political events that have rocked the nation from the center of legislative power have been a revelation to me. Yet it may appear strange to you that I feel happy in having been chosen as one of the incidents in the supreme test of the soundness of our political institution. Subjected as I have been to the cruelest public scrutiny and emerging thereafter enjoying the esteem and confidence of my colleagues in the executive and legislative departments of our government, I can not ask for anything more from you. All that should vindicate my name as a public servant.

The resolution of the provincial governors and city mayors in convention the other day and the resolution of the National Committee of the Liberal Party today, reiterating the confidence of my colleagues in the government and in the party in my actuations as head of this nation and of the party, constitute the greatest consolation in my thankless job of establishing in this country a regime of respect for the law and the conscience of this nation.

Others like me have been placed on the carpet in the merciless crusade for a clean and honest government. It should not be queer that, having started the movement, I should be dragged into the vortex of its fury. There is a native saying that whoever wields the broom “gets the dust.” My only regret is that in wielding the broom, I have been mistaken for the dust. The outcome of the other cases has been varied and different. But the ultimate result, by the national estimation of this unusual effort of the epoch, vindicates the name of our people and reaffirms the stability and strength of our democratic institution. We have proven beyond doubt not only national resiliency but also political stability.

No wonder that in our tutelage under different powers and systems of government, in our bitter experiences as a struggling people, in our multiple contacts with foreign elements employing heretofore unknown weapons of conquest, of domination, and of absorption, we have trained ourselves to grapple within and without, with our taxing national problems, for survival as a people. And this generation that has inherited the wisdom and experience of our earlier leaders and the epochal struggles of our race, has been able to derive inspiration from our leaders of the past. Thus, we have known how to employ on opportune occasions the alertness, aggressiveness or impulsiveness of a Quezon; or on other occasions the patience and deliberation of an Osmeña; and at times, the brilliance and vision of a Roxas, or the audacity of an Aguinaldo; but, all the time, the inspiration and spirit of self-abnegation and love of country of Rizal and his colleagues in the early awakening of our national consciousness. Verily, we now present a new pattern in our political life that we have only discovered as we knit the loose threads that had characterized the different leaderships throughout our national history. Thus, the new pattern of democracy in its color and texture as established in this country, is not only peculiar to our country as a unique product of international influences but also adaptable in this era of universal readjustment. I can now see and conclude that as long as we do not destroy the warp and woof of our national life, the new pattern that we have established in this part of the Orient shall survive and endure.

So, rather than lament the recent political convulsions that have apparently shaken seriously our political institution, we should thank the efforts of our alert, aggressive, and impulsive leaders in Congress for having roused the country from its lethargy and complacency and challenged a long-established and tolerated order of life that was undermining the existence of our political institution and robbing us of the name, reputation, and respect that we now enjoy in the council of nations.

I like to see the direct and incisive philosophy of political life of Tañada, the tactical maneuvers of Arranz, the big stick of Mabanag, the coolness and earnestness of Cuenco, the piercing malice and wisdom of Diokno, the technical resourcefulness of Francisco, the abrupt and clean-cut actuations of Lopez, the political romanticism of Sanidad, the uproarious outbursts of Pendatun, and even the curious malignment of Angeles David—all these in the Upper House, stirring the political hornet’s nest, but all calming down and subsiding in reverence to our laws, to our Constitution, and to our high responsibilities as leaders of this nation, accepting with grace the verdict of history in the present stage of our national life.

I could only say the same thing in the Lower House: the partisan consistency and stubbornness of Primicias, the immovable firmness and coolness of Sumulong, the gentle and tactful influence of Leuterio, and the fatherly guidance of our Manong , just to enumerate a few examples.

My great hope and earnest wish is that, after this interesting experiment in our national evolution, we can now turn our attention to other phases of our national objectives.

So much for our political life. I shall invite you to turn a new leaf and open a new chapter in our economic life. This is where we need less political theorizing arid experimentation.

Now that our house is in order, let us go out to the premises, to the backyard, to the garden, to the farm, to the forest, to the mountains, and even to the air, and contemplate the whole panorama of our national life. We cannot live in honor, righteousness, and honesty alone. The new evangels of this era cannot continue merely preaching their abstract aspirations. We can no longer soar high, mixing ourselves with the molecules in an effort to find the ways and means of feeding our people, providing them with the human necessities to make our lives worth living in a practical and troubled world.

Positive efforts, concrete endeavors, and substantial achievements are the inescapable bases of our enduring existence. It was right, when we were still planning for the future, to scan the skies, interpret the movements of the planets, and invoke spiritual guidance from the unknown, giving expression to our imprisoned thoughts in our vague intrusions into the unexplored and the unexpected. As long as this nation must lean upon something solid on which to lay the foundations of a stable economic life as the fountain source of the contentment and happiness that we must afford to our people, we must clip our wings and discontinue making ambiguous, philosophical disquisitions on the manner in which we should solve our practical problems as a nation.

Our action must be positive and not negative, distilling from the misgivings or failures of others a program of action based on mere theorizing. The problems of state are vital, practical, and concrete. We live in a confused world where a person does not know where to stand firm and secure unless he counts not only upon his individual efforts to stand on his own feet but also on the support of others struggling for co-existence, mutual protection, and goodwill.

Much of the success of any living creature does not depend merely upon its isolated existence. There is something that should supplement and complement its life in a society created by the Great Master. No nation lives by itself alone at this moment. It must count upon friends, upon the sympathy of others, upon friendship, upon the one thousand and one things that make human relations the determining factor in a successful human existence.

Thus, as we put our house in order and establish here a stable political and economic life, we must cast our eyes beyond our confines and look for the society, the company, and the friendship of other nations that make of our national life a real part of world institutions. That is our new life, our new aspiration, our outlook, as a new democracy. In achieving our high purposes and objectives, as leaders of this country, we must, therefore, examine our conscience, our very acts, to see if they are in keeping with the high ideals of community life in this new world. We should not sacrifice our country’s future simply because we want to lead this nation when, in so doing, we know very well that we may be sacrificing the permanent interest of the country and people. The real test is our readiness to sacrifice self for country.

Many of you have exposed and perhaps sacrificed your political fortunes in the most recent test of our country’s stability. Your greatest hope, your greatest consolation, your biggest reward, will be the recognition of your patriotic efforts by those who succeed you. I invite you all to continue unrelenting in the noble cause that you have espoused for the country’s name. The Liberal Party has shown to the whole world that it knows how to clean its house, that it is true to its high principles of government, and earnest in establishing a constructive regime for the permanent existence of our Republic. You cannot be ashamed of its actuations; you cannot be discouraged by the results; you cannot in all dignity retreat in your steps as leaders of this Party by destroying the organization or renouncing its responsibility, or changing its name—the name which you and I have justly redeemed in our recent efforts in the Administration.

As for me, I am still proud that I am a Liberal. I have gone through a thorny path in the realization of the Party objectives. I have the distinction of being the first Chief Executive of the land to be impeached for seemingly reproachable acts under the Constitution, under our laws, and under our traditions as a people.

“I care not what the world may seem, Not if the day is bright or dim; I do not count the pangs of years, Nor tell of hours I spent in tears, Because I know God still sends The light and warmth that I may need, Because I know, I know God blends The joys and tears to make my creed.”

Thus, I thought and expressed myself in early youth; thus I think and express myself in my declining years. God willing, I will continue the crusade and fight it through. With your continued support and promptings and the strength I am confident you will always give me in sinews and in morale, I expect to justify your actuations and mine, and earn the favorable verdict of history!

Source: The Quirino Way: Collection of Speeches and Addresses of Elpidio Quirino