Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines In a luncheon given by him in Honor of Governor Thomas Dewey of New York

[Delivered in Malacañan, July 19, 1951]

PRESIDENT QUIRINO’S EXTEMPORANEOUS SPEECH

Fifty years ago a Commodore Dewey came here. Today it is our pleasure to welcome a new Dewey. He finds a new atmosphere, a new mood, an independent country.

When Admiral Dewey entered Manila Bay, the people of the Philippines didn’t know what his purpose was. He was given no specific instructions on what to do after destroying the Spanish fleet. But as a result of his coming, the Philippines was placed under the tutelage of the United States.

Admiral Dewey became a controversial figure in our history up to July 4, 1946. Some thought he was merely an instrument of American imperialists, while others thought he was a representative of democracy, and came to Manila to help us win our freedom. All doubts were dispelled on July 4, 1946, when America gave us our independence.

Fifty years after that first visit, and five years after Philippine independence, another Dewey comes, presumably also without any specific instructions from his government and even disclaims any official representation in his visit in the Philippines but the same instinct which was manifested by Admiral Dewey’s visit when he came to the Philippines gives us the assurance that he also embodies our hope of perpetuating our personality as a nation under a democratic system.

Governor Dewey may not want to commit himself. He has not so far revealed the purpose of his visit. I know he didn’t come all this distance just for his health. As a student of world history, I know he is jotting down the most notable facts and circumstances that he observes here which may be useful to his government and people to help enhance the name and prestige of the United States.

Well, I am glad that Governor Dewey reached our country and the other countries of Southeast Asia so that he may have a composite picture of the true situation of the group of nations around us and we appreciate his visit. I hope that he will look at us with glasses of different color, that he may even magnify what he sees if possible so that he will be able to transmit clearly to America how we feel and how we react. It is my hope that Governor Dewey’s visit to the Philippines will bear the same beneficial results as that of Admiral Dewey.

May I say to Governor Dewey that first and foremost it is our security which is in the balance today. It is no longer independence or our personality as a nation that worries us. It is our security that I hope we can impress on Governor Dewey as our main concern so that when he returns to the United States he can stress to his countrymen that Philippine security must be given America’s preferential consideration. We in the Philippines initiated the idea of a Pacific Pact in 1949. We want that idea carried out now. We hope he can help us when he returns to America. The Philippines must be the anchor of such a Pacific security pact.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). President Quirino’s Extemporaneous Speech. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(7) , 3411-3412.