Extemporaneous Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before Freemasons

[Released on January 11, 1951]

BROTHERHOOD OF MAN

I COME here gladly as a member of the general brotherhood of man under the fatherhood of a Supreme Being. I have no higher claim. As such I appreciate the occasion to extend to you the sincere fraternal greetings of one who believes with you that “he who is in the light, and hateth his brother, remaineth still in darkness,” and who recognizes in you a body “composed of honorable men, free and independent, who are observers of the Constitution and laws of the country” and whose basic belief is “in God and the immortality of the soul; its object, the propagation of the truth in all its manifestations; its test, eternal progress; its torch, reason tempered by faith; its crowning gospel, liberty of conscience; its apocalypse, toleration; its end, the love of humanity; its motto, Liberty and Fraternity.”

The mystic history of your organization presents the paradox of courage, enterprise, and vitality wherever men are subjected to tyranny and are denied truth, freedom, and justice. It has been proscribed as the enemy of many a despotism, and is thus strengthened and distinguished by the persecutions it has faced for standing for human dignity and individual liberty.

As you all know, the Philippines, in common with the rest of the world, is facing a crisis, a crisis that holds our freedom as a people and the fate of civilization itself in the balance. I have yet to know of any group of individuals in a better position to realize and appreciate the gravity of this crisis in relation to the future of our nation than you who are listening to me tonight.

You are witnesses to a great struggle to raise an order that can assure our people the substance and reality promised by our ideals of freedom, justice, and human dignity. And as the world crisis deepens, you and I, all of us, are brought face to face once again with the issue of survival itself.

By your precept, you recognize as your duty to assist in elevating the moral and intellectual level of society, in coining knowledge, bringing ideas into circulation, and causing the mind of youth to grow, and in putting, gradually, by the teaching of axioms and the promulgation of positive laws, the human race in harmony with its destinies.

I am sure that you can muster the vision and wisdom to translate that duty in terms of your personal responsibilities and national anxieties. We need unity here. We need goodwill, courage, confidence. We need the will to face our difficulties together and to make our contribution to their solution. Above all, we need a stronger sense of sacrifice, realizing that we have to yield many of our material advantages individually and collectively in order to preserve our prized liberties and insure our very survival.

Our greatest danger today lies in the apathy, the inertia, the plain sloth engendered by the selfishness, negativism, and partisanship peculiar to our own times. Thus, a creeping paralysis of will coupled with moral and spiritual sterility threatens to cripple us. Nothing can be more convenient to the dark forces actively engaged in our midst to destroy our free institutions and promote the confusion needed to institute their new slavery.

I feel that our problems of government, though highly practical and material, are basically ethical and call for a deep moral stiffening of the national fiber. If we will what is honest and right, we will do the right thing. That firm will must imbue the whole population as well as our leadership.

The ideals and principles that you uphold are in their essence the ideals and principles of Democracy. They are the ideals and principles we must uphold if the Philippines is to remain a democracy. They are the ideals and principles directly challenged in the world today by communism.

I see in you a powerful democratic and liberal agency which stands naturally and unalterably opposed to the new tyranny threatening our country.

I am equally persuaded that in the bigger, more inclusive brotherhood that is democracy, under its sanctions derived from the unsearchable wealth of our Christian heritage, we find the only authentic opportunity for any free communion to exist in complete dedication to the cultivation of conscience which creates human dignity and sets the pace of man towards unlimited victories of the spirit.

We have in this country of ours, after the sacrifices of our fathers and predecessors, the means to strengthen this democracy. We have it in the moral and spiritual resources they developed and left us, in the capacity we have to conquer what is low, narrow, selfish, vain, and grasping in our souls, in the ability to discipline our appetites and seek their sublimation on higher levels of self-denial, humility, and service.

We have it in the opportunities to achieve all this, not by the dictate of a tyrant set over us but by force of an inner compulsion of conscience that makes for individual distinction. And we have it in the freedom to assume responsibility in response to the challenge to contribute to the common welfare above considerations of self, special group, or party.

To the extent that we succeed in this direction, in our personal and collective efforts, we strengthen the brotherhood of our special and our common affiliation, we strengthen democracy and insure its survival. At the same time, we substantially contribute to the positive efforts of all men of faith and good will elsewhere, outside our borders, to preserve peace and advance human liberty.

We are due for greater progress, but this will not be automatic; it will require effort, impose dedication, and utilize the cumulative wisdom born of age-long struggle for moral and spiritual conquests in the march towards the perfection of a universal brotherhood of man.

I cannot think of anything more appropriate then than to appeal to you as individuals and as a brotherhood to help create here in our midst the moral and spiritual climate conducive to good-will, trust, and unity.

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].