Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On Labor Day

[Released on May 1, 1949]

THE GREATEST THREAT TO OUR UNION

President Quirino called on all the people of the Philippines to rally behind the government’s total economic mobilization program which he described as “the greatest efforts of our time” to make the Philippines strong and enduring, in an extemporaneous Labor Day speech delivered on May 1, 1949.

Warning against the danger of playing into the hands of subversive elements, the President declared:

“I warn you, my friends, anybody making political capital out of the greatest disgrace that ever fell on the nation, is a disgrace to the nation. They only seek to blemish and blacken the name of the new republic which now enjoys the admiration, prestige, and even love of our neighbors.”

The President opened his address by saying he had wanted to suspend his address out of respect to the memory of Mrs. Quezon, but that on second thought he decided this was a good time not only as a day of dedication to Labor “but as a dedication to the memory of Mrs. Quezon and President Quezon as well, the two greatest champions of the masses in our time.”

Excerpts from the important portions of the speech follow:

THERE IS really no logic in keeping with the human conscience, for an employer to take advantage of the strength, the vitality, the earnestness, and the loyalty of a man engaged in production activities if, when this individual becomes either physically broken or becomes ill or is incapacitated, the employer neglects his welfare.

Under such circumstances it is necessary for the government to step in to protect such an individual and one of the purposes of the bill prepared by the Social Security Study Commission is to provide social security for the man under such circumstances in order that he may receive the benefits from those he had helped enrich in his prime of life or while he had the strength and capacity to work.

Other measures as preparerd by the Social Security Study Commission have to do with the improvement of the type of wages that should be imposed upon employers under certain circumstances and in certain industries and communities. These measures are designed to continue the program of social amelioration of this government.

I advocated not long ago the total economic mobilization of this country as the basis for the realization of our goal, a new ideology of spreading contentment and happiness for our people derived from the social and economic benefits by the development of our resources, industries, commerce, and every productive activity.

For the first time in the history of civil administration in this country, not more than two months ago, the Philippine Republic adopted a complete and concrete program of economic development. This program is no longer a mere blueprint. We are no longer theorizing. We are actually in the heat of execution. We have actually employed millions and millions of pesos for the realization of our huge economic program. We brought home from, the United States P200,000,000, a part of our gold reserve lying idle there for decades and decades in order to utilize as capital investment to promote and develop our industries. From, that money we have already allocated today not less than P115,000,000.

For abaca alone we have earmarked and authorized an expenditure of not less than P35,000,000 in order to maintain our monopoly of that product in the world market. For the production of rice I have allotted P15,000,000 out of that capital investment of P200,000,000, besides the current appropriation for the development of 10,000 hectares of land in Cotabato, in Ala Valley; and another 10,000 hectares in Mindoro, as well as another 10,000 hectares in the Cagayan Valley, for the production of rice and for which current appropriations have already been provided in order to develop these rice lands and produce and insure the stability of this cereal for the coming year. We have set aside P10,000,000 for the immediate construction of irrigation projects, setting aside P24,000,000 for this purpose. We have set aside several millions more to take care of other minor irrigation systems that can now be utilized in some localities and only need recommissioning and rehabilitation or repair. We have set aside millions of pesos to reawaken interest in tobacco as well as the reorganization of the coconut and copra. We are now attempting to reorganize the coconut industry in order to multiply the opportunities for the use of that agricultural product. We have organized in some places and plan the reorganization of other branches of the National Bank in others in order that credit facilities may be democratized and established in strategic points of production from the extreme north to Mindanao. With these credit facilities, I am quite sure that the country will have more facilities to encourage or give impetus to small and new or initial industries.

My friends, the greatest danger to the country today is disunion. The greatest threat to our union is ambition, and the greatest danger to ambition is purely personal aggrandizement.

Believe me, my friends, because I come from you. Believe me because I have worked and suffered with you. Believe me because I want to serve you, and believe me because I will fight for you, for the welfare of the common man, the masses from which I came. ( Applause )

More than any other time in our history is there need for sober meditation. The whole world today is proud to see this new republic rise as an exemplary institution of democracy. The whole world today looks upon us not only as a young republic but as a model republic. All around us, we are surrounded by social and political upheavals. There is commotion to our north. There is commotion west. There is commotion to our south. There is struggle towards the east. We are surrounded by dangers. We are beset by problems that sooner or later will arise in our shores and influence our national life. We are not so ambitious as to aspire to rule this region, or lead in the life of our neighbors, but we do aspire for internal national stability. For centuries after centuries, we have aspired to achieve this. That opportunity has come in 1946. From that date on you know what has happened. It is not true that this country has been remaining stagnant. Our affairs have been taken care of.

Not less than one year ago, you could not stand on this spot and think with all the candidness of your conscience of the problems of the country. There was still that sense of instability, of fear perhaps that our life is not secure. I have not said that this country is peaceful everywhere. That there is peace and order in this country, I want you to go out and see for yourselves. You don’t have to risk your neck when you go through Pampanga, Bulacan, Nueva Ecija, or Tarlac today. That there were killings here and killings there is true. When Abe Lincoln, the greatest President of the United States, was assassinated, the whole country of the United States was not agog, feeling that there was national disorder. That was just an act of an irresponsible element in the same manner that our poor and beloved friend has passed across the Divide owing to some irresponsible men. When there is a killing here, and a killing there, it is not because the government is not functioning normally as long as the police and the armed forces are there to watch the security of the country. Any untoward, miraculous incident or accident cannot alter the situation of our political institution.

I warn you, my friends, anybody making political capital out of the greatest disgrace that ever fell on the nation, is a disgrace to the nation. They only seek to blemish and blacken the name of the new Republic which now enjoys the admiration, prestige, and even love of our neighbors. Those who would rejoice or are giving unjustifiable excuse for the murder perpetrated within our time and set the blame on the administration are simply aligned with those who are bent on robbing us of our name in their eagerness to align themselves with some foreign power. Many curses have confronted us in our struggle for statehood, pestilence wars, starvation, tortures. But one of the greatest curses today is that one launched by the fifth horseman of the Apocalypse, acknowledging without cause that this effective responsibility is tottering simply because one or two men have determined to blot the name of the country.

My friends, I appeal to you for a sense of proportion I appeal to you for cooperation, for love of attachment for mutual protection in the name of our children, in the name of posterity. Thank you very much. ( Applause )

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1949). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].