Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the National Economic Protectionism Association Revival Banquet

[ Delivered on December 30, 1948 ]

THE PRINCIPLES OF THE NEPA NEED A RESTATEMENT

In connection with the national observance of the 52nd anniversary of the death of Dr. Jose Rizal, His Excellency, President Elpidio Quirino, attended two programs on December 30, 1948. The first was held at the Holy Ghost Auditorium at 5:30 P. M. where the President was guest of honor of the Orden de Caballeros de Rizal. Its principal feature was the installation of His Excellency as honorary member of the association. The second was held at 8:00 P. M. at the Fiesta Pavilion of the Manila Hotel where the President was principal speaker at a NEPA (National Economic Protectionism Association) Revival Banquet, the revival of the NEPA being the Motif of the year’s celebration of Rizal Day. The following was the speech delivered extemporaneously by the President at the NEPA revival banquet.

MR. CHAIRMAN, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, AND FRIENDS:

I CAME as a bidden guest to participate in this program which is part of the celebration of Rizal Day. I don’t know which is incidental on this occasion, whether the NEPA or Rizal. But I think that both can be the subject of our discussion this evening.

The advance publicity for this banquet aroused my curiosity. I was led to expect new Filipino food, beautiful girl waitresses dressed NEPA style, delicacies peculiar to our country which for the last five or six years we have not tasted. I have not seen these things; I am disappointed. I even have the distinction of being more NEPA than your chairman tonight. I received just a while ago the honor and distinction of being Honorary Member of the Orden de Caballeros de Rizal . I am not suggesting new honors but I think I deserve them because I am a better NEPA member than the presiding officer. When he saw me tonight, he wanted to go home and put on his barong Tagalog but I said, “With or without barong Tagalog , your idea, your practice, and your business principles and not your attire will tell whether or not you are a good NEPA man. I think I am right.

Ladies and Gentlemen, I started to say that this affair is part of a national program in remembrance of Dr. Rizal. I propose to dwell tonight on some of the phases of his life which up to now have not been given sufficient importance. We already know Rizal well as a writer, as a scientist, as a social leader, as a poet, even as a painter, an architect, a patriot, a hero, and a martyr. But very few realize that Rizal was also an economic leader as well as the first and the greatest ambassador the Philippines has ever produced.

As an economic leader, he founded the Liga Filipina way back in 1890, the year I was born. Although the Spaniards believed that it was a fraternal society whose object was to overthrow the Spanish rule, at bottom, it sought the commercial and agricultural development of the country. When Rizal was deported to Dapitan, the society died because of the lack of enthusiasm of those left behind. But Rizal really thought it was necessary for the Philippines to rise as an economic power in order to thwart the attempt of the Spanish rulers to absorb control of our economic life.

Although as far back as 1780, by Royal Decree, an association called the Liga Economica del Pais was formed in order to encourage the Filipinos to organize themselves economically and establish here a nation of substance, the association also perished for lack of interest not only of those who were directing the affairs of the state at the time but of those concerned or directly affected. The young people on whom Rizal had placed his hope for the country resumed in recent years the idea of reorganizing the economic system. You will remember the organization of the Bagong Katipunan way back in 1927 or 1928. I was one of the organizers with President Roxas and other friends. As far as the substantial future of the country was concerned, that association also died a natural death. But there was enthusiasm in spreading the doctrine of protectionism, perhaps in a more aggressive manner than that of the NEPA. Yet it died a natural death because it lacked encouragement. Its appeal to the people was not so far-reaching and was directed to the heart and not to the mind and it largely ignored the practical needs of the people. It was all preaching. We did not organize anything to base our preachings on and to demonstrate the soundness of the laudable purposes of that organization. I still remember how President Quezon killed that organization with just one word. When he called it “Bagong Katipunan”, everybody laughed it out of existence.

I don’t want the NEPA to have the same fate. I will pick up that subject again later on in my few remarks, but I want to dwell for a while on Rizal’s activities as an ambassador. Rizal, possessing the highest nationalistic mind in the country, saw to it that the Philippines was near to the heart and soul of other countries. In his writings, he never mentioned the Philippines alone. He never patronized her products alone. He never used our own languages alone. He never talked of our people alone. He talked of many countries and subjects, and used several languages. In fact, he knew 22 languages. He studied the economics, the ideals, and the aims of other countries. He did not only acquaint himself so intimately with the literature and science and political progress of other countries but also saw to it that their peoples were brought nearer to us by the bonds of culture and friendship.

The greatest admirer of Rizal was not a Filipino and did not live in the Philippines. It was Blumentritt. And, by the way, I have just read in the papers that Dr. Blumentritt’s son and his family are displaced persons in Germany. Some of the writings and original manuscripts of Dr. Rizal which were once in his possession as a heritage from his father, and which are valuable to those who love Rizal’s works, have been seized by the Communist authorities. I will offer my cooperation in the sense that we acquire those manuscripts and keep them in the land of Rizal’s birth.

Rizal, in his desire to know the world, unconsciously became the greatest ambassador of our country. He combined in his life the nationalist idea of awakening national consciousness in ourselves, thus solidifying our people in order to establish here a government of our own worthy of the name of an independent, sovereign nation. At the same time he so attracted world attention that even at that time the Philippines and the Filipinos were well advertised. The world knew him. His poems were recited not only in Latin America but even in the United States as well as in Europe. I still remember that great Congressman (Cooper of Wisconsin) who recited Rizal’s poem during a session of the U. S. Congress.

I want to admit in all frankness, my friends, that when I was invited to be your guest this evening, I thought long and carefully whether I should come and give official encouragement to and confirmation of the revitalization of the activities of the NEPA. Many fear that the revival of the NEPA is premature since we are still reorganizing our economic forces to establish here the foundation for a strong nation by inviting foreign capital to cooperate with us in the development of our natural resources. We are inviting the world to be our friends. Yet we are organizing ourselves into a nation that is satisfied with our own local resources, which we develop for our exclusive benefit. Owing to this apparent contradiction, I think that there is need for clarification. When I was invited to speak here, I had to call the members of the board of directors of the NEPA to discuss with them the real purposes of the reorganization at this stage of our national development.

I wanted to be sure that I was not going to be misunderstood tonight. I wanted to be certain that whatever I say here would count with the support of the organization. I came here in a helpful spirit and I want you also to cooperate with me in this administration. ( Applause )

It is understandable that we should be nationalistic in our outlook. After centuries of struggle for our independence, the natural reaction is that once our independence is in our hands, we should shape our own destiny ourselves. The world knows how we fought valiantly to secure the boon of liberty. The world knows how loyal we have been to our allies, even in the darkest hour of our history. But what the world does not understand, perhaps, is the fact that after we have risen from our prostration, we feel it necessary to control our national economy. No country in the world has ever been able to stand on its own feet unless it had organized itself properly and stabilized its economy and secured for herself a future that would be a joy to posterity.

It is natural, therefore, that the Philippines should aspire to be as self-sufficient or economically independent as possible. But there is no country that can be considered absolutely self-sufficient or economically independent. This fact tends to confuse us; so at the height of our campaign for political independence, the country was divided. One group wanted political independence first, ahead of economic independence another advocated economic independence first before political independence.

Those of us who believed that political independence should precede economic independence won, for it was necessary that we had all the instrumentalities of power and authority in our hands to be able to establish a nation. Once we had secured political independence, we could adopt a program of national economic development to enable us to make secure that political independence. It is therefore, natural that now that we have in our hands all those instrumentalities, we should work out a program by which we can develop our country in our own way. But because there is such apprehension on the part of our friends abroad whom we are inviting to come to participate with us in the development of our country, it is necessary that we make clear our position so that we may not be accused of having been hypocritical when we approved the Parity Amendment.

Very few countries have done what we did in 1946 when we amended our Constitution in order to extend to American nationals the same rights and privileges as the Filipinos enjoy in the development of our natural resources and exploitation of our public utilities. We did that because of our faith and loyalty and of the assurance from the United States that that country would be helpful to us as we rise from our prostration. We did it because America was then the sovereign power, although she did not impose it, and she made us understand that if given the opportunity to help develop our natural resources and public utilities, she would greatly help in stabilizing our economy.

In that belief and conviction, we amended our Constitution. It would now seem inconsistent on our part that after giving the American citizens the same rights as Filipinos enjoy through the Parity Amendment, we would now try to exclude from our market American products and perhaps discourage the investment here of American capital. But I have received assurances from the NEPA spokesmen that this is not the case. Officially I am going to announce that I shall not allow any discouragement of foreign capital. We shall continue to invite foreign capital, not only American capital but also Chinese capital, French capital, Spanish capital, British capital, any foreign capital. Our only aspiration is to be able to control our national economy so that we can establish our sovereignty over our economic life. Participation of foreigners in the enjoyment of the patrimony of the state is a hospitable pleasure to us. We are known to be hospitable. We shall not change that enviable trait.

Our goal, therefore, is simply the control of our national economy. That is the basic purpose of the organization of the Central Bank. We want to have a central institution which will provide capital and promote industry and agriculture. Our economy will be directed by a central organization which encompasses all the economic activities of the country.

But foreign capital is certainly not excluded by the organization of the Central Bank. The Central Bank will be the bank of banks, of local banks, foreign banks, all sorts of banks and institutions of credit. In our program of industrialization, we do not mean to exclude foreign products. We shall only aspire to produce for our own consumption those products that can well be produced here more advantageously, more cheaply, products more adequate and suitable to the taste of the Filipino people. I have issued the Import Control Regulations in order that we may be able to balance our payments abroad. It is not with the idea of excluding foreign products. We want simply to regulate the quantity and quality and, perhaps, the extent of international commerce so that the influx of foreign goods will not destroy the stability of our national economy.

So the principles of the NEPA need a restatement so as to jibe with the policies established by the government in organizing the Central Bank, in issuing an executive order on Import Control, and in adopting an industrial program. These policies constitute the economic program of the government which cannot be assailed on the basis of selfish motives.

The Philippines is a result, I have said it once and I say it again, of international cooperation. Countries from the east as well as those from the west, countries from, the north as well as those from the south, have come like successive waves that lash our shores and each has left its mark in our commerce, in our culture, in our religion, in all human influences that now constitute Filipino life. We are not the Filipino nation that used to be four centuries ago.

Even our racial appearance now, our racial structure, our outlook, our habits, our customs, are no longer those of the Filipino race that Magellan found here in 1521. Look at the faces of the people around us. There has been cooperation even in the homes and in the souls and in the hearts of many people of various races here. Such is our life. Such are our ideas, such is our economy, and such is going to be our outlook. We are situated in a strategic position to receive from every direction the influences that we need to stabilize Filipino life and Filipino government.

Our strategic position, however, is like a double-edged weapon. If we allow without limit and regulation the influx of capital, the influences of foreign agencies in the Philippines, they will destroy the Filipino people. On the other hand, if we do not allow as we have allowed in the past the cooperation of all nations that want to participate in our national development as well as in our political uplift, we are going to be left behind in the advancement and progress of the world.

Take the case of air traffic as an example. We have here only one air company officially supported by the government; we have in the way of subsidy actual shares in that company, the PAL. Manila has become an international point of necessary contact. Airplanes from the east as well as those from the west stop in Manila. The same is true with airplanes coming from the north or from the south. There may be five or six or ten air companies from countries with which we have aviation treaties. They have free entry here. They stop here and take passengers. If we do not regulate the air traffic so that we can insure a reasonable share of the business, our only company will naturally face ruin. So the natural position that we have to adopt is to so regulate international air traffic so that we can retain our share of that traffic.

What I say of air traffic, I can also say of steamship companies, of the import and export business, and of other economic activities. There must be regulations adopted by this country under the laws and the Constitution which must be respected, which must be followed and given recognition and cooperation from outside, so that they will mean something and not amount to mere scraps of paper. Our position, in the Philippines, therefore, is to allow every nation, every country, every businessman of any clime or color, to participate with us in the development of our natural resources and public utilities as well as in our international commerce and other economic and financial activities. As long as the control of business, the control of our national economy, is in our hands, there can be no limit to international intercourse in this regard.

This too, I believe, is the fundamental principle upon which the NEPA is being revived. It is of course necessary that in order to develop our local market for our own products, we encourage the purchase and use of our own products in preference to those produced outside and imported here in great quantities. But in order to protect our own products, it is not necessary that we exclude other products. Articles from abroad may be necessary to stabilize prices in order that such prices may be within the reach of the poorer class. What we should do is to increase production, improve our local products, cultivate Filipino taste for, and pride in them because they are beautiful, not merely because they are our own, without necessarily excluding foreign products. If we can do this we shall achieve something for our own benefit and lasting interest.

I would discourage overemphasis on emotion in the campaign of the NEPA. I am not going to tax our people, much less attack their habits, by telling them through emotional appeal to give preference to Philippine articles as an act of patriotism and Filipinism. That to me is the narrow-minded way of convincing our people to consume our own products.

In my opinion the best way to campaign on behalf of our own products is to produce them cheaper, to make them suitable to our tastes, and to produce them in sufficient quantities so that we can rely on a steady supply in case of need. In order to do this, we must promote small industries. We must build our economy from the bottom, rather than from the top. The big corporations, the big companies, can find assistance and help from outside. They can secure capital abroad at low interest, but the small industry, the small industrial activities, industries which we call cottage industries, possess no international credit. They should, therefore, be encouraged and built from the bottom and financed from our own funds. This is a program upon which this government has already embarked, and which is going to guide all the activities of the Central Bank and all the credit institutions of the country from now on. If I can do something to promote the interest of the NEPA in this regard; if I can do something to multiply the small industries, to give them the incentive and necessary cooperation, to encourage appreciation on the part of our people for our products, to produce our products in big quantities at cheaper cost and in accordance with our taste, I am for the NEPA one hundred per cent. ( Applause )

But let us not be misunderstood. We are launching the NEPA in support of a program for the growth and development of the country. It is not necessary to exclude foreign capital, much less, to discourage our friends whom we are inviting to come and invest with us, in order to develop our natural resources and exploit our public utilities. We should continue to invite them to come and establish industries here. Once such industries are established here, they will in effect be Filipino industries. In their benefits, they will have no nationality; they will be neither American, nor Chinese, nor British, nor French. Once an industry is established here, it becomes a local industry whose growth, prosperity, and stability will be to our lasting benefit and interest.

My friends, I thank you for giving me an opportunity to express myself in these few words. I hope the NEPA will progress and flourish in the sense in which you and I have understood its objectives. Thank you very much. ( Applause )

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1948). The new Philippine ideology . Manila : Bureau of Printing.