Extemporaneous Welcome Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines To the Supreme Court Justices

[Released on September 24, 1952]

WHAT “CHECKS AND BALANCES” SHOULD MEAN

I AM going to say just a few words of explanation because tonight we are resuming the beautiful tradition established by my predecessors. This was suspended in 1947, for various reasons, one of which was financial.

When I assumed the Office of President in 1948, we were confronted with a very keen financial stringency. I did not want the people to feel that because they needed our funds more for urgent and essential expenses, the administration was spending a portion of the money then available, for the entertainment of friends and public officials who, in accordance with past practices, were entitled to a yearly entertainment, such as leaders of the legislative and judicial departments.

I therefore adopted the policy of financial austerity and have been following it up.

Incidentally, there were pending cases in the Supreme Court requiring an interpretation of the prerogatives of the Chief Executive, and I did not want the people to feel that I was trying to influence its decision on the emergency powers of the President.

In 1950, our financial position became worse. It extended as far as the latter part of 1951 when it was freely predicted that by the end of September of that year, the government would collapse for lack of funds. Under those circumstances, I could not well resume this beautiful tradition. First, there was the question of economy or retrenchment, and second, there was the question of official delicacy.

This year, I feel that we are stabilizing the functions of our government. There had been quite a reaction in the jealous exercise of prerogatives immediately after our independence, a reaction that compelled us to establish precedents. Each department showed eagerness to find out its respective jurisdiction. Each wanted to know not how far it could go or should go, but how far it could check the other departments under the theory of checks and balances provided by the Constitution. There was a tendency to restrict rather than to allow the normal functioning of the government following a liberal interpretation. There was thus a race among the three departments as to which of them would first establish precedents with regard to its jurisdiction.

Fortunately, during the last two years, by periodic pronouncements of the Supreme Court and the precedents established not only in the executive but also in the legislative departments, we are beginning to adjust ourselves and normalize our relations. The so-called doctrine of checks and balances contained in the Constitution of the United States and borrowed by us has operated to restrict rather than liberalize the interpretation of our laws in such a manner that each department could act more freely in keeping with our desire to hasten our political and economic development.

In the past few months, I have observed that we all are beginning to realize that the interpretations of the prerogatives of each department should be less restrictive and more permissive for the general development of the functions of each department. There is a feeling abroad today that instead of following a negative interpretation of the traditional theory of checks and balances established by the United States when it needed precedents for its new democracy, the tendency in the Philippines is to regard the three constitutional departments as co-equal and integrated parts of the Ship of State — the Executive Department as the helm of the ship, the Supreme Court as the ballast of the ship, and the Legislative Department as the propeller — coordinating but not checking each other unnecessarily as we sail to our destination.

This attitude is more in keeping with what we desire to do in our country in order to lose no time in our eagerness to develop our land and make it as stable as possible without the least delay.

I am happy to have been able to resume this beautiful tradition tonight. It is with the greatest satisfaction that I note that at long last we are adjusting ourselves to the new exigencies of the nation. Realizing these three essential roles of our respective departments — the helm, the ballast and the propeller — I have great hope that henceforth we shall continue to function in a coordinated and harmonious way in order to achieve results for the benefit of our nation and the happiness of our people.

I welcome you, Mr. Chief Justice, and all the members of the judiciary here present, to this banquet. I hope we shall be able to continue this tradition periodically in an atmosphere of the greatest cordiality.

Source : Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].