Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines To the faculty and students of the Silliman University

[ Delivered at the Silliman University, Dumaguete, Negros Oriental, November 24, 1948 ]

I AM GUIDED BY NO SELFISH REASONS

To bring further the government closer to the people, one of the main aims of his administration, President Elpidio Quirino, accompanied by members of his family and high government officials, left on board the “S. S. Argus” at 8:00 P. M. on November 22, 1948, for a 12-day tour of the Visayas and Mindanao.

Speaking before the faculty and students of the Silliman University in Dumaguete, Negros Oriental, on November 24, 1948, the President warned against the evils of Communism and urged his audience to bear in mind that “this government will not countenance unnecessary deviations or distractions from its present work of reconstruction.” He explained further in the following speech which he delivered extemporaneously that his visit to the provinces was inspired by his desire to bring the political sub-divisions of the country together “so that we can rise with the strength of a compact and solid nation.”

Mr. TOASTMASTER, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, AND FRIENDS:

I AM rather tongue-tied because, at first impulse, I was going to express my appreciation for the closing remarks of Congressman Teves, but I think I can reserve that for some future occasion, should his prophecy come true. ( Applause )

This is not the first time I have visited your province. In fact I can trace my political evolution upon the times of visits that I have made to your province and the difference in my position every time I have come. I came here first as a Senator. Then I came as Secretary of Finance. Afterward, I came as Secretary of the Interior; later on as candidate for vice-president of the Commonwealth; and now, as chief executive of the nation. I feel that after having reached the highest pinnacle of my political career, I should not have visited you again as a public official, if I have to follow the official chronology of my visits to your province, because there is no position higher than that of chief executive. ( Applause )

But this time, I came as a friend, and it is perhaps more important for me on this occasion to have a heart-to-heart talk with the people of Negros Oriental than merely grace the occasion of the inauguration of this beautiful city and hear hosannas to heaven, to the enhancement and elevation of this political community.

We have to save our energies and enthusiasm for the most pressing problems of the day. I wish, however, to have a chance to see each province, each municipality, each city, each community, so that I may be able to hear and feel and see conditions for myself and thus keep in tune with our people and country and together develop into a stronger nation than the one we have inherited from our past leaders of past generations. I do not know but that God might have set aside for me the temporary mission to carry on from the brilliant beginnings of this administration, despite the opinions of those who may be considered ill-wishers and deprecators right here in the Philippines, in your very midst, some of them our closest friends before. We hear complaints bewailing the situation in the Philippines and blaming everybody, even the deceased and departed friends, for things that we have not been able to accomplish. It would have been a miracle to have accomplished immediately all the things that we had in mind upon the assumption of office of President Roxas, including the restoration of peace and order and the rehabilitation of our country, since the Philippines was just at the beginning of her postwar recovery.

My friends, witnesses who have gone or come from abroad, both of our kin and race, as well as temporary visitors in our country, have been unanimous in describing in laudable terms the present conditions in the Philippines, the reputation that we have won in terms of our high spirit and our indomitable morale after the war, and our efforts to rise from our prostration immediately after the international debacle of 1941-1945.

All these friends here and abroad have been one in voicing their commendation, repeating praises of people outside the country and at the same time making vocal the envy of other nations of the peaceful situation, the constructive effort, and the determination that the Filipino people have shown in their effort to rise from their prostration. We are surrounded by countries in the Orient where one hears nothing but the booms of cannon and the hisses of a discontented populace. In our country, we have people who would like to rob the government of the opportunity to do better than what others have done before them, of people who are so eager to grasp power in order to carry on their dastardly objectives, of people who have not been able to rise from their lot because of suspicion, hatred, and fratricidal fight. We are surrounded by all these circumstances and by all these voices, yet we have concentrated our attention on our business, we have buckled down to work in a determined effort to accomplish all those things that mean the immediate reconstruction and rehabilitation of this country.

It was a blessing in disguise perhaps, that we were involved in the World War which ended in 1945. We came out of that war with a new name, with a new dignity, and even with many well-wishers and friends abroad, and we entered the family of free nations with friends on all sides, with sympathizers everywhere, with friends who are now cooperating with us to make of our venture in national life a success.

While the Philippines is envied and esteemed by peoples abroad, some of our people, motivated by political differences, continue to nurture in their spirit and souls sentiments that weaken our national solidarity, our national economy, and our national strength.

My visit today to the Province of Oriental Negros has been inspired by nothing but my desire to see that the political sub-division of the country can be brought together, can be made stronger, can be made attached to each other so that as we rise as a new nation, we rise with the strength of a compact population and with the single objective of making this nation solid and great and worthy of the attention and admiration of the whole world.

My friends, we did not accept democratic principles and practices, believing that we were free to do everything we wanted, to say anything we wanted, to destroy institutions, character, homes, or traditions. We are building, my friends. We should not destroy the materials available for our reconstruction. It will not do us any good at all to destroy one single good material which we may need in the erection of our national edifice. If we engaged today in this pastime—in this pernicious practice—we must be prepared not only to lose the materials that we badly need but also to deprive ourselves of the rare opportunity to utilize those who in the recent past may have been regarded as political debris but who have emerged from the crucible of war and postwar politics cleansed and purified.

The time has come, my friends, for us to be more broad-minded regarding the qualities and aptitudes and the experiences and high aspirations of the men that were tested in the past. We should give them the same opportunity that we give to the new elements that have come forward so that in the construction of a national edifice we may have the benefit of their experience and training and their past record, thus each and everyone will find his rightful place and exert his best efforts to build a firm, cohesive, and solid nation.

This is my aim today. I came guided by no political doctrine. I came guided by no partisan objective. I came guided by no selfish reasons. I came here guided only by the general welfare of the people, especially of those whom we have neglected in the past in our continuous political wrangling which is one of the curses of this nation. I say curse, because politics has always been a deterrent to our economic development, and the greatest obstruction to our national solidarity.

My friends, let us, each one, as men and women of this new nation, realize our duty to share in making it stronger—let us be more worthy of our nation and of our traditions. ( Applause )

I did not expect to make a speech. I think I have said more than I should say to you. In my enthusiasm to convey to you my innermost feelings for the City of Dumaguete and the Province of Oriental Negros, I realize that I have gone quite far.

It is far more important to me, however, to hear from you as representatives of the City of Dumaguete and the Province of Oriental Negros. I repeat, I came to hear, to see, and to feel the conditions and sentiments of your localities precisely at a time when I am preparing a comprehensive message to the representatives of our people in the next Congress. I want to be able to tell them that I have seen the conditions in your respective communities with my own eyes, and to hear with my own ears and feel with my heart the needs and sufferings of my own people.

Gentlemen, I want to hear from you in a few minutes. I want to hear from you about your public works, your schools, your roads, your irrigation systems, your industries, and the problems and difficulties that obstruct your efforts and plans. If I had time I would visit every municipality and see your factories and your institutions of learning. I would like to spend more time in the Province of Oriental Negros, but, unfortunately, my time is not mine. I am only acting in consonance with the ticks of the clock, and I don’t think that I have enough time to do so between now and midnight, but I am quite sure that I have a few minutes more to listen to you if you will just come forward and present to me the problems or the issues of the day in this province or in this community.

I repeat, I came to hear, to see, and to feel. The first thing that has touched me is your cordial welcome to me and my party. My friends, this is more than I can take home. It will be a source of encouragement when I go back and try to do something for you in Manila. Thank you very much. ( Long applause )

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1948). The new Philippine ideology . Manila : Bureau of Printing.