Extemporaneous Remarks of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the opening of the 1950 National Fund Campaign of the PNRC

[ Delivered at the Malacañan Palace, February 14, 1950 ]

Ladies and Gentlemen, and Friends:

Once again, as is customary every year, the symbol of the Red Cross, the undisputed emblem of charity, dominates the atmosphere of this palace, and for that matter of the whole nation.

As an official organization organized by law, it is not only vital to the moral support of the Chief Executive. It counts upon the official support and, if necessary, the sacrifices of the whole complement of the Government in order that its noble mission to our country may be realized. I therefore accepted the invitation of the chairman if this campaign to open the drive even if I was not sure that I may be with you this afternoon, uncertain as I was about my presence in the Philippines on this occasion. And, even if I were absent, I would have exerted the same effort to have to enjoin every citizen, every foreigner, and every inhabitant of this country to support this campaign because the Red Cross needs the necessary funds to implement its high objectives, its high mission.

Everyone has always regarded the symbol not only with gratitude but with respect and no controversy ever arises regarding its movements and activities and the accomplishments in its mission because the activities undertaken by this great humanitarian institution are but a duplicate, a replica of what is symbolized by its prototype, the Cross of Christ.

From this occasion, my friends, I shall not tarry long nor shall I employ more time for the enlightenment of our citizenry and of the people whom we call upon to contribute their utmost to the success of this drive. Everybody knows, because everybody has realized the great work the Red Cross, our own Red Cross, has accomplished during barely three or four years of its organization as our own national instrumentality to carry out the mission of the Red Cross all over the world.

I have been preaching austerity of late. But this should not apply to the Red Cross because there is no austerity in charity, in mercy, or in compassion nor in our love for our fellow men. I invite each and everyone of you to give the most that you can, especially during these days of strife and stress when our Government is in a difficult financial, economic position and there is great suffering on the part of our people in these times of emergency, whether they are victims of natural catastrophes or of adversity or the follies of man. We must be ready to give effective succor to the suffering people of this country.

I therefore believe that I am discharging one of my most noble duties as Chief Executive in asking each and everyone of you throughout the length and breadth of this land to contribute the last centavo that you have saved. If you cannot make effective your contribution in cash, I am sure the Red Cross can accept your promise to pay. Credit will be honored by this institution and I know that if you don’t have the money today, tomorrow, when the import control or the exchange control or the other financial difficulties that are psychologically bothering the conscience of our people today, the effects of the so called temporary ailments, have subsided, I am very sure each and everyone of you will be able to contribute at least P10 or P20 each, or every inhabitant. I am going to make my own contribution the most that I can personally make out of my salary. I will give P1,000. [ Applause .] Millionaires, businessmen, professionals, and even racketeers can commend this campaign. I declare open the drive for this year. Thank you. [ Applause .]

Source: Presidential Museum and Library