Extemporaneous speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On the occasion of the Feast of the Lady of Peñafrancia

[Delivered on September 20, 1953]

My Friends of Bicolandia:

In coming to Naga today, it was not my intention to hold any public meeting. As a matter of fact, I really came on a pilgrimage to fulfill a vow that I had made when through the intercession of the Lady of Pefiafrancia, I luckily escaped death through two difficult operations at Johns Hopkins Hospital. And now, that I am able to make this trip,’ I want to make good my word.

I would not spoil the symbolic mission that impelled me to come to Naga today by delivering a political speech. But I think it is necessary, and I cannot escape the responsibility of saying “hello” to my constituency in this part of our country and assure them that I have returned determined to serve further the interest of both this country and that of our children.

This is a crucial period in our national history. We established the Republic in 1946 which many people feared might not continue to exist owing to handicaps, the great disadvantages, and the dark clouds that were still hovering over our skies when our independence was granted. These difficulties were so big that people not only here but from across the seas, who have observed the conduct of our nation and the way we have been able to brave difficulties during the darkest hour of our history—although we were assured of the help, and we had the determination, the courage, and the vision to move forward and establish a strong democratic institution—many of them feared that we might not be able to stand on our own feet because we were then not only impoverished, but practically in tatters. We were begging in the streets, people were poorly dressed, our farms were devastated, our industries were all paralyzed; and we only expected that our friends across the seas might give us assistance needed to rehabilitate and reconstruct our coun­try.

Thank God, because of our determination and industry, and because we have endeavored to make the best of the circumstances, most of which were almost God-given, because we were favored by good crops, by good climate, and by peaceful conditions, we have been able to rebuild this nation, to reconstruct and rehabilitate this country, and further than that, we have been able to achieve something for which we are now known throughout the world as a stable Republic. (Applause)

But we are not sure to continue existing as a Republic if we do not know how to protect and preserve our democratic institutions. The world is still in the midst of turmoil. While it is true that you do not hear here the cannons from our immediate vicinity, recently lulled by a peace conference that is now being held in New York City, there is no telling, nobody can say what is going to happen tomorrow, because the conditions of the world, as they are now, do not permit us to feel so secure without being prepared to face the great difficulties ahead.

Our country today needs stability, it needs unity, it needs solidarity. This is not the time for us to be wrangling, fighting for power, just for the mere exercise of it. What we need today is to develop our country, to make our people feel stronger, to give them a life of substance, contentment, and happiness, so that they may not be induced to espouse the cause of the communists who are now disintegrating the whole world hoping to dominate the world, which is inspiring their activities here and everywhere else.

And, my dear friends of Bicolandia, we rely on you to join hands arid support the government we have established, the government that has given you for the last six or seven years the stability, prosperity, and happiness that you now enjoy. It is the Liberal Party that gave you all these, no other party. (Applause)

Of course, I do not claim to be the author of everything that has been accomplished in our favor, to make of this country stable, internally strong, and externally secure. This achievement is the common work of all of us. But even that common work did not sprout spontaneously. There was a directing hand, there was a vision, there was somebody who worked out the program to achieve all these. Then who is that head, and whose is that vision, and whose is that organization that has made all these things possible for us? It is this administration, it is this leadership and this party that thought of everything, the party that comes to you and asks you to continue it in power so that you may continue to enjoy the benefits that you are now enjoying. (Applause). And I want you to fight for this administration, to fight for the things we have espoused in 1946, and to fight for the further existence of the institution that we launched on July 4, 1946.

My friends, let us preserve our nation, solidify ourselves, preserve all that we have been enjoying today for your children and for those who will come after them. Thank you very much. (Mabuhay!)

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Extemporaneous speech of President Quirino on the occasion of the Feast of the Lady of Peñafrancia. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49(9) , 3834-3836.