Extemporaneous Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before Scientists

[Released on November 28, 1953]

A SEED-BED OF INFLUENCES

I WELCOME you all to the Malacañan Palace. This ceremonial hall has witnessed in the last five or six years different reunions. Representatives of peoples from across the seas, who have held conventions in Manila and elsewhere on topic more or less international in character, have assembled here at one time or another. But this is the first group to honor this hall with such a respectable number of renowned scientists from all over the globe. I want to assure you that with your presence you are making history in the Philippines.

Since President Quezon’s time, we have been wishing the Pacific Science Congress to hold its meeting in the Philippines if only to draw world attention to this area. For fortunately or unfortunately, it has always been regarded as an underdeveloped region. We have considered it necessary to open the eyes of the world to the many things which properly developed would contribute in no small measure to the welfare of mankind.

It was in 1933 when we were still under the American regime that we passed a special act creating the National Research Council. From time to time, we have changed the members of the charter, but the council itself has remained unchanged, coordinating all the research work in this country and cooperating more or less actively with the research work done abroad, all for the purpose of widening and expanding our scientific knowledge.

The momentum that the National Research Council had generated toward research and progress the past few decades has been interrupted; nevertheless, the council has continued quietly to coordinate the manifold activities of all the various research bodies created to do some special work.

The results of your deliberations may not be readily realized, but even now it is patently clear that your mere coming here has filled our scientists with new enthusiasm, new interest, and new determination to continue with their research work and contribute in a larger measure to the general welfare of our people as was envisaged in the organic act of our National Research Council, and to the advancement of the applied sciences throughout the world.

Ours is a new country. Of late, we have been able to discover many of the potentialities which have been lying dormant within our confines, waiting for the talent, the scientific know-how, to exploit and develop them to our benefit and advantage.

Going over your program of activities, I notice that you have covered practically all the subject-matter known to science, with particular attention to pre-historic conquests. You have unearthed many things not only from the known past but also from sources which we never had the occasion to analyze before. You have thus made our people realize more than ever the tremendous importance of applied science in our growth and development.

Personally, I am happy that you have convened during my incumbency because in after-years when our growth and development are traced and retraced, and the efforts of our scientists in collaboration with yours have borne fruit, our people will be pleased to learn that we were somewhat identified with your work and that it was upon my invitation that you came here and achieved things of benefit to our respective regions and — why not say it? — to the world.

You have come from different countries abroad. Perhaps you have found in the Philippines a unique type of people, a people known to be hospitable, resilient in character, and responsive in every way to the kind of work in which you are engaged. That is why one could say that the Philippines has been developed so far by international collaboration.

Some time ago, I read a book entitled The Sea Around Us . For the moment, I don’t recall the lady author’s name 1 , but I found her work most interesting. She dwelt extensively on the Sargasso Sea. She discovered how the gulf current in Mexico goes up north from the Gulf of Mexico to Massachusetts and thence across the Atlantic to England, France, Spain, and all around, until it has made a complete circle, creating a vacuum in the middle somewhere west of the Azores. That space she calls the vacuum space of the Sargasso Sea. Many ships, she says, have avoided crossing that spot because of the risk involved. The current, according to her, gathers the flora and fauna in the circle around the Atlantic, creating in the middle many unique specimens.

Well, as far as we are concerned, the Philippines is another Sargasso Sea. The country, to be sure, is not a sea, nor is it at sea. But placed as we are at the crossroads, varied influences have reached our shores from India, from Arabia, from South-east Asia and North Asia, as well as from the Old Continent and the New Continent. Their peoples have come here in successive waves and with different objectives, some guided by the spirit of adventure, discovery and conquest, others actuated by material motives. That was when colonization was in flower.

Those countries which have sent their representatives here have left on our shores a rich deposit or sediments of their influence in religion, in customs, and in government. Such sediments have helped us build our country little by little. Although we have succeeded in keeping, as it were, the soul and basic characteristics of our race, yet we have been able to utilize in the building of our new nation those foreign influences that in the course of years permeated among our people. It is precisely because of this rare meeting and blending of the spirit of the East and the spirit of the West in the Philippines that it would make an interesting study why we are considered unique in the Orient.

I really think it would be a good idea for you to study the Filipino people of today because they are quite different from their neighbors. This I say not by way of criticism but in a spirit of pride because through continuous association and contact we have been able to accumulate all the desirable influences that have lent a sort of distinction to our people and develop their linguistic aptitude which has enabled them to acquire a number of foreign languages, to say nothing of words now found in our vocabulary. Thus in our Constitutional Convention we had to strike a compromise by adopting English and Spanish as our national and official languages, the first of which is now spoken all over the country.

The tendency of people who have been liberated after conquest or colonization has been a return to nationalism. Perhaps we shall do the same, but in the meantime and for our own practical purposes, we have buried our tribal troubles and differences and have secured a common ground of understanding, never caring what language we should use so long as we can preserve the Filipino fundamental characteristics which distinguish us from peoples of other countries; that is, our hospitality, resiliency, responsiveness, and readiness to cooperate with everybody in the world.

You have thus come at a time when we need your encouragement in order to continue forming a new people more receptive and adjustable to world conditions and more easily adapted to circumstances, without forgetting the essential characteristics of our soul as a people and our love of country. I do hope that with your presence in the Philippines you have injected into our body politic something that will remain there to be developed, something that will make us more ready to cooperate to the full in the peaceful solution of world problems, in readjustment and development, which is the common aspiration of all of us.

I refuse to be classified as belonging to undeveloped areas or undeveloped people. We are not a backward people. With our knowledge of science, our readiness, our determination and our experience, there is no just or valid reason for classifying us as backward people belonging to undeveloped areas or regions.

May I express the most earnest hope that you have come here to assure us of your cooperation in collective enlightenment and in the successful application of all the results of your researches for the promotion of the welfare and happiness of the people you have visited, who, I am sure, will hold you high in wisdom. I thank you for your call.

Footnote: 1 Rachel L. Carson

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].