Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the Jaycee Convention

[Delivered in Baguio, March 27, 1952]

WASH DIRTY LINEN AT HOME

I PURPOSELY ran away from in front of the speaker’s stand in order not to make one of the ups in public speaking. You remember the three ups, of course — stand up to be seen, speak up to be heard, and shut up to be appreciated. I would have made the first up if I stayed in front of the speaker’s stand because of my wonderful height.

I am very happy indeed to be with you this morning. I want to confess that I was longing for this occasion. It would afford me an opportunity to relax. I felt relaxed while witnessing your parade. I enjoyed admiring the beauty and even the graceful dancing of the Baguio delegation. I was pleased to note that there are two presidents among the Jaycees here, President Gonzalez and I. ( Laughter ) You don’t seem to remember that I, too, am a Jaycee. That is why I stood up and took my seat among the delegation. But knowing that President Gonzalez and President Quirino are going to speak at the same time on the same platform we agreed to vie with each other in the preparation of our respective speeches. I prepared a good one. He prepared a better one. In order to avoid comparison as to which speech is better, we swapped speeches. ( Laughter ) He has just read to you my speech ( Laughter ) and I am sorry I forgot his at home. ( Applause ).

Seriously speaking, everything that he has said here reflects the sentiments that would have inspired my speech had I written one. There is not a single word, not even a single comma, that I could strike out from that speech. Probably I could have delivered it with more enthusiasm because the idea, the concept of public duty, and the objective of the Jaycees are my own personal objectives. If I were to speak today on a topic, I would prefer to begin reading to you as gospel the program I had just read in your magazine. I liked it so much that I am going to use it as my text.

Jaycee is non-partisan, but its members can enter public life. We subscribe to the philosophy that unless you take active interest in the government, you must be prepared to be governed by people not better than yourselves. Being a Jaycee is a natural preparation for public office. In Jaycee, we learn that government must be of laws and not of men, and that service to humanity is the best work of life. No nation can achieve progress unless its leaders are high-minded. Somewhere in this issue is a list of Jaycees who have been elected to public office, thereby giving them an opportunity to show to the people how Jaycees regard public life. We know they will not fail to give a good account of themselves. Everything is correct except the last paragraph. The last paragraph calls attention to the Jaycees who have been elected to public office: a governor in Agusan, a governor in Davao, and a number of mayors, vice mayors and councilors. They forgot that the President of the Philippines was also elected and that he belongs to the Jaycees. ( Applause )

My friends, it is certainly encouraging to be with you this morning. To hear your president discourse on public duty and you renew your pledge so well recited a moment ago is to impart a new life, new enthusiasm to your organization, and new inspiration and confidence to your government and your people in the high-mindedness of your organization. I have thought of taking advantage of the attitude of the Jaycees ever since you made me an honorary member by utilizing the services of your organization. I succeeded in drawing some but failed to bring in as many as I wanted.

I am reminded of what Alexander the Great once experienced when he wanted to meet Diogenes. In his thirst for power and influence he wanted to cultivate the severe virtues or derive inspiration from the philosophy of this wise man who used a small lantern even at day time in his search for an honest man. Alexander sent for Diogenes perhaps to ask his views on certain matters. Diogenes curtly told the messenger. “Your prince lives in Macedonia. I live in Athens. Macedonia is as far from Athens as Athens is from Macedonia. Why does not your prince come here and see me?” Diogenes said to himself, “Why should I go and pay homage to a man who has conquered the world but has not conquered himself? I have conquered myself. Let him come.”

Peeved by the rebuff, Alexander sought an occasion to meet Diogenes and make him account for his rude reply to the ruler of the known world.

So when he finally met Diogenes, Alexander upbraided him for refusing to go to Macedonia. “What do you think of my kingdom and of my rule?” he asked Diogenes.

Diogenes answered, “I have long been wandering, looking with my lantern for an honest man. You are not the man.”

“Really,” Alexander the Great said to himself, “I must respect the man who has been able to conquer himself; for self-mastery is the greatest conquest.”

The Jaycees have apparently conquered themselves. That is why I have been inviting them to see me and give me their counsel. Very few of them have come. I had to invite other people and other organizations. I was able to take advantage of the offer of the Lions to serve the government with me, although only to a limited extent. These two organizations are the best civic organizations we have today to propagate high-minded ideas of government. This they have done not only in the Philippines but also in the United States, in Europe, and elsewhere.

I remember the days when the Jaycees went to the United States, travelling from city to city, delivering speeches, and picturing to the American people the problems of the country and the advantages which we had gained in our democratic way of life. They appealed to the American people and the American government for a more benign consideration of our problems, saying that allowance must be given for our infant democracy.

They were quite apologetic regarding our stride in government matters, especially in the solution of economic problems, but they invited all elements in the United States to help our country. Those gentlemen played the role of ambassadors. There was only one exception I could take. Some of them made no attempt to conceal certain mistakes committed by the government, mistakes which could well be corrected by us here without bringing them to the attention of even our intimate friends abroad. . . . .

When a man travels and he cannot put all the good things in his baggage, he should select only the best that he can carry with him. He should leave behind the dirty linen, because there is no use exhibiting it abroad. When you have your own problems at home it is almost odious for you to go to other houses and tell them about your trouble because they too have their own trouble. Keep it for yourself and don’t advertise.

This is one recommendation I would like to make to the Jaycees going abroad. Take with you the best that you can: our ideas, our civilization, our culture, our agricultural development, our industrial pursuits, our practice of democracy, the excellent record we have made in reconstruction and rehabilitation, the great objective that this government is following, and the one thousand and one things that make the peoples abroad admire the Philippines today. Take all these excellent qualities with you but leave behind the dirty linen for we at home can do the washing ourselves. ( Applause ) Let us not advertise the unpleasant things that happen in our intimate family and say that Juan de la Cruz is a crook. Call his attention if you will. If you are interested in straightening him up, tell him so, but don’t advertise his shortcomings every time because whether we like it or not what we say is broadcast. It is transmitted by radio, by magazines, by articles, by conversation. In our unguarded moments, we often repeat what we hear about the ills, and even the sins of our neighbors. We should not advertise them. Why don’t we imitate what the barbers put in their shingles? “If we please you, don’t tell us; tell it to others.”

It is a very simple philosophy which we can well adopt to maintain the name and prestige of our government and our people. There is not a single nation today, especially in the whole democratic world, that does not recognize, admire, and love us because of our unceasing effort to make our country great and strong. Despite the fact that we have been so long prostrated, we have been able to rise and gain a new name and fame in the whole world. Why besmirch that name when we should take pride in it?

As politicians, in our race or struggle for power, we sometime discard our opponents. In our eagerness to reach the goal, we, jockeys, sometimes whip the horse of the other fellow or push the head of the horse that is going ahead of us. That’s in the game during the race. But let us not make the race last throughout life or for an indefinite period. Once the race is won, the winning jockey receives flowers and waits for another race. Those who lost can participate in the next race. If they win, well and good. If they lose, they should be noble enough, decent enough, and humble enough to admit their defeat and not howl and keep on howling. They should be the good boxer who shakes the hands of the winner and prepares for another bout. That is how we should play the game. That is one of the wonderful qualities that I have discovered in you, Jaycees and Lions. In your public life you have shown such broad-mindedness, such patriotism, such earnestness to serve your country that you have been able to ignore the little differences that those who run for power in the government magnify. For that you deserve commendation.

There is no time for us now to dicker among ourselves regarding the role that each one should play. The time calls for national solidarity especially because of the menace that endangers the whole world. Already, it is so near that we feel the heat of the flames from across the seas. We are only within three hours striking distance from the mainland of China. We are about eight hours distance from the bombing stations of Russia.

You, Jaycees and Lions, are the new elements in shaping public opinion in the Philippines. I have taken keen interest in your activities and I am proud of your work in helping the public. From the steps you have taken, I know that you are in the right direction. You are not only talking, delivering speeches here and there; you are also setting an example to be emulated by others. You are in the most advantageous position to lead your country. As is well said by your president, you come to give us strength. You are going to be the successors of the present regime and must cultivate all the virtues necessary to make this country stronger, more unified and more enduring. You have been leading the youth. Tomorrow, you will be the leaders.

I am glad to hear repeated several times that your organization is non-partisan. If it is non-partisan, it must not hate any party leader. Do not entertain any prejudice against the Liberal Party, the Nacionalista Party, or any other party. Follow the path you have chosen. Don’t mind the barking dogs on the way because if you stop to hear the barking, you will never be able to reach your goal.

I want to encourage each and everyone of you in your respective callings. If you are engaged in the industrial or agricultural development of our country, if you are interested in banking or insurance, follow your choice honestly, determinedly, because that is the only way we can build up our country today. Our territory is small; our population, limited. We must intensify our activities to develop our country, supplementing our lack of territory, of men and of means, with greater effort and enthusiasm.

I am not speaking idly of the economic development of the country. I have visited provinces and municipalities throughout the Philippines. Everywhere I have preached the gospel of economic preparedness.

You, who are now specializing in this line of activity will assume tomorrow the great responsibility that we are shouldering today. We have built roads, bridges, hospitals, ports, irrigation systems; we are building fertilizer and hydroelectric plants. We are exerting our utmost to rush our economic development and provide our people with the means to raise their standards of living. We have shown patriotism in the darkest hour of our history. We have shown to the whole world that no matter what influence may be exerted to disintegrate our people, so long as we have the faith in our own future, our own strength, and in our own capacity to govern ourselves, and as long as God presides over the destiny of this country, we will never perish. ( Applause )

We want to develop industries. We want to dig our mines, all the mineral deposits we have. We want to exploit the great advantages we have as strategic distributing centers of commerce and communications in this part of the globe. We want to exploit every possibility in the air and underneath our soil.

We want to mobilize everything and awaken everybody. If I had the power to knit the people into one single purpose in order to establish a strong and enduring republic, I would gladly do so. Unfortunately, the only means I have is persuasion. In this I must ask you to help me persuade our people.

My friends, the time has come for us all to unite because the danger is near. I am not a war-monger, but I know that the whole world is preparing for another debacle. The peoples of Europe are organizing themselves into the North Atlantic Pact in order to defend themselves jointly in case of aggression. Outside Europe the people are also preparing for the same danger. And are we not presently surrounded by countries tottering under the rush of communism? When the United States herself, one of the most peaceful and powerful nations of the world, has declared a state of emergency and appropriated $85 billion, the biggest appropriation in history; when everybody in New York, Los Angeles, and Washington, and throughout the United States is making preparations for air-raid shelters, and even practices air-raids, why should we not also prepare so that we may be strong enough to ward off any aggression if it comes at all? ( Applause ) People talked about my motives in presenting these facts. The truth is that once in a while some men are guilty of suspecting that I am doing this for political reasons. What political motive could I have to warn the people that they be prepared? Nothing. All I want is to be able to deliver this country to the next administration in a peaceful manner with the people happier and more prosperous than when I assumed the reins of government. ( Applause )

Emergency powers. I don’t need emergency powers. The emergency powers given by the congress are limited, but the emergency powers that are provided in the Constitution are unlimited. In case of actual war, I don’t need emergency powers. All I have got to do is declare martial law and I have all the powers that I need to defend this country against aggression. So I am not interested in emergency powers. If they grant them, well and good. If they don’t, well and good, too. My only concern is to make each and everyone of you and your children ready and prepared for any emergency in case such eventuality arises.

And, my friends, I am not talking through my hat. You have already experienced the vicissitudes of war — death, hunger, oppression, pestilence, cruelty. So you be prepared. You must provide all the means to make yourselves stronger. Dig up from your backyard the food that you may need for the maintenance of your family. Don’t let any piece of public land lie idle. Take every opportunity to prepare, to grow flesh and blood and sinews and strengthen our souls in an effort to solidify our country and prepare it for any eventuality.

Source : Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].