Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines After the oath-taking of the new members of his Cabinet

[Delivered on September 22, 1948]

At long last, I am happy to have been able to constitute this Cabinet. In making my selection, I have tried my utmost, my very best, to please everybody concerned. I have discovered that this has been a very ambitious attempt. No one will ever be able to succeed completely; I don’t expect to be an exception. There will always be a percentage in the whole complement that will not meet the objection of even our best well-wishers. My only consolation, and this I am determined to accomplish, is that I can continue to make use of my prerogatives to minimize the causes of the apparent misgivings.

I appeal to the right thinking citizens of this country to give my new Cabinet a chance. I shall not apologize nor court public sympathy for them. All I wish is to have these men who have sworn to serve the best interests of the country an honest opportunity, full opportunity, Christian opportunity, to do their level best in order to accomplish their mission. I think I have a right to demand co-operation and to request that no campaign of obstruction to their administrative endeavors be started prematurely from the very beginning.

To you, gentlemen, and Mrs. Perez, who have accepted your respective responsibilities, I ask you to concentrate all your efforts, all your energies, devote all your time, put your heart and soul to your work and your duties. We have no time to lose. We have to speed up the work of restoring our country to normalcy. We are not supposed to reconstruct or rehabilitate the country from the ruins of the last devastating war only. We are supposed to build and plan for the development and expansion of all our activities and make of this nation strong and enduring. You may be criticized for your actuations, you may be heckled, you may be embarrassed, you may be harassed, but as long as your acts are motivated by no other than your patriotic endeavor to help build this country, its name, its institutions, its dignity and its honor, do not waver nor hesitate in the discharge of your public duties. Do not be afraid to act if in so acting you follow the dictates of your conscience, the law the constitution, and the supreme interests of the people. A government of wavering, hesitating public officials is not strong.

Of course we constitute the Government, but this government is of the people. We are merely their hired servants. But precisely because we are the instruments of the people’s welfare, we are entitled to the co-operation and respect of the people whose interests we have sworn to serve. I want, therefore, this government not only to be strong but to be respected, its laws obeyed, and the general interests of the people served. I ask you to do justice to every man, which is the supreme constitutional mandate.

I repeat what I announced upon my assumption of office: let us all so conduct ourselves in our public actuations and even in our private lives so that the people may have confidence and respect for us. I enjoin you to devote every minute of your time to the welfare, the prosperity, the security, and the happiness of the Filipino people. God be with us all.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Extemporaneous speech of President Elpidio Quirino, delivered after the oath-taking of the new members of his Cabinet on September 22, 1948. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44(9) , 3209-3210.