Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Upon being awarded a Gold Medal and Diploma of Merit “For rising from Barrio Teacher to Second President of the Republic of the Philippines and for continuing an abiding interest in Education,” by the Awards Committee of the Golden Jubilee of the Philippine Educational System

[Delivered at Malacañan Social Hall, December 16, 1951]

Mr. Chairman, Distinguished Guests, and Friends:

This is one of my happiest moments and to my recollection it is the sixth time that I graduated in my career. It should be my purpose to evaluate or make a correct appraisal of the good work done by the Educational Congress and in general to express the government and the people’s satisfaction for the earnest and comprehensive manner in which this Congress has carried out the Golden Jubilee celebration of the Philippines’ educational system and its far-reaching effect on our people.

I already said at the inauguration of this Congress what I thought would be some guiding principles as far as the administration is concerned regarding your actuations as a body. At this moment, you probably expect me to appraise what your Congress has accomplished. Unfortunately, I have not yet received copies of the resolution and the official actuations of your Congress. Besides, it will take me time not only to read but to appreciate the great value of the results of your deliberations. In fact, it will take years to make a just appraisal of the measures recommended for implementation by our government. Any of the measures you have agreed upon will be submitted not only to our government but also to all the educational institutions here and abroad.

I had not been notified that I would address this congregation this afternoon on the fundamentals of education. Besides I must confess that I have no further contribution to make to the success of your Golden Jubilee celebration than to express my personal satisfaction for the efficient manner in which you have discussed all the problems confronting this country and the countries whose delegates have participated in your deliberations.

This, as I said, is one of my graduation days. I have graduated from the primary, the intermediate, the high school, and the university. But certainly this graduation of mine this evening is one of the most memorable to me because it is the culmination of a long career. How I became President after starting as a barrio school teacher at the age of 15 years is quite inexplicable to those who do not know the humble and thorny path of an old man. Just think that I have been connected with the government for the last 45 years, years of almost continuous service. I say “almost continuous” because for four years I was neither in the House nor in the Senate.

It is a long long trail from the barrio school of Caparian, then a part of the municipality of Vigan, to Malacañan Palace. I was not in a position to outline my future conduct or implement what I had in mind in the pursuit of my educational ambition. I simply took things as they came, but slowly and steadily, step by step, I kept marching on. When I graduated from high school, I thought of going to college; after my graduation from college, I thought of going to practice law; when I practised law, I thought of going to be a representative; when I became a representative I thought of becoming a senator; when I was a senator I thought of joining the cabinet; when I was a cabinet member I thought I would be vice president;, and later on, unexpectedly at first, but by destiny later on, I reached the place where I am now.

All that time was not pure luck. Nor was it mere destiny. Some say it was 90 per cent perspiration and only 10 per cent inspiration. But the 10 per cent was greater to me in after years than the 90 per cent .because the 90 per cent is always found in the success of every man who has risen from a humble position to one pi great responsibility. It is that 10 per cent that lasts,, that now comes back to my mind as I accept the honor of graduating at this moment. And I want to make a confession because this is important to me.

When I was still young, and that is not so many years ago as far as years are concerned, I thought of one thing. I read something which served as my inspiration while I was in the grades. I suffered hard and long and in those moments of solitude, when I thought I should rise up and continue to study in spite of odds, I composed some lines which I still remember. I used to address myself thus:

I care not what the world may send nor whether the day is bright or dim, I don’t count the pangs of years nor hours spent in tears Because I know the sun still sends the light and warmth that I need And because I know God blends the joys and tears to make my crib.

As a high school student, I had that poem for an inspiration. In my further struggle for education, and especially when I entered politics, there was something that got again into my head. That was inspired by a Spanish poem which I remember to this day. ( Applause. )

And so, in the practical struggle for existence, in politics and in worldly life, facing so many sordid problems,—political, financial, and otherwise, something inspirational always crossed my mind to buoy up my courage and spirit to meet any given situation.

And then, a friend of mine gave me this piece of advice which I observe to this day: “So conduct yourself that both in public and in private life you can always look straight into any man’s eyes and tell I him to ‘Go to hell.’ ” ( Applause. )

As the competition became keener and more virulent and the cares of life began to overtake me, I felt worried. I was troubled. I was harassed and embarrassed by political enemies and .deprecates some of whom no doubt wanted to relieve me of the high responsibility I was assuming in later life. I had to steel myself against the temptation of retracing my steps, bewildered, demoralized, and sometimes desperate, as a result of the incessant violent and venomous attacks of my detractors.

On such occasions, I derived spiritual encouragement and comfort from a Spanish poet whose words still ring and perhaps will ring in my ears to the, end of my life. They form a good reason and an excellent pattern of action to follow, especially for those who want to center their attention on something tangible, something permanent, something they would like to leave behind them, and for which they would wish to be remembered in afteryears.

Said the Spanish poet:

“If I have to stop and listen to the barking of the dogs, I will never reach my destination.”

So, at this age of 60 years when I see in retrospect the thorny paths I had to go through, I say to myself, “Man should not stop moving.” As Oliver Wendell Holmes observed, “Man is like a horse in the race track. After he has finished running the scheduled pace in the race, he is not supposed to stop at once.” The same thing applies to a political career. Perhaps I have reached the pace where I should canter but as I move about and canter, I want to be still useful to my country. ( Applause .)

So, my friends, this is one of the most important events in my public life. I have been identified with the school system of this country since its inception. You may not know it, but I antedated the school system in learning the English language way back in 1899, when the first cavalry company that was pursuing Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo in La Union, Ilocos Sur, was crossing to go to Palanan. The cavalry that reached Tirad Pass in my province, the municipality of Concepcion where General Del Pilar, General Aguinaldo’s rear guard, was overtaken and where he died a heroic death, that cavalry reached La Union in 1899 when I was still in Aringay. That cavalry used to stop at the plaza in the afternoon and tie up their horses and during meal time, mess time, we children of the town used to go around and ask some of the soldiers for biscuits which they readily gave us. I was happy then. I was one of the children who used to sit on the knees of American soldiers and learn the first words of English. That was in 1899, long before the present school system was officially established in this country.

From then on I went to classes until I graduated from the University of the Philippines. From then on what I learned not only from the soldiers but also from the system established in the country, I have followed faithfully and consistently. The great lessons that I have learned from the educational system and before its introduction bore fruit in afteryears and I can safely state with pride that lam a real, genuine product of the present school system in the Philippines. ( Applause .)

This system leaves much room for improvement. There is much to teach our youth that was not taught to us during our time. There is much to learn from outside, especially in the present world troubled condition, which leaves the safety and security of this country exposed. There is much to teach in order for us to survive as a nation, in order to participate in the honor and prestige of our new republic, and, in union with all the world, to comply with our duty in the formulation of a policy that would make this world safe for democracy.

It was this point that I stressed at the beginning of the Educational Congress convened the other day. I would like to repeat it: Our country is in danger of being destroyed from its base because the democratic ideas which we have learned from the very beginning are being threatened to the great danger of our very national life.

So, distinguished delegates of this Educational Congress and guests of the Golden Jubilee Celebration of our educational system, I invite you all to concentrate your attention on something that will make this system stronger, more dependable, more in keeping with our present aspirations, and more conducive to the lasting existence of a sovereign nation.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Extemporaneous speech of President Quirino upon being awarded a Gold Medal and Diploma of Merit by the Awards Committee of the Golden Jubilee of the Philippine Educational System. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(12) , 6106-6110.