Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At a Popular Banquet

[ Delivered at the Manila Hotel, September 23, 1949 ]

REPORT TO THE PEOPLE

I FEEL VERY highly honored by this vast audience, which, perhaps, is the largest that has ever gathered in this hall. I am afraid though that you shall have to listen to a P4 speech. ( Laughter )

I am sure each one in this gathering can afford to pay P100 per cover. ( Laughter ) But we came here decided to save P96 each and, what is more, I will do my part to save you a great deal of time so as to enable you to go back to your work this afternoon.

I wish this were the Congress of the Philippines to which I could report the result of my recent visit to the United States. There are, indeed, many people quite interested that I make the report public now. Obviously, our political opponents are eager to hear ahead of Congress the result of that trip as if, in so reporting now, I would provide them with an opportunity to expose myself to more cruel and devastating criticism.

Those who entertain such idea are sadly mistaken, because the events which have transpired since I made the visit to the United States prove conclusively that the trip prepared the promotion of the Philippine Republic in rank, in honor, in distinction, and in international admiration. ( Applause )

A few days ago, a 49-page speech was read in this very hall for the sole purpose of criticizing everything that I did in the United States in an effort to belittle the object of my trip.

I think it was all a lost effort, because subsequently someone not in my political party wrote a 39-page exposition of that trip, which successfully contradicted those 49 pages of distortion.

I fully realize why our friends on the other side of the fence are grieved that I succeeded. They feel depressed to see my picture side by side with that of President Truman’s. They dislike hearing repeated references to the speeches that I delivered in the House of Representatives and in the Senate of the United States, because to them these were more than was expected of me. They resent that I was cordially and enthusiastically received by the Government and people of the United States, especially the cheers evoked over the record of this Republic and this Administration.

They cannot endure witnessing other people’s success. It pains them to hear words of encomium for me. They cannot associate themselves with the rank and file of the people in expressing gratification for a job well done.

But, my dear friends, it is necessary that you know all the facts and circumstances of the trip to fully realize its effects, which I myself could not have anticipated. They criticize me for using an airplane, which in a way, was a government plane. I suppose they expected me to use a parao or banca to get to Honolulu, thence swim to San Francisco to reach the United States. I presume it would delight them if I appeared before the American people in rags in order to inspire commiseration from the people and Government of the United States of America.

I distinctly recall saying before leaving the country that I was not going to the United States to beg, because it would not be in keeping with our sense of propriety. But why were the U. S. Government and President Truman and the officials in Washington so kind and sympathetic, so cordial and enthusiastic, and so lavish in their entertainment, showing to the world great esteem for the people of the newly born Republic of the Philippines through me? That great Republic, the greatest of republics today, need not shower those courtesies upon me, nor upon the Republic of the Philippines for that matter, if only to show its best, its influence, its power. There must be something besides.

The record of my trip is written not only in letters, in public documents, in newspapers. It is written, reproduced, and repeatedly publicized not only in the United States but throughout the world. Why is the world so concerned about this new Republic of the Philippines, this country only three or four years old? There must be something worthy that the Filipino people have done, or set as example, to merit the attention of other nations.

There was. There is. And if we don’t fail, if we don’t destroy our present institutions, there will be more. For the whole world was astounded at the remarkable accomplishments of this new nation. This is a new nation with a new vision, a new energy, a new determination, a new soul, a new life, and a new outlook.

The degree of intelligence of the Filipino people is amply demonstrated by their statehood’s success in less than four years of independent existence. The performance is indeed incredible. For, if you will remember how the whole world was devastated during the last world war; if you will analyze the respective positions of the countries that were plunged into that international conflagration and the extent of the havoc wrought upon each country in comparison with the great sufferings of our people, this country of ours which had been converted twice into a battleground, once when the Japanese came and again when the Americans liberated it; if you will compare the vicissitudes of our people during those darkest hours of international debacle with the experience of other nations, tried and experienced and hardened by other wars in the past, you will fully realize the significance of the admiration of the whole world for us, because of our ability to survive from four years of Japanese occupation and tortures.

We established this new country practically from scratch. Only eighteen million pesos was in our coffers, the residue of the funds held by the Government-in-exile in Washington, on the day of liberation. But in barely three or four years, we were able to reconstitute our government finances. The eighteen million pesos we started with in 1945 has multiplied to more than three hundred and two million pesos in 1949.

When the American liberation forces entered Manila, they found scattered everywhere—even in this very hall—mangled bodies of tortured people. All was waste, all was devastation, all was in ruin, all was in ashes. And then the remnants of our greatly decimated population all in tatters, hungry, bewildered, not knowing perhaps where to go, slowly rose from their prostration. One thing had hardened their spirit and made them determined to rise on their own feet—that was their great faith in the Lord that justice will be served. We rose to live that the nation might never die.

The character and strength of our determination made us accomplish quite a number of things within the three or four years of independent existence. It is a matter of gratification to recall that from rationing, which was the people’s mode of life after liberation, to outside charity and help for clothing and food, we emerged from that prostration resolved to rise over national calamity.

We started rebuilding our homes, first from mere barong-barongs , later, to better, wider, and more enduring structures. In less than three years of rebuilding, Manila now has larger streets and more comfortable homes. We thought we could not reconstruct or rehabilitate this country in 15 years, certainly not in 10 years! But as we go today through the districts of Manila and elsewhere we see work of rapid reconstruction going on—signs, indeed, of our determination to build this country on a solid rock.

The nations of the world are watching us. The whole world is making comparisons.

On a trip I made in 1947, I observed, as I went through the different countries, that we could favorably compare with them, and upon my return I said to myself, “I am happy that we are not far behind.” But that was only a personal confirmation. Other people from the north as well as from the south, people from one continent to another, who have stopped over here, have been generous in their admiration for the great strides that we have made during the last three or four years of our independence.

America was first to recognize the country’s rapid and remarkable recovery. Thus, when I crossed the Pacific again last August in an effort to cement and deepen our friendship and goodwill with that great country, what did America do? It showered upon me and, through me, upon the Republic of the Philippines the great admiration which elicited for us the universal esteem we now enjoy.

Those who try to deprecate our country, or mock at our onward march, or cast aspersion on our good name so well earned during the last three or four years of independent existence are doubtless rendering the greatest disservice possible to their country.

My friends, I hope I shall not be called a braggart for referring to myself as having had something to do in placing the name and fame of the new Republic of the Philippines before the world. ( Applause )

But the elections of November 8, 1949 are being utilized seemingly by certain gentlemen to destroy what we have been building, either merely for temporary political advantage, or to redeem somebody’s name, or to vindicate another man’s lost career. Even a revolt is insinuated to the people. Why? Are we hungry? Are we in tatters? Are our rights trampled upon? Is there oppression, or calamity, or adversity? Is the country so hard pressed, or is someone so desperate that in order to unseat this Administration revolt is the way out, notwithstanding the fact that this Administration has placed the Philippine Government high in universal esteem and world leadership? ( Applause )

During the four years of occupation, when our people were compelled to kneel under the scorching sun, ignominiously slapped because they did not know how to respect the Japanese flag or to bow to the Japanese soldier; when innocent people were hanged from trees along the Luneta and the public squares, with their tongues sticking out, because they dared defy the Kempei-tai or did not squeal on the guerrillas; when people were taken to Fort Santiago to be tortured and humiliated, if not beheaded in groups, and the moans and groans of those people in the dungeons were heard across the Pasig River to Malacañan, and I was one of them; when our innocent children in the breast of their mothers were snatched away and murdered along with their parents, powerless against the enemy’s brutal designs; when the people were kept hungry and in rags just to supply first the needs of the cruel invader; in short, when all these cruelties and inhumanities were being inflicted upon us by a conscienceless foreign ruler, why didn’t we then rise in revolt, using all the instrumentalities of the Government, even if it were only a “puppet” government? Who was our leader then? The nerve of this man to incite revolution now against this government! ( Applause )

Graft and corruption! What did he and his cohorts do during that time? Now, who is cleaning this government? I want to refresh your memory. President Manuel A. Roxas created the Horilleno Committee, taking in as members Dr. Joven, then Deputy Auditor General, and Mr. Jacinto, Deputy Collector of Internal Revenue. They went to work to find out why the ECA was so stinking. They discovered some culprits. These were sent to jail. Others, who were so big to handle because of political consideration, were not brought to book. But when I assumed the Presidency, I re-appointed the Horilleno Committee to go over the Surplus Property Commission and charged it with the duty of chasing out the culprits and sending them behind bars.

Results from the evidence gathered by these gentlemen: there were incriminating documents—checks by the hundreds of thousand — which upon their discovery by the members of the Senate, were utilized as evidence against whom? Not against a mere clerk, or a mere accountant, or a mere chief of division, but against the President of the Senate. ( Applause )

Remember, in no time in our civil administration have we ever dared to lift an accusing finger against the President of the Senate, no matter who was President, Quezon or anybody else. But the courageous members of the Senate, feeling for the first time the urge of clearing their own house, and led by a dauntless and sturdy citizen, Senator Tañada, ( Applause ) went after the culprit relentlessly and mercilessly and deposed the wrongdoer from the Presidency of the Senate and suspended him for one year as senator. We, too, of the Liberal Party, deposed him as President of the Liberal Party. If that is not cleaning the Government, what is it?

The alleged immigration racket is still under investigation by my order. I have not as yet received any report. But as soon as I receive it and find that someone is answerable for any criminal action, I pledge to you and to my country that whether he be a member of my Party, or a relative, or a friend, or whosoever he may be, I will have but one action: I will-have him prosecuted. ( Long Applause )

Now, who is doing all this? Is it Mr. Avelino? Is it Mr. Laurel? Please remember, my friends, my name is easy to remember—ELPIDIO QUIRINO. I have no middle initial. I am a poor man—and have always been. But from this humble beginning, laying aside temptations that are quite numerous in public service, I have been able to adhere unflinchingly to a motto that early in my public career I had adopted. The motto is: “To so conduct myself both in public and private life that I can always look straight into any man’s eyes and tell him to go to H. . .” ( Applause )

Now, whose is the slogan for a clean, honest, and efficient government? I have a rightful claim to that. But it is not only my slogan—it is my program of action. Observing that the program of action I adopted has aligned the people to my side, our political adversaries by clever maneuver now try to rob me of the initiative and steal from me the thunder of my slogan. Why should they borrow ideas from one whom they call incompetent? ( Laughter and applause )

This intellectual minority! These aristocrats of the brain! Why can’t they invent something new for their own slogan? Why do they have to imitate when they can well soar high up in the heavens and contact in the spacious air lanes the molecules from which to concoct their so-called “secret formula”? ( Applause and laughter )

My friends, let us analyze the present situation of the country and be just to the Administration.

From time immemorial we have had many recurrent problems, and they may still be recurring if we do not find a way to solve them once and for all.

The peace-and-order problem; the rice crisis; the school crisis; and even the political crisis in our country. I am happy to tell you that we have solved them all — these four. We have heard of the Moro dissidents in Lanao, in Cotabato, in Davao, and in Sulu, especially during the American occupation. Expedition after expedition was sent there. General Pershing went with zeal and determination after the Moro dissidents and made a name in Mindanao. General Wood also started his career in the Philippines by going after the dissident elements in Mindanao and Sulu. We have heard of the “colorums” in Pangasinan. You remember the “Sakdalistas” in Quezon, Laguna, Bulacan, and Nueva Ecija. We have heard of the “pulahanes” of Samar and Leyte, the “bandoleros” of Cavite, the “Ganap” elsewhere, and now the “Huks,” the “PKMs,” and other dissident elements in Central Luzon. Now, where are they, may I ask?

There is one man named Taruc, who, according to documents now in my possession, is being considered by my friend Laurel as his Secretary of the Interior if he gets elected. Where is this Taruc? A few months before I assumed office, he even wrote a letter, an open letter, addressed to President Roxas, challenging Mr. Roxas to go and get him where he was. I think he was in San Luis, Pampanga, at that time. I wish he would write me a letter now and tell me where he is, and I will get him dead or alive. ( Applause )

Of course, the remnants of Taruc’s organization are still foraging around, coming down from the forests and mountain fastnesses in the night to victimize innocent people in far-flung communities at the point of a gun.

But now the people have settled down. They have more rice than before. They have a chance to fraternize in the communities where they live. Today, throughout the country, if one takes the trouble of analyzing the situation, especially in the south and in the extreme north of Luzon and throughout the archipelago, the people are peaceful, law-abiding, and actively productive as of old. As a result, the peoples of Asia, nay, the peoples of the whole world, now do recognize the Philippines as a haven, a place of refuge from lawlessness and misery and turmoil.

We are still surrounded by areas in trouble. China is still aflame. Burma is exposed to Communist danger. Indo-China is no less. Siam the same. Korea is also threatened. Japan is struggling to establish a normal government. It is only here in the Philippines where stability, order, and security are recognizable.

We are not going to stop right here, realizing that the danger to our security is still active. We will keep on working to insure the stability of our institutions, but what I wish to say at this moment is that there is law and order and stability, and this Government is determined to have not only its authority recognized and respected, but its laws obeyed. ( Applause )

What are the problems that previous administrations have failed to solve? You know that ever since we learned to eat rice, we have been short of that commodity for our consumption. We used to have yearly rice crisis. Each year we have imported rice in amounts running from sixty to ninety million pesos to supplement our local production.

Since last year we have had in operation a measure under my emergency powers. I issued an Executive Order commandeering all the rice produced throughout the country. Under that Executive Order the rice producer is under obligation to turn over to the government his entire produce at the price of P14 a cavan of palay. The intermediaries or rice dealers used to buy this palay at a price ranging from P8 to P11 a cavan. As a result, we accomplished three important things: (1) controlled the rice supply; (2) insured a reasonable profit to the producer; and (3) lowered the retail price on this cereal to the benefit of the consumer.

Supplementing with cheaper imported rice, we now have a sufficient stock of rice, and I can assure the people that there is going to be no rice crisis this year, there will be none next year, and as long as I am President there will be no rice crisis. ( Applause ) There will be no rice crisis because we have taken action that will insure a constant and steady supply of that cereal. We have a program of speedy rice and corn production in strategic areas, such as ten thousand hectares in the Cagayan Valley, ten thousand hectares in Mindoro, ten thousand hectares in Cotabato, ten thousand hectares in Palawan, and thousands of hectares elsewhere, employing wherever possible mechanized farming and technique.

The rice and corn program is not a mere blueprint. It is an active executory of the Government, implemented by an appropriation of ten million pesos and headed by a man who has the know-how to produce rice and corn. In five years we will stop importing rice. We will even be exporting rice.

Ever since the establishment of the public school system in the Philippines, there was not a year in which the parents did not complain because of lack of room for their children. Under previous administrations (American, Commonwealth, and even during the first few years of the Republic of the Philippines), there had been a recurrent school crisis. Since last year—my first year in office—we have solved that.

Having started life as a humble barrio school teacher at P12 a month and having had occasions to observe how parents suffered to see their children out of school for lack of room, I centered my attention on that problem as soon as I was placed in authority to solve it. The record of this Administration proves that despite the enormous increase in enrollment since last year no children of school age are out of school for lack of room, and no mother hereafter need feel apprehensive that her boy or girl will have no place in the public school. ( Applause )

How did we accomplish all these? Who was responsible for these things? Certainly all these accomplishments must have been directed by somebody, and I take pride in the fact that this Administration was led first by President Roxas, and then by me.

On the other hand, I will be delighted to hear from my detractors who are doubtless blinded by their strong partisanship to show me what they had done in their time. I will tell you what they did. They hurriedly departed upon the approach of the victorious American forces, leaving behind them suffering people in dungeons, in the fields of battle, in droves in the mountain fastnesses and ravines. They escaped from Baguio to Tokyo to establish a Government-in-exile in open defiance to the peoples and Governments of the United States and the Philippines, and Mr. Laurel collected for himself an alleged accrued allowance of 300,000 yen.

Would you believe it, my friends, that on August 17, 1945, my dear friend and colleague and former classmate signed a proclamation stating that his government had ceased to exist as of that date and yet, by the voucher signed by himself and his son as his own disbursing officer and audited by his now campaign manager, my dear friend, Camilo Osias, he collected his advance pay up to December 31, 1945? ( Applause. ) If his government had ceased to exist on August 17, 1945, how in the world could he collect his salary up to December 31, 1945? ( Applause )

He was no longer the head of any government during that period and there was no law authorizing him to collect a pension. Is not this illuminating in so far as its shows the character of the man?

Realizing the legitimacy of the claims of the bulk of government employees for assistance and recognition, I recommended to the Congress and secured the passage of Republic Act No. 304, better known as the Backpay Law. Shortly after the approval of the Act, Mr. Laurel, losing no time, submitted his claim to National Treasurer Guevara, for P47,410.71 to cover the period January 1, 1942 to February 26, 1945, as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the Philippines. If you recall, Mr. Laurel during the occupation period was successively Minister of Justice, Minister of the Interior, and President of the so-called Republic of the Philippines and as such collected his salaries. He knew that the Republic—this Republic—was still operating on borrowed money and the smaller employees were not yet paid their backpay. Yet Mr. Laurel presented his claim for backpay to Mr. Guevara as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court and converted it all into cash.

Where is Mr. Guevara? ( Applause ) Mr. Guevara, stand up, please.

“Am I right, Mr. Guevara, that Mr. Laurel presented his claim for backpay as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court?”

Mr. Guevara: “Yes, Sir.” ( Applause )

“Is it true that Mr. Laurel collected his backpay for the period from January 1, 1942 to February 26, 1945, as member of the Supreme Court of the Philippines?”

Mr. Guevara: “Yes, Sir.” ( Applause )

“Is it true ( Applause ) that Mr. Laurel was able to convert this into cash when other Government employees less fortunately situated would have to wait ten years for redemption by using his backpay certificate to pay off his land taxes in Manila and Mandaluyon and his wife’s obligation with the RFC?”

Mr. Guevara: “Yes, Sir.” ( Applause )

“Thank you, Mr. Guevara.”

So we have this strange feat.

In view of the fact that Mr. Laurel, using his legal and other talents, succeeded in collecting readily his backpay contrary to the intent and purpose of the law, as soon as the Congress meets I will see to it that the modest government employees will also get their backpay under more favorable terms. ( Long applause )

It is right for Mr. Laurel to collect his salary as puppet president up to August 17, 1945, because his government, according to him, was still in existence up to that date. But to collect salary from August 18, 1945 to December 31, 1945, and have it charged against “his government” when he was already at Sugamo Prison in Yokohama, — what will you call that? ( Uproar ) To me it is pure and simple misappropriation of public funds. ( Applause )

There is the man who but a few days ago in Dumaguete called me a racketeer, simply because I have not yet taken any action on the alleged immigration quota racket pending the receipt of the report of the committee investigating it.

My friends, I am not telling you this in order to cast unreasonable and unjust aspersion on my political rival, but the common man must know the real quality and character of the man who bids for another lease on the confidence of the people. This is the time to tell him full in the face that he should clean his record first before he casts aspersion on the record of others. ( Applause )

My friends, I am not overanxious to continue occupying the position that I now have. I repeat, I was once a poor barrio schoolteacher. Steadily and gradually, rung by rung, I climbed hard until I was able to reach this pinnacle in my public career. I want to tell you that I cannot boast of an inch of property of my own, directly or indirectly. I have no house. I have not been able to buy a house thus far. I was not even able to acquire any property or accumulate jewels during the occupation ( Applause ) and the only legacy I can give to my children is my name, but I am proud of that legacy. ( Applause )

In order to preserve the prestige, dignity, and honor which is now my privilege to enjoy as Chief Executive of this Republic, especially that prestige which this young Republic has earned in my time in international esteem, I should not be a candidate. I would thereby avoid risking the abuse and vituperation attendant at an election such as this. I am perfectly aware of the hazards. But one thing compels me to go on happen what may. I claim to have a great deal of investment in this new Republic. From an early age I have served the Government continuously and faithfully, including the country’s struggle for independence.

You will recall that in 1933 President Quezon and I went to the United States to secure from the American Congress a law to replace the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act, which we rejected. You will also recall that we returned bringing with us the Tydings-McDuffie Law. And from then on I served our Government in different capacities—in the Senate and in the Cabinet several times during the Commonwealth Government. During the darkest hours of our history, I was tortured and humiliated in Fort Santiago.

At that time my friend Laurel was Secretary of the Interior. I rotted there under the feet of the Kempei-tai without assistance, without help. Because of his announcement that the City of Manila would be declared an open city and because of my pledge not to leave the City of Manila without the consent of the Kempei-tai , I had to stand the crossfire in Ermita when the Americans came to redeem this Jap-ridden city. There I was, with my wife and children and other relatives. With shoes and clothes on I swam the Paco creek ten times to save what remained of my family and bring them to safety on the American side, leaving one or two dear ones dead on street corners.

Recovering from that bloody Odyssey, President Roxas and I laid the foundation of this Republic.

These are my investments. I vowed then, and I vow now, in the name of my dear ones and the people who had suffered with me during those dark hours that I shall devote all my strength and energy and intelligence to the service of my country. ( Long applause )

That is the urge that burns in my heart and spurs me to action today. I am committed to this action not merely because I want to direct the affairs of this nation, but because I don’t want the destiny of our country placed in vicious and irresponsible hands.

If by a queer twist of fate this country is delivered to those who so loved the Japanese that our heroes of yesterday were completely placed in oblivion by them, what assurance have we that eventually we would not be placed in pawn to the Red Spectre of Communism? Then all our efforts, all our sacrifices, all our sufferings would be in vain.

My friends, the Communists are active. Right here in our midst, they are fomenting the destruction of our democratic institutions. We should not take lightly the plan of Mr. Laurel to make Taruc his Secretary of the Interior, to suspend democratic practices, and ultimately to change the processes in this Government. Laurel, Taruc, and the Reds — what a mental comfort for conjecture! The Reds are the avowed enemy of the democratic way of life. Are we going to deliver this country to the Reds through Laurel and Taruc? That is the question. Are you? ( Vociferous “No” from audience ) Then, I submit my case. Thank you. ( Prolonged applause )

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].