Extemporaneous Speeches of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines and Honorable John Foster Dulles U.S. Secretary of State After the formal dinner given by the President in honor of Ambassador and Mrs. Dulles

[Delivered in Malacañan, February 12, 1951]

THE PRESIDENT’S SPEECH

About two years ago I had occasion to invite the attention of the American people and government regarding conditions in the East. I asked then the eyes of America to turn to the East. My invitation at that time was not warmly heard nor accepted. But since then I have been observing a great change in the attitude of the American people and government. And today America is looking toward the east. The United States has sent her special envoy to come and see the East. We are certainly fortunate and I wish I can look back to this moment that Ambassador Dulles has found time to reach our country and make a study and observation of the conditions obtaining here.

In the past we have been overlooking—many of us two peoples on both sides of the ocean—the Philippine situation on its moral and idealistic phase. Many of us have considered the Philippines as a mere military objective and in its defense we have been measuring the capabilities of both peoples to defend our country from the point of view of military strategy.

We have been forgetting the moral value of the continued existence of the new Republic to the United States and to the world. Thus, the moral and the ideal phase of our defense has been neglected or minimized. And the material, or military and economic defense, has been given more importance and immediacy, and the lasting moral and ideal defense, or defense of the ideal, has been considered in secondary terms. The first is only temporary; the latter, permanent. The former affects the life of the nation; the latter, its soul. The Philippines as a country will never die, but our democracy may die. It. is the soul and the ideal of the people that must concern us—if we have to live as slaves or as freeman with dignity.

America has made a great investment for the perpetuation of a new democratic life in this part of the world. That moral heritage we would like to keep; we would like to be its exponent in our region; America expects us to be the living example in the realization of her benign policy to make free men, lifting their standard of living, of peoples long held in bondage. You even go further by representing us as the “show-window” of democracy.

America’s mission here is more important than merely democratizing ah already civilized people and a well established government. These will know how to take care of themselves. We are still rising from our prostration. And yet we are expected to carry out America’s mission.

Mr. Ambassador, I am glad that you have come to study and observe the relative importance of America’s responsibility in the Orient. We have been looking forward to this opportunity to review with you our situation in the light of the most distressing moments in our lives as free peoples.

Our international clock has been slow in the past. Other peoples across the seas, whose preferential claim to your attention has detained America for some time, and whose pressure for assistance has held the hands of our Far Eastern clock, are now properly organized. And you again designated your best military genius to work out a program of defense in the Atlantic seaboard.

All we want here, the peoples of the Orient, menaced to the same extent as your allies in Europe, is to set up our proper defenses with America’s guidance, sponsorship, and effective support; so that when the hour of redemption from the evils of Communism arrives, it will strike simultaneously, not only in the Atlantic but also in the Pacific, and throughout the whole world, to the honor and glory of the United Nations, particularly of the United States of America, the new-found leader of the free world, and ultimately of its great President, Harry S. Truman.

(Toast to President Truman.)

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Extemporaneous speeches of President Elpidio Quirino and Ambassador John Foster Dulles after the formal dinner given by the President in honor of Ambassador and Mrs. Dulles at Malacañan, Monday evening, February 12, 1951. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(2) , 632-633.