Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before the 10th and 20th BCT’s

[Delivered on June 18, 1951]

HUGE TASKS AHEAD 1

I REGRET that I was not able to go and meet the members of the Tenth BCT when you returned in triumph to your native land the other day. I would gladly have rushed to greet you because you deserve all the honor, all the distinction, and the deep gratitude of your people for your accomplishments across the seas.

This afternoon, I am taking the opportunity to welcome you back to our shores and at the same time to bid God-speed to those who will soon leave to replace you in the battlefields of Korea. All of us who have remained here have watched your conduct in the battlefields and in your own quarters. We have observed with great pride the way you have comported yourselves. You certainly have added to the name and prestige of the country which sent you to Korea to fight for freedom and democracy.

Korea is a very small country compared to the big nations involved in the current conflict, but the issues that have to be fought in the battlefields of Korea are tremendously important. In fact, the outcome of the conflict will mean either that the world will have permanent peace or permanent enslavement of mankind.

Your contribution to this great conflict is no less important because you came from a small country. The efforts you have exerted, the bravery and heroism you have displayed before the enemy, and the exemplary conduct you have shown in your quarters all redound to the honor of and respect for your country. I am very proud of your accomplishments. Your country is very happy to know that you have been able to return with stories of glory when, side by side with the other forces of the world, you fought gallantly for freedom and democracy. Your country will be eternally grateful to you for your having brought a new name and fame to the Philippines. This would not have been possible had you not determined to achieve the role that was expected of you. In that you have surpassed our expectations.

When you left the Philippines, I took occasion to give you a few words of parting at Camp Murphy. I did not realize then how great and far-reaching.our participation in the conflict would be. We thought we were just complying with our routine duty as a member of the United Nations, to which we have pledged our support and contribution to pursue the war against totalitarianism and communism. We never thought that each drop of blood that you shed on the battlefield of Korea would some day be left to your posterity and your country as a heritage, as an eloquent testimony to your courage and your noble mission to fight for liberty and justice not only for your country but also for the world. You certainly did more than we expected. And when you returned in triumph to see and be once more with your mothers and fathers, your sisters and brothers, and your sweethearts, with that air of satisfaction and glory in your face, you raised the prestige of your country.

Everybody cheered with you, everybody was satisfied with you, everybody was happy with you, and all felt grateful to you. Some day, history will write that the boys of the Tenth have not only done something for our country but a great deal for the world. That legacy will have to be preserved. You have shown to us that you went to Korea in fulfillment of a new mission — the mission which this Republic has pledged to accomplish and through the Tenth has nobly accomplished. When our liberty for the first time was granted on July 4, 1946, people never expected that some day we would cross the seas and contribute to the preservation of liberty and freedom.

Soon your brothers in arms will leave our shores to replace you on the battlefields of Korea. Those who are leaving on the same mission must be imbued with the same love of country, love of liberty, and love of humanity. To the legacy that your brothers have just brought to us from Korea, you who are about to go must add another saga worthy of our forebears, which will further increase the honor and dignity and the glory of our country. I know that your achievements will be as great as those who have preceded you on the battlefields. I have heard that each and every one of you is very eager, enthusiastic, and determined to fight not merely as paid soldiers of the country but as citizens of the world conscious of their mission.

That is our joint mission. If we do not participate in this tremendous issue in Korea; if we do not show determination to maintain peace and order in our vicinity; if we do not help our neighbors, our associates, and our allies across the seas in the preservation of justice and democracy, our shores will not be safe nor our homes either. As a small country, we need allies and friends who will cooperate with us in protecting our land so that we may continue to enjoy the privileges of a sovereign, independent, and democratic life.

So you are going to Korea to continue the good work that your brothers have started. I don’t know how long the war will last; I don’t know how many more men will have to be sent to the Korean battlefields to replenish those who may have returned or perished; but I do know that as long as we are a member of the United Nations, as long as we love democracy and freedom and are determined to preserve that freedom in our country, it is the duty of each and every Filipino citizen to contribute his bit so that the Philippines may continue to exist as a sovereign nation. The only way we can do this is to pool our efforts, our resources, our heroism, and our determination.

Those of you who will remain behind will have the same noble mission and the same opportunity to accomplish our task. While our brothers in Korea will be fighting an open enemy, here in our midst, we will be fighting the same enemy but clad differently, masquerading as a friend or brother and utilizing every means to subvert our institutions and poison our minds in an effort to enslave our people to a foreign power. We who are left behind are faced with greater difficulty because deep down in our hearts we hate to fight our own brothers, the brothers who have aligned themselves wittingly or unwittingly with our sworn enemy. Those who are in Korea can only injure, kill, annihilate, or destroy elements that are not from our own country, men who are not of our own flesh and blood. But you who are here have to face men of your own flesh and blood. But bitter though it be, we have to respond to the call of duty. We have to steel our nerves, we have to strengthen our souls so as to cope with enemies who are undermining the very foundations of our country and murdering innocent citizens.

When we see brothers fighting brothers on the same issue, the effect on our own conscience as a nation is such that we must stop as soon as possible this campaign of dissidence in our country, this organized effort to subvert your government, this inhuman activity of snuffing out innocent human lives in outlying districts — people who are defenseless, old men and old women and young children and patients in the hospitals. We must uproot this persistent evil as quickly as possible because we need stability and tranquillity in our country in order to continue and accelerate the great development of our land.

It is necessary to increase our momentum; it is necessary to show more determination by every means available so that we may be able to accomplish our task of building a strong, peaceful, happy, and enduring nation.

Your country is being stabilized. Thank God the dangerous months of our financial stringency, of our economic debacle, social unrest, and the very depressing economic atmosphere have passed. We must finish our task as early as possible.

Almost a year ago, I suspended the writ of habeas corpus in our desire to give no chance for those who are suspected or are actually engaged in the subversive movement to go back to the mountains and renew their bloody activities. I considered this step necessary because we must bring them to court properly and we cannot bring them to court in the short period provided by the present law. The suspension was a necessary measure to insure the safety and security of the state. I do not want to go down in history, however, as having curtailed for an indefinite period the enjoyment of the privilege of habeas corpus . I for one will not like my name to be linked with those who would deprive the people of their constitutional privileges. If I took that step, it was simply because I considered it absolutely necessary for the peace and security of the state.

I want you who are staying behind to cooperate to the utmost in the early accomplishment of our task of cleaning our country of subversive elements. I want you to do all in your power to restore as soon as possible the normal enjoyment of the privileges of habeas corpus and all other constitutional rights involved in our campaign against dissidents. I expect you to accomplish all this soon after the additional ten battalion combat teams have been completely organized and have gone throughout the country and spread themselves in strategic positions.

It devolves upon you, the armed forces of the Philippines, to end the campaign as quickly as possible. There are huge tasks ahead, tasks that this nation must do. We want our country to be developed; we want it to grow in strength, in wealth, and in happiness; we want our resources to be tapped. We want to give our children better opportunities for education and progress; we want to build schools, roads, and bridges for them so that they can go to school without trouble. We want our people to continue working in the fields unafraid.

We have many things to do. We have to build more schools, more factories, more hydroelectric plants, and more irrigation systems. We have to create new industries because as we grow in number we must have the means with which to maintain our increasing population.

We did not establish here a new government in the expectation of continuing to receive aid from outside no matter how close, how faithful, how loyal, and how kind it may be to us as the U. S. is. We do not want to be a liability to any nation, much less to the world. We want to rise and stand on our own feet. We want to paddle our own canoe, build our own nation, and provide ourselves with every means available to continue our independent and sovereign existence.

All this we must do. We have a huge program of development for our country which will enable it to provide all the needs of our people and yet we cannot make much headway at present even with the accelerated aid the U. S. is offering us under the ECA program and the offer extended to us by the Import and Export Bank for an additional capital investment with which to develop our country. With all the money that comes from outside, with all the technical assistance proffered, with all the help extended to us by our friends and allies, we cannot accomplish the huge task we have envisioned unless we fight free from the dangerous elements still decimating defenseless, innocent men, women, and children in our barrios and in isolated districts.

We are going to lose all these opportunities if we allow our misguided brothers to continue with their nefarious activities. It is therefore the supreme duty of every one of you who are staying behind and all of you who are leaving our shores to bring to a successful conclusion this campaign of the subversive elements so that we can restore here a regime of peace, happiness, justice, and stability.

My friends, I invite you all to ponder on what I have just said. Those of you who have returned and are to be given a furlough of about thirty days, when you go back home to your provinces or when you see your relatives and friends, tell everybody that you have made great sacrifices and risked your lives not only for them but for the world. If you were able to make that sacrifice for us, they too must make similar sacrifice for peace and order in their own vicinity. ( Applause )

Give them the proper perspective and example of civic and public duty. You did not go to Korea as mercenary soldiers of an army that had to bribe the United States to give us more assistance for its continued existence. You went to Korea because we were all convinced, you and I, our country and people, that you had to fight for freedom and democracy because that is the only thing that would enable us to survive. ( Applause )

When you are well rested and you return to public duty, continue telling your brothers in the army about the example, the glory that you have brought to us, and the satisfaction and gratitude of the people, and let them emulate your deeds. Those leaving in a few moments have the same privilege and opportunity. We expect no less of you. The heritage that these gentlemen have brought to us now lies in your hands. It is for you to keep it, enhance it, or destroy it. If you destroy it, the curse of your own country will be upon you. If you continue with the same bravery and the same heroism, assert the same conviction, the same love of country and of freedom and democracy, the Philippines will applaud you and will rise in the estimation of the world.

Remember that in this world today, a nation is not respected merely by the number of soldiers that it has in its standing army. Remember that a nation today is not respected merely because it has so many millions in its coffers. Remember that a nation today is not respected merely because it has large colonies or empire. A nation is respected by its moral value and leadership in the world. I want you to preserve that as far as the Philippines is concerned. Thank you very much.

Footnote:

1 Extemporaneous speech before the 10th and 20th BCT’s, June 18, 1951.

Source : Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].