Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before the Provincial Governors and City Mayors’ Convention

[Delivered on July 31, 1951]

I have asked you to come today for a conference which we may extend another day or two to consider in general terms serious problems affecting the security of the state and the stability of the nation.

We are approaching the date when we are supposed to submit our final stand on the Japanese peace treaty the draft of which was submitted to us more than two or three weeks ago and which has been the subject of general discussion here and abroad.

Although there is an understanding between the major parties in the Philippines that our foreign policy should be bipartisan, that no party should take advantage of the other in the presentation of the issues or solutions offered, of late, however, we have noticed a deviation from this attitude.

This being a pre-electoral period, our foreign policy and our stand on the Japanese treaty may become a partisan issue contrary to our fundamental understanding of a bipartisan attitude on foreign affairs. Already in the United States, we are hearing reports that several prominent American citizens and officials are giving the impression to the people of America as well as here, that our attitude on the Japanese peace treaty is nothing but a political stunt and that the leaders of this country are playing the electorate.

The Philippine Congress and the Cabinet and the Council of State—the supreme advisory bodies of the Government—have already gone on record as unequivocally against the treaty. This stand is unanimous and decisive.

It remains, however, for the people of this country and the United States as well as the rest of the world whose interests are affected by the Japanese treaty to know what our local executives—the governors, the city mayors, and even the municipal and other officials of our different political subdivisions—have to say on this matter, especially because it involves the question of security, not only of the local security of the state, but also the international security of our country.

Heretofore, provincial boards and city councils as well as municipal boards have been approving resolutions endorsing the attitude of the central government and its leaders regarding our stand on the Japanese peace treaty. But all these expressions and attitudes taken by the local public officials are merely desultory.

There is need for an unmistakable, a solid and strong stand in support of the attitude we have heretofore taken on the Japanese treaty. It is necessary that we present a solid front.

The issue is no longer a partisan or merely a political one. It is a national issue on which this country must express its stand unequivocally, solidly, and determinedly.

This is the reason why I called you for conference and consultation so that all members of the body politic from the smallest political unit to the highest hierarchy of our Government may define their solid stand.

The people of America as well as the people of Japan specially must know that we are not presenting our claim capriciously, that we have studied our position thoroughly. The economic provisions of the treaty are well understood by us. We know the economic position of Japan, its potentialities, and its capacity to meet its obligations now or in the future.

We honestly press our claims because of our personal knowledge of the damages wrought by Japan on our country. The main thing for us therefore is, to present a united front, determined to push through our claims, not because we want our “pound of flesh” from Japan, but because we know it is the moral duty of Japan to pay reparations for the wrong that she committed upon this country.

We may not be able to collect materially or financially, or even in kind, all the amount that we expect Japan to pay to us. But certainly, there must be a recognition of our right to collect from Japan that will serve as a moral deterrent should Japan have any aggressive design again on this country.

We must crystallize our stand and put it in black and white and present it before August 13, the last day, I think, set for the final presentation of the draft. We must, without loss of time, express ourselves in a manner that the United States Government and all the prospective signatories may consider as our unequivocal position.

I also want our local executives to express their views. or their support on the issue of the security of the Philippines. I think you will remember that as early as March of 1949, when the Atlantic Pact was being considered and was about to be put into final form, I did announce that a similar pact should be adopted for our protection in the Pacific. I launched the idea not only in press statements but also in speeches, including my address before the U. S. Senate when I was invited to the United States in August, 1949.

I have expressed my desire that in the South Pacific, a similar pact should be adopted with the backing of the United States. While that proposal was not met with enthusiasm at “the time by the State Department in Washington, I knew, I could observe, and I could feel when I was in the United States in August, 1949, that the American people, especially the leaders of the American people in the Senate, were convinced of the wisdom and necessity of adopting the measure for the protection of the Pacific countries menaced by Communism.

The observation then of Secretary Dean Acheson was, that the proposal was made prematurely, but I knew with my personal contact with the people in the United States and their leaders that someday in the near future, America would be convinced of the necessity of such a pact.

I am very happy to have received confirmation of the wisdom of that suggestion in recent months. Although the United States was only expected at that time to give its moral backing to any pact that we organized for the protection of this region, the United States now comes out offering to be signatory to that pact with such countries as Australia and New Zealand, and with the Philippines if we want to.

At the beginning, I thought that to place the Philippines under an obligation to the United States for our own protection by entering into a mutual defense pact with the United States, may mean the conversion of this country to a protectorate. As I view the question now from the point of view of national security, it is not only the United States that desires to join us in the pact but also other countries.

So, I propose that you express in a resolution your opinion as executives of the political subdivisions of this country, giving your unqualified support and endorsement of such a pact for our own security, not only during these troubled days but especially in the future.

I suggest that you adopt a resolution indorsing our definite stand against the Japanese treaty provisions regarding reparations which do not satisfy our status as sovereign and free people; and also an unequivocal stand on the security of the Philippines to be guaranteed in the Pacific pact which may be entered into in the future.

My friends, I think it is time that we tell our people today and henceforth that if we are going to continue to remain a nation, a sovereign government, an independent democracy, we must all pull together and show to the world that there is one and only one Filipino people, determined to defend its national existence.

I am saying this because in the coming elections, there will be heated discussions, each one claiming credit for accomplishments achieved by the country.

At times such as this, we are up to forget our national responsibilities and deny to our nation the credit for the achievements that we have so far been able to accomplish during the last few years.

The country is now developing into a prosperous one. It is not because the administration has done that, or this department has done it.

I do not claim, for example, to have increased rice production alone; I do not claim to have increased the hemp production alone; I do not claim to have increased our international commerce alone; and I do not claim to have maintained peace and order and restored tranquility of the country alone. But I do say that our people and their representatives have secured the proper atmosphere so that we can plant our staple crops, enhance international commerce, and maintain relative tranquility in our country.

I have not planted a single stalk of rice, I have not planted a single plant of hemp, and I have not invested a single centavo at all. I have not even held a knife and gone to the field to fight the Huks. I have not shed a single drop of blood. But I do say that you and I in the administration, Liberals or Nacionalistas or any other party members who have cooperated to secure the proper atmosphere so that our people could grow rice, expand our commerce, and maintain peace and order, have made possible this progress.

The whole world looks upon us now as a people—not as Nacionalistas or as Liberals. The whole world is analyzing how we have been able to lift ourselves from the morass of economic depression and turbulent political situations. The credit for these achievements belongs to the people. The credit belongs to the country.

From now on, I would like to discourage any talk on our part, we the responsible officials of the Government, attributing to a single, individual action, anything that has contributed to our stability and growth as a nation. This is all our work. We have all cooperated in this. Our people must be given credit for our accomplishment and no one individual, no department, no group, should boast of having done this or that.

Now, my friends, I have here a resolution which I wish you to consider. This conference of governors and city mayors, if it wants to prove its effective intervention, especially at this moment, in the shaping of our national policies, has an opportunity to do so, as regards the Japanese peace treaty and the Pacific security pact. I turn this over to you and I would like you to discuss the matter thoroughly.

I wish that you would convert your conference into a seminar. I want to give an opportunity to all the members of the executive departments, the leaders of Congress, and other departments of the Government, to give a correct appraisal and estimation of the work we have accomplished so far. And let us make this a lively topic of discussion with our people. I believe that in these political campaigns now taking place, the discussion of the vital problems of the country confronting us, will be more pressing if you, the leaders of the provinces and cities, were to take your assigned places in indoctrinating our people on the development of the affairs of the state, laying aside the minor personal issues which have frequently become heated topics of discussion in political meetings, especially in the provinces.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Extemporaneous speech of President Elpidio Quirino before the Provincial Governors and City Mayors’ Convention, July 31, 1951. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(7) , 3414-3418.