Message of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On United Nations Day

[Delivered on October 25, 1951]

Ladies and Gentlemen:

I appreciate this opportunity to join you in exalting, and in focussing an appraising glance on, the United Nations.

This World Organization has definitely emerged from its chrysalis. In six years of growing pains, it has developed structure, stability, and stature of an extent to handle responsibilities crucial to world peace and welfare.

The United Nations was born out of mankind’s deep need and desire for peace. That need and that desire have increased in direct proportion to the difficulties that have stood in the way of their attainment over the past six years. Today with the danger of atomic war easting its dreadful shadow all over the globe, the peoples of the world are turning more and more to the United Nations.

The observance of United Nations Day this year is an occasion for world-wide renewal of faith in the principles of the United Nations’ Charter. Indeed there is need of a more vigorous and unequivocal expression of the determination of the member states to help achieve the purposes for which the United Nations was founded.

The past year has been a crucial one for the United Nations. In June, 1950 the organization proved itself by its historic decision to defend the Republic of Korea against aggression. But it was a decision made possible only by an an exceptional circumstance: the absence of the [Soviet Union from the Security Council and the consequent temporary removal of its veto power. Normally, the Council’s decision to repair the breach of peace in Korea by armed collective action should have been followed up by the rapid development of an international army under Article 43 of the Charter. However, the return of the Soviet Union (and its veto power) to the Council precluded any such development. As in the days before Korea, the Council was hamstrung and the free world found itself confronted with the problem of how to sustain the action in Korea, and to organize additional forces necessary to prevent future Koreas, within the framework of the United Nations.

This problem inspired two parallel developments of utmost importance in the evolution of an effective collective security system that would safeguard peace and ensure the rule of law throughout the world. First was the adoption by the General Assembly of a “Uniting-for-Peace” resolution which activates the Assembly’s hitherto latent authority to act whenever the Security Council should be unable to discharge its primary responsibility to maintain or restore peace. Member states could now place units of their armed forces in the service of the United Nations. They could also take more effective part in preventing breaches of peace through the newly created Peace Observation Committee and the Collective Measures Committee.

The second development is the deliberate subordination to the United Nations of the regional defense arrangements which are being evolved by the free world. Both the North Atlantic Treaty organization, which is well on the way to completion, and the new security system now abuilding in Southeast Asia and the Pacific area signed to conform strictly to the Charter. They supplement rather than supplant the United Nations’ structure of international security. Thus, they keep rearmament of the free world from becoming an end in itself and it to subserve a higher purpose, namely, that “ armed force shall not be used save in the common interest” and only to maintain international peace and security for the promotion of social progress, greater freedom, and better living standards for all peoples.

It is to the everlasting credit of the United Nations that this higher goal has not been lost sight of even in the midst of the most intense preoccupation with the problem of defense and survival. For while it is unfortunately true that adequate power is an indispensable condition of our present security, our hope for a lasting peace must ultimately lie in the elimination of conditions that breed wars among nations, like poverty, ignorance, discrimination, political domination and economic exploitation, suppression of essential liberties, denial of human rights, and gross inequalities in means and opportunities for advancement. It is a matter for rejoicing that the United Nations has carried forward its constructive work in social and economic fields despite formidable difficulties created by political conflicts among the Great Powers.

We cannot emphasize enough how much United Nations instrumentalities such as the ECOSOC, WHO, ILO, UNESCO, ECAFE, IRO, FAO, and UNICEF have brought members together to cooperate within their respective jurisdictions to produce results advancing their economic, cultural, and social life. The grateful results now being achieved in increasing measure will ultimately bind the nations more firmly than the fact of merely standing side by side as allies in an armed conflict.

The accomplishments of the United Nations through these agencies are at the moment not so widely understood and appreciated. But they assuredly will have more far reaching effect, for international conviviality and peace. Greater than mere military victory, they identify member nations closely with the common struggle to maintain lasting peace, friendship, and general human advancement.

In these fields, as well as in the sphere of security, the Asian region continues to be the principal proving ground of the United Nations. This world organization has done much to meet this challenge through the work of its specialized agencies, but developments of the past year indicate that a vastly greater effort, comparable to that which is now being undertaken in the field of collective security, will be required to accomplish the task.

We earnestly believe that peace, however desirable, is not an end in itself but only a means of making the world a better place to live in for all nations and all men.

We share this profound concern for peace with our neighboring states in Southeast Asia as we jointly expressed in a resolution adopted during the Baguio Conference of 1950. We in the Philippines have followed it up in the last Geneva session of the ECOSOC, where the Philippines, with the tacit cooperation of other Asian states on the council, strongly advocated even the establishment of an Economic Commission for Africa. We have no interests in that part of the world, but we took this position in line with our established policy of assisting the political, economic, and cultural development of non-self-governing peoples. No delegation was more surprised than that of the Philippines, however, when the proposal was lost through the abstention of certain states that withdrew their support under the pressure of highly developed metropolitan powers that understandably had no sympathy for the new economic commission.

But we are not discouraged. We truly believe that closely related to our collective security is the necessity of fostering the social and economic advancement of the so-called underdeveloped areas as essential to international peace. So we are determined to I assume our responsibilities in this regard as a member both of a regional community and of the United Nations. We, therefore, invite our neighboring countries in Southeast Asia to do likewise in the honest conviction that to do otherwise, to stand aloof when interdependence among nations, big and small, is being more felt every day for survival, would be to precipitate disaster rather than avoid it. We must resolve to prevent the entrenchment in our midst of antidemocratic movements that capitalize on want and misery.

Both in social and economic development as well as in regional security, the countries of Southeast Asia should not stand apart for the sake of the common destiny. I believe we have rightly traced our mutual interests and affinity at Baguio in 1950. Our association in the United Nations has made those interests and affinity more firmly bound still. We must rise to meet the exigencies of the epoch. World peace requires our positive contribution. Our survival demands it.

We should not allow the statesmanship of Asia to drift into the back-waters of a do nothing neutralism lest our peoples become enslaved by a syjst0m far more oppressive and ruthless than any they have ever known. What we most need in Asia today are two things: a positive faith in the United Nations and its peace objectives and a program of positive action to back up that faith.

Both, the Filipino people have. We have cast our lot for freedom and democracy. We have not hesitated. We have refused to indulge in fence-riding. Just as in Bataan and Corregidor, when the highest values of human dignity and freedom were endangered in Korea, we went there with our bravest to show our positive faith in liberty and our love for peace. Since 1949, we halve outlined and followed a program of positive action to support that faith. I reiterate it today. A Pacific security pact, which will include all the nations of Asia who believe in freedom and are ready to defend it no matter what the cost, is the crying need of the hour. What I said on the mighty rostrum of the U. S. Senate on August 14, 1949, I can repeat word for word and to the last comma with burning pertinency at this very hour.

“Today the most urgent problem that confronts the Philippines and the other free countries of Asia is the problem of security. It is, in fact, the principal problem that besets all those states that lie athwart the advancing tide of communism. The Philippines rejoices with the rest of the free world that there has at last been erected a mighty bulwark against the advance of Communism in Europe. That sector of the globe has been secured and the peace of the world; to that extent, has been stabilized.

“However, it is obvious to everyone that the task of securing our free world is only half done. No one who realizes the extent of the menace to which Asia is exposed—the threat to Korea, the infiltration into Viet Nam, the debacle in China—can well afford to rest at ease now that the North Atlantic Pact is in full force and effect. Asia with its vast population which accounts for more than half of the world, and with its incalculable resources, cannot and ought not to be lost to communism by default. And yet-this is bound to happen unless something of the courage and vision that went into the forging of the democratic defense in Europe is applied to the forging of a similar system of defense In Asia.”

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). United Nations Day address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, before the Rotary Club, Manila Hotel, on October 25, 1951. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(10) , 5068-5072.