Necrological Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the memorial services in Honor of Doña Aurora Given by the Philippine National Red Cross

WE FEEL POORER BECAUSE OF MRS. QUEZON’S DEATH

At the memorial services in honor of Doña Aurora given by the Philippine National Red Cross at Malacañan on May 9, 1949, President Elpidio Quirino declared in the necrological speech that follows that Aurora Aragon Quezon was not only the first of the First Ladies of the Land, but that, “in her own right, she was simply grand.” The President said that “our people may not know now who was the greater, Quezon the Father of his country, or Aurora Quezon, the truly symbolic mother of her race,” but that history will record both of them as the greatest benefactors of this generation.

MY COUNTRYMEN:

IT IS a common belief and feeling among men and women everywhere that their mission on earth ceases when they lose their respective spouses in their declining years. Many even wish to be buried together in the Christian belief that they can still travel together in the life beyond. Their devotion and attachment to each other inspire the conviction that their union is as indestructible below as it is eternal above. And if one fails to follow the other soon in the other side of life, the former, if young enough, seeks another’s company in his or her nostalgia or, that failing, considers the rest of his or her own life as a mere transition until he or she crosses the Great Divide. Still others, who may no longer entertain such longing, consider themselves as dead among the living and gradually languish away.

There are notable examples of such types in our own country. In fact, I know several of them. But there are also notable exceptions. One of them is the beautiful soul whose memory we are gathered to exalt tonight.

Mrs. Quezon, devoted and attached to her husband as she had always been all her life, human enough to feel the immeasurable loss of her beloved husband’s demise, summoned all the courage and wisdom that she could muster from her heritage and determined to continue her husband’s life struggles while she lived. It was she who had served as the lever that had gauged the course of her husband’s public life. She had stabilized and steadied his movements and convictions as he had embarked upon his aggressive and compelling patriotic endeavors at the height of his strength, power, and influence as leader of his people. The husband’s vicissitudes of fortune in his great battles of life had made him turn his eyes upon the lot of the common man. But it was she who had touched and softened his heart and made him champion the cause of the masses, the underprivileged, the underfed. President Quezon’s social justice had been Aurora Quezon’s inspiration and passion.

But great as her influence had been, she had never abused it to further even a justifiable personal pride when she knew that grave problems of state were involved. She had asked nothing for herself. She had never suggested that she would be sharing the criticism or glorification of her husband’s conduct even if it affected her feelings or dignity as the mother of his children. Nor had she minded being dragged along up or down as her husband’s career had brought him higher or lower in the national estimation. She had always risen to the occasion in the most helpful spirit. In fact, there were events where it was difficult to distinguish . . . Because far and above her realization of some of her husband’s failings in his human adventures, she had had absolute confidence in her husband’s devotion and respect for her, which she undoubtedly had inspired by her conduct and her prayers. Quezon, the great man and leader, became the greater because of the inspiring influence of Mrs. Quezon, the woman and wife. And thenceforth, she eventually became the rock of refuge and of strength to many a Filipino leader beset with the burden of the people’s problems. That she did all this quietly within the private sanctuary of the home, is a grateful fact and commentary on the womanhood of this country.

Aurora Aragon Quezon was not only the first of the First Ladies of the land. In her own right, she was simply grand! The insuperable dignity, wisdom, and grace with which she carried her responsibility to the nation after the death of President Quezon were no accident; they came as the mature flowering of a lifetime of responsible, devoted, and fulfilled comradeship. When she undertook to head our National Red Cross, she simply acceded to giving her formal confirmation, on her own right, of being in fact and in truth, mother to her people. She did not merely lend her name, great as it was, to that noble cause. She labored mightily, doing yeoman service like everyone else who belonged to it, and provided its deepest and most abiding inspiration. Our people may not know now who was the greater, Quezon the Father of his country, or Aurora Quezon, the truly symbolic mother of her race. But history will record these two, both of them, as the greatest benefactors of this generation, and Mrs. Quezon as the greatest woman in her country.

The world has shared our people’s sorrow in her tragic passing. I have received condolences from heads of States as well as from the Holy Father and from other friends abroad. Those of us who knew her well can most truly say: to know her was to respect her, to admire her, to love her. No longer shall she grace the halls of the land which were wont to be exalted by her ennobling personality; no longer shall welfare institutions feel the touch of her kind heart and hand. No longer shall these Palace halls be dignified by her handsome and queenly figure; no longer shall these walls receive the impact of her gentle influence. No longer shall this atmosphere, which for many years she had enlivened with her wisdom and charm, be permeated with the spirit of racial honor and pride—by her presence as embodiment of the noblest type of Filipino womanhood.

Every one of us feels the poorer because of her death. But all of our people as well as our posterity will be the richer because she has lived.

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1949). The new Philippine ideology . Manila : Bureau of Printing.