Oration of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the Necrological Services for the Peftok War Dead

[Delivered at Luneta, May 7, 1952]

Fellow Countrymen:

We pause to pay homage to our very own who kept the faith of freedom in a foreign battlefront.

Twenty months ago they left our shores as part of a courageous contingent to fight our war of freedom in Korea.

They carried with them the cause that is not only our country’s own, but that of all nations and all races who have a common stake in liberty.

They knew, as we all know and all the world knows, what they were to do—they were to pit their faith and their lives in a life-and-death struggle so that the rest of their fellow countrymen, so that all free men everywhere, could stay free and live in honor and dignity.

When they left, we told them: Return with your sovereign nation’s flag high in your hands. Eight months later, many of them did return with that flag high in their hands. Those who are before us today made the supreme sacrifice, “returning on their shields.” Their mortal remains are back, to the bosom of their motherland, to attest to the loyalty and gallantry with which they and their comrades, surviving and dead, faced the implacable enemy of their country’s freedom. They all earned the commendation of their Commanding General, James A. Van Fleet, who said of them: “Many foreign armies have proven their worth in Korea, and the Filipinos are among the bravest.”

By their sacrifice, they sustained afresh the heroic tradition that is our people’s most precious heritage; they proclaimed anew the community of vision that will always unite and fire liberty-loving peoples to make a common stand against slavery and aggression.

This would be a futile hour, as would be the gallantry and sacrifice of these honored dead, if we failed to realize in greater measure the gravity of the crisis facing civilization and mankind today.

The prestige their courage and sacrifice brought to the name of our country would be vain, indeed, if we should waver in our determination to muster all our physical and spiritual resources in order, along with all the free world, to meet this crisis.

Definitely, we are called upon to do more and better as this crisis comes to a head. And I feel it is coming to a head. Certainly, we are challenged to cut out the frivolous causes that divide us and weaken us.

Communism is the enemy, which stops at nothing and respects nothing but what is strong. A solemn obligation is placed upon us to husband our forces and continually to advance to positions of increasing strength.

We will be strong because we have the inspiration and the discipline that alone are given, to men who love truth and are free. We will be strong because we have something to fight for—an invaluable stake in the preservation of human dignity. We will be strong because we strive for a planned, equitably distributed abundance basic to social justice and peace. And we will be strong because we have a compelling inheritance in the shining contribution of our heroic dead.

The sacrifice of our heroes in the Korea and every other war for liberty should forge our solidarity with all free and self-respecting peoples in the face of the clear and present danger. It should deepen our common devotion to the humane Christian tradition intimately linked with the reality of that liberty. It should reinforce our will to give our full share towards the conservation of such a tradition that alone justifies continued civilized existence in a free world.

To the kinsmen of this gallant group whose remains are here the symbolic object of our humble tribute, to its orphans who forthwith are left to find their way to their own fulfillment, it hardly need to be said that the personal loss which they have sustained enriches a common treasury of national pride, honor, and affection. The range of its inspiration, the value of its contribution, will know no limit as it blesses and strengthens every new and coming generation that cherishes its heritage of freedom.

Before they left our shores on their mission of freedom we told our heroic soldiers: “It is not for us, who will stay behind, to urge you to be valorous, to be chivalrous, to be strong. It is rather for you to show us how to follow you in the valor, the chivalry, the strength with which you go forth.”

There, in their respective caskets, they now speak to the nation not with their lips that can no longer articulate, but with their soul that has elevated them and their beloved Philippines, enjoining us all with their example to be strong, loyal, and true to our country and people. In their name and in the name of our children, may the God of Liberty illumine our conscience, steel our hearts to national solidarity!

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1952). Oration of President Quirino at the Necrological Services for the Peftok War Dead. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 48(5) , 1729-1731.