R.O.T.C. address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the grand stand on the Luneta

[Delivered on March 16, 1952]

I want to thank you for honoring me this afternoon. It is time that we met in patriotic communion.

You have come to this spot treading sacred ground. Where once the garrote and the firing squad cast their dreadful shadow, the heroism and martyrdom of yesterday brought forth the freedom and democracy that we enjoy today.

The lone flag that proudly floats over our heads this afternoon recalls the day where at yonder spot the Republic of the Philippines was proclaimed and established on July 4, 1946. On this hallowed ground, in solitary grandeur and solemn contemplation, stands the majestic figure of Rizal, whose faith and hope on our youth are incarnated by this inspiring assemblage.

This moment in our history is no longer night meeting day, or dawn—we are at the zenith of our liberty. To preserve this day is our greatest task—it is a responsibility destiny has specially placed upon our shoulders. We are therefore gathered here to meet the challenge—Rizal’s challenge.

How did the youth, respond to his challenge? We who were young when he died and you who are young when we are ready to give way to you, can affirm that we did not fail him.

His dream has been realized.

We have built a new country. If you look around and recall the shambles to which this fair city was reduced upon liberation, the wonderful vistas which you now contemplate will impress you with the magnitude of the efforts that have been exerted at nation-building.

We have built not only for today and for ourselves, but for tomorrow and for our children. We have kept pace with modern progress and advancement. There is an entirely new atmosphere that pervades the country today.

Barely six years since July 4, 1946, what has been done?

We have laid the foundation of a stable government.

We have not only rehabilitated and rebuilt public build­ings, roads, bridges, ports, wharves and seawalls, irrigation systems and flood and river controls and built some more, but from the ashes of war we have reconstructed the financial and economic structure of the country, arresting inflation and stabilizing our currency.

We have increased our agricultural production, established many industries, expanded our foreign trade.

We have improved the living standards of our people, raising the birth rate, reducing the death rate, building low-cost housing for low-income groups, fixing minimum wages for industrial and agricultural workers, increasing the salaries of teachers, nurses, enlisted men, and providing a general retirement system for all government servants.

We have emasculated Communism and made Democracy work on our soil.

We have acquired a personality in world affairs, we have established our credit abroad, and we have made a new name in bravery and heroism in the field of battles.

We are fighting for freedom not only on our own soil; we are fighting for the same ideal even beyond our shores.

We are not fighting for internal security alone; we are also fighting for external security and for the peace of the world.

When the Philippine Army was conceived upon the establishment of the Commonwealth Government, our objective was to prepare no less than 200,000 men ready, willing, and well-equipped, to insure internal security as well as to ward off foreign aggression.

We knew we might not have this number as a permanent standing army, but we relied on our capacity to raise a citizen army big and strong enough to protect our right to be free.

You form part of a select few who year by year are being trained to constitute and lead a citizen army. The challenge of this day is how to preserve our country and continue enjoying our liberty.

In the recent past you helped maintain and strengthen our democracy. It is imperative that you pledge to give your all to do so, for it is for you that the present generation—those now engaged in the battlefields of Korea and in the Communist-infested regions of our land—are sacrificing their lives and our fortunes, that you may continue enjoying tomorrow and with your children the blessings of freedom and democracy.

This country may be conquered again, but it will never die. It will never die as long as the fortitude that we exhibited in the darkest hours of our history dominates our spirit. It will never die as long as we love each other and pledge in unity to defend our common patrimony. It will never die as long as we are guided by the lessons of war in our daily life. It will never die as long as we have faith in ourselves and in the future of this country, arid can keep our friends who believe in our continued existence as a nation. It will never die as long as we have faith in God who presides over our destiny.

In all these lies our moral strength, strength that must increase every passing day. Indeed, more than ever, we need moral rearmament to meet the actual and active threat to our national existence.

We must determine to eradicate from our midst the agents of the enemies of our freedom and democracy against whom we are shedding the blood of our manhood abroad. What a sad spectacle that, while we are sacrificing our fives to fight them in Korea, some of us protect and defend them in the courts of our land! Moral courage—there must be moral courage here.

But moral strength is not enough. Heroism, bravery, and patriotism are mere abstractions when there is no physical strength to manifest them. We have to stand on firm ground, using all the vigor that material and physical advantages can bring to give steel to our sinews. Even the rock of freedom must find basic substance.

We have to make this land, our land, strong, stable, healthy, wealthy, and happy, exploiting all the resources that nature has placed in our hands to make it worth defending and dying for.

In my radio chat last night, I enumerated our accomplishments in this direction. It would be superfluous to repeat their enumeration here.

The only way to accomplish our great objective is to mobilize all our Resources and generate the power needed to strengthen our defenses. In a concentrated effort we have been doing this during the last three or four years. In fact, we are in the midst of execution of a program of national action.

We have expanded our production. We have given impetus to industries by the establishment of the basic ones.

The national development program for our country is not a new thing. We have had economists, industrial and agricultural planners, who had adventured in the economic field early in our national history. But we could not make available the means with which to realize our ambition to build and strengthen our national economy. At long last we now have the means with the assistance, pecuniary and technical, of our friends abroad. Assistance in military and economic security is afforded by our great friend, the United States of America. And the whole democratic world looks upon us with friendly sympathy and encouragement.

We must now concentrate our vital attention. We must not lose time. We must increase our momentum. We must take advantage of every opportunity to develop and expand our constructive activities. We must make available for survival and continued existence all the necessary material and strength to cope with the exigencies of what looms, potentially, as the most crucial world struggle we have yet ever faced.

You are already feeling the repercussions of that struggle. The waves from every direction are bringing to our shores sinister evidences of the international conflict. Let us not continue deluding ourselves into the belief that we are safe, simply because we have entered into pacts with our allies for mutual defense. Only the feeling of security which is provided by our own efforts can make our conscience rest.

You and I who have pledged to give our all to this country that it may live, must be alert to our responsibility. As the chosen soldiers of a militant army, we must stand as sentinels everywhere, not only to guard our rights to be free but to make our citizens strong and secure.

You are here gathered to renew that pledge and to derive new inspiration from our present accomplishments. We have shown to the world that we can stand as a free and independent country if we only will it.

This afternoon I invite you all to rise as one man to show that we will! This morning I heard this gospel message: “Every kingdom divided against itself will bring desolation, and house will fall upon house.” May God give us light and strength to heed this warning.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1952). R.O.T.C. address of President Quirino. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 48(3) , 982-985.