Radio Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On the conduct of Census Day

[Delivered on September 30, 1948]

As you have already been informed, by legislative mandate and executive proclamation, tomorrow will be Census Day. The first census under the new Republic will be taken. We expect this to be comprehensive, complete and accurate.

There are many reasons why we need such a census at this time. Because of the repeated devastations inflicted upon our country during the Pacific war, decimating our population, desolating our fields, destroying our cities and towns, the last census taken in 1939 has naturally become obsolete. And because our records were destroyed during the occupation and a follow-up of our statistics to render them up-to-date has been made practically impossible, it is now necessary that we take a new inventory of our nation. No planned effort on the part of our government, on that of private individuals, or on the part of those engaged in the development of our industries, or the promotion of our financial activities under the general development program of the country, can be successfully realized unless it is premised on an accurate statistical knowledge of our population and the resources at our command. The methodical and systematic rebuilding of our country must be based upon scientific planning and direction and not on a haphazard and fumbling undertaking which is wasteful and painful.

Census taking is an initial preparation for a nation. We are building a new nation and the pattern which we follow must necessarily be in tune or in harmony with the present world progress. Thus, local and foreign elements concerned or interested in this joint venture must be apprised of our true conditions before any intelligent planning can be adopted. This, however, cannot be accomplished without an accurate estimate for our basic plans. Despite our recent vicissitude, our country has progressed tremendously compared with other countries equally devastated in the last world war. We are now in the heat of execution of our vast plans of reconstruction and rehabilitation, as well as of expansion and development. For the purpose of economy in our common efforts, money and energy, we must have in our hands an accurate compendium, all the necessary data, that will permit us to make correct estimates in carrying out our vast programs. I therefore call upon every person in this country to cooperate in every way possible with the personnel in charge of taking our census who will visit each and every one of you at sunrise tomorrow.

They will come to your homes or your places of business to seek the answers to the questions prepared by the government calculated to draw from you the facts and figures which together will give us a new and accurate picture of our young Republic. I myself will cooperate as a mere citizen when tomorrow, I shall receive an enumerator and give forthright answers to the questions contained in his census form. Only by truthful answers given in the spirit of cooperation shall we be able to have a new census that is useful, accurate, and reliable.

Most of us have already been subjected to census questionnaires in the past. So it is no longer necessary to explain that the government has not the least desire or intention to pry unnecessarily into our people’s private business or affairs. I am sure that the entirely laudable purpose of census-taking is well-understood among the masses of our people. I am therefore confident that they will extend their utmost cooperation and make possible the taking of a new census which will be a scientific and accurate inventory of everything useful and helpful in our country. I want the census to be taken tomorrow a veritable Bible and treasury of facts and statistics depicting the culture, the wealth, the progress and the life of our people.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Radio speech of President Elpidio Quirino, delivered on the eve of Census Day, September 30, 1948. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44(9) , 3211-3212.