Radio Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Delivered on a nationwide hookup

[Released on August 30, 1950]

My Beloved Fellow Countrymen:

Last Sunday morning, the nation was horrified by the news of the massacres of Tarlac, of Santa Cruz, San Rafael, and Tayug.

We all read and heard those horribly true tales of murder, of rapine, of burning. Of helpless patients in a hospital butchered, even as they lifted weakening arms in pitiful appeals for mercy. Of nurses raped and murdered, and of doctors ruthlessly slain as they struggled to save their sick. Of unarmed, helpless people shot down before their homes, of those homes burned.

This was not done by an alien invader. What hands slaughtered those sick men in the hospital at Camp Makabulos, those unarmed men, and women and children elsewhere? What hands set the torch to the homes? Whatever power may have been behind this crime, the criminal, bloodstained hands were hands which we should have loved to grip in brotherhood, but could not.

Do we want this Red Hand of murder to spread over our country?

If we do not—and I do not need to ask the question more than once—then the government and the people, must unite and rise to wash off this Red stain—or shackle the Red Hand.

The danger posed by the dissidents under the Red banner of violence has achieved a new record of horror. The next victims may be anyone of you. In the end, it can strike us all. Our tragedy is cut out of a world pattern of terror and enslavement, with its loose ends right at our door.

Heaping mutual criticism, no longer helps. It only depresses our fighting forces. They need encouragement and sympathy too—something that will lift their morale. Public support will achieve this.

Every time we pause to strike at each other in mutual recriminations, to hurl charges and counter charges, the leaders of Communism rejoice. We make it so much the easier for them to murder our fellow citizens, lay waste our homes, destroy our morale and resistance and submerge us in fear.

Because they are after power, not after reforms, they cynically exploit our policies of amnesty, amelioration and attraction to give themselves time and resources to destroy what we seek to build.

They think the time is ripening for reaping the harvests of fear. The question now is: Shall we sit in complacency, with folded arms, and watch or wait for further carnage?

My beloved countrymen, I appeal to you and for you. Rally to your government, which is yourselves. Give the necessary civilian assistance and encouragement. I ask you to organize. Whether the forces of the government are large or small, they can do little to meet the menace of the Red Hand unless you, the people—you and I, rally behind them. Stand with them where they are strong. Step in to support them where they are weak.

I do not ask you to protect the government, or this or that government official. I call on you to protect those things which are above government. Your homes, your families, the schools for your children, the hospitals for your sick, the churches in which you worship.

Our good people, UNITE. Citizens of this free land, form yourselves into battalions of peace. Form your community assemblies, your neighborhood associations, your barangays for peace. Call on the civic organizations. Even the charitable institutions, religious institutions, the Boy Scouts, the Girl Scouts, Parent-Teacher Associations and other civic and charitable institutions and our labor unions in every municipality. I ask you to call on them and all the prominent citizens of each community. Go on the alert. The enemy is around you, so learn of the enemy. Information is security. Unite to get the information. Relay it immediately to the nearest peace officers.

You have heard of the Civilian Guards condemned. This, because their loyalty was to the man or the group that hired them. Take over the civilian guards. Form your community chests. Many there are who are contributing for less patriotic purposes. Our government is poor, but our individual citizenry is not poor. Every one can afford to contribute to a common peace fund. Fill those chests with your contribution. Name your own trusted men to disburse them, and make the Civilian Guards YOUR guards—Loyal to the people.

I do not call you to campaign of war. I summon you to a campaign for peace. Unite, my dear friends, to keep the dread Red Hand of Murder from your doorsteps. This our fight to preserve our Philippines.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Radio address of His Excellency, President Elpidio Quirino, delivered on a nation-wide hookup, August 30, 1950. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46(8) , 3624-3626.