Radio Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines During the National Language Week

WRITE AND SPEAK IN NATIONAL LANGUAGE

In the following radio address in Tagalog delivered on March 29, 1949, the beginning of National Language Week, President Elpidio Quirino pledged that he would not make any backward step regarding the propagation of the National Language but that he would do everything he could to bring about the realization of President Quezon’s dream of making our country united not only in aspirations and feelings but also in language.

MY COUNTRYMEN LISTENING ON THE RADIO:

NOW, on March 27, the National Language Week begins. Annually, starting on this day and until April 2, the Language Week is celebrated, in accordance with Proclamation 35 of President Osmeña signed on March 26 of the year 1946. The purpose of celebrating Language Week is to stimulate the development and propagation of the National Language, which, according to our Constitution, must be developed and used by all Filipinos.

From President Quezon, who is recognized as the Father of the National Language, all Presidents of the Philippines who followed have valued the National Language and considered it the strongest bond of our race. I will not fall behind the previous Presidents of the Philippines, so in this time of my administration, I will not take any regressive step regarding the National Language, but rather I will offer all the necessary help, so that the dream of the illustrious President Quezon to see our country united, not only in aspirations and feelings, but also in language, we will see immediately as a beautiful reality.

The National Language is a language of government and official, since July 4 of the year 1946. We have an office or bureau that cares for the development of our own language, this is the Institute of National Language. Schools, whether public or private, through the teaching of the National Language from elementary school to Colleges and Universities, are able to more effectively propagate the language in all corners of the Philippines. Movies and radio, newspapers and popular readings, reach remote areas and deliver to the people there stories, news, and shows in the national language. All of this is a sure sign that it will not be long before the National Language of the Philippines is used by all, in understanding each other, in dealing with the government, in studying and becoming intelligent, in making agreements and trading; and on all occasions, we must prove that we are one race, one language, and one nation.

Rizal said that language is the soul of the nation. And because the soul of the nation cannot die, this week of Language let us make this proverb: Write and Speak in the National Language.

Thank you very much.

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1949). The new Philippine ideology . Manila : Bureau of Printing.