Radio Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On United Nations Day

My fellow countrymen and friends throughout the world:

It is a signal pleasure to me as President of the Philippines to be able to greet you on United Nations Day.

At no time perhaps in the history of the world is there a greater imperative for peoples everywhere, East and West, North and South, to join in one solid determination to stand together if they are to survive, if they are to preserve everything that they cherish of their culture and civilization.

We in, the Philippines have an equal obligation with every other country to add our weight for the continued strengthening of the United Nations towards this urgent end. Whatever every Filipino does in support of the United Nations and of this end is an act of the deepest concern for the safety of his own native land. He can express no greater loyalty to the invaluable heritage from his own country’s heroic past.

We are especially honored by the fact that a representative of our Republic is now head of the United Nations General Assembly. It means that however modest is our position among the nations of the world, we can contribute directly and significantly to the resolution of the major problem of our century, which is the advancement and the preservation of peace. Ambassador Romulo’ as President of the United Nations General Assembly can do only as much as his own people back home, as individual citizens and as a group, are ready to undertake to maintain the will to peace under conditions that are just to men of understanding everywhere.

And so, on this United Nations Day, let us consecrate ourselves anew for this purpose. Let us pray that men everywhere else will be of like resolution that peace will prevail with justice and honor to all mankind.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Radio speech of President Quirino on United Nations Day. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45(10) , 4368-4369.