Radio Address of Honorable Elpidio Quirino Vice President of the Philippines On the eve of Rizal Day

Fifty years ago on this very eve the forces of despotism committed one of the greatest blunders in history. Locked up in a damp dark cell of Fort Santiago, sat a lonely man, condemned to die before a firing squad the next day, an outcast of his church and his people, by decree of alien rulers. His crime? He had written books and pamphlets which portrayed the sufferings and miseries of his people. He had dared depict the unbearable despotism and arrogance of Church and State which held the people down and arrested their progress. Charged as a filibustero, he was also blamed for instigating rebellion that was fast gathering over the Philippine horizon.

In the age of despotism these were, indeed, serious crimes. But Rizal who was thus locked up, was wiser than his jurors, more subtle in his insight, and, therefore, more calm to await the verdict of history. He sat quietly under the flickering flame of a weak lamp, and strove feverishly to write down his last thoughts into one of the world’s most immortal poems, “My Last Farewell,” whose beauty, sincerity of feeling, and simplicity of expression, written as it was in the very last hour of his life before the spectre of death, not only revealed a calm, composed mind but a towering character commanding respect any where any time.

If Rizal had done nothing but write this poetic masterpiece, he still would be great. For judged by all standards, the circumstances surrounding its composition, the elevated sentiment of love,—of country, of home, of family, of peace, of valor, of dignity, of honor, of patriotism—all the finest feelings that have inspired men to worthy achievements put together in a work of magnificent beauty, Rizal’s last poem must be rated among the world’s best.

But Rizal did more than write an immortal poem. That was only the crowning achievement of his career as a literary man. The portrayal of his people in his two forceful novels, “Noli Me Tangere” and “El Filibusterismo,” was masterly done. His people’s oppressors banned these books for the truth they portrayed and not for the falsehood they allegedly contained. Nowhere has the might of the pen been most truly demonstrated over the power of the sword than in Rizal’s choice use of the former against the combined might of the Church and the State in his time. And this work is now epitomized in the immortal lines of another Filipino poet who sang of Rizal’s life:

If a bullet shattered your skull, then your idea shattered an empire!

Two years after the tragic death of Rizal on the field of Bagumbayan, the mighty Spanish empire in the Philippines toppled down. The force of evil and despotism that he depicted exploded as he had predicted, and the blind rulers who would not see the light as he wanted them to see it got the verdict they richly deserved.

His gift of a prophetic vision as a writer was unexcelled. But great as his contribution was to the building of a Filipino nationality by his writings, the force of his example was even greater. He had both the gift of ideas and the power of expression. But he never indulged in vain talk. He was quiet and reserved, but inwardly he was restless. He was feverishly active studiously searching out for solutions of the many ills and evils he saw around him. At the age of thirty-six he was a man of travel, a scientist, a linguist, a writer, a sociologist, an anthropologist, a physician, an occulist, a painter, a sculptor—withal a patriot whose brilliant and exceptional talents were devoted and dedicated largely to one thing; namely, to the good name and progress of his fatherland.

No man that I know of, living or dead, had accomplished so much to train all his powers for fruitful use than Rizal. Yet with all his personal gifts and accomplishments, he remained a humble man,—a good son, a good brother, a good friend, a patient teacher—kind to all men, dutiful, devout and God-fearing. For all his travels, studies and activities, he lived an intense life. His was not a life of easy means for he was not wealthy and had to depend on his own earnings partly for what he needed. The strange thing about him is that with all his lack of means, his expensive studies and intense intellectual and literary activities, he left an unblemished personal record. Neither wealth nor riches attracted him, nor did he take advantage of his fame and power. He lived a simple life wherever he was whether in Madrid, in Paris, or in Berlin the same as when he was as an exile in Zamboanga or in the brief moments when he could stay with his ancestral family. With all the wealth of his work and accomplishments, Rizal left no estate whatsoever. His ancestral land and home had long ago disappeared, and today there is nothing material connected with his memory and fame.

Yet there is no Filipino, living or dead, who has left so much legacy to his people than this brave martyr of Bagumbayan. While we admire his writings for their great erudition and human understanding, while we seek his inspiration for its nobility and purity, while we feel awed by the versatility of his genius, while we worship his patriotism for its firmness and great conviction, while we adore him as a dutiful son, a brother and a friend, while we hold him as the father and idol of this land, none of this feeling to me could best interpret Rizal’s life and service to his country than the lesson of his spotless, courageous life, shining above all odds and temptations to corrupt and taint it. To you who are listening to me tonight and to all Filipinos, I desire to commend this phase of Rizal’s life as most worthy of our meditation in preparation of tomorrow’s Rizal Day celebration.

My countrymen, even as the greatest hero produced by our race toiled unceasingly to better himself and improve the lot of his people, let us work, and work, and keep on working to bring our country back to its feet, for only by this way can we achieve progress, prosperity and happiness—the ultimate goal of this the greatest Filipino lifework and martyrdom. Only by emulating his example can we hold inviolate the cherished liberties we have won this past half century, and for which he and a host of heroes and martyrs gave up their lives so that we, who follow them and those who come after us, may justly reap the fruits of their sacrifices and our own toils.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). Radio address of Vice President Elpidio Quirino on the eve of Rizal Day, December 29, 1946, over Stations KZRH, KZPI and KZFM. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 42(12) , 3258-3260 .