Speech on the Radio of the Honorable Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On the opening of the first day of the celebration of National Language Week

MY DEAR RADIO LISTENERS:

NOW, March 27th, the National Language Week begins. Annually, starting on this day and until April 2nd, the Language Week is held, in accordance with Proclamation 35 of President Osmeña signed on March 23, 1946. The purpose of holding the Language Week is to stimulate the development and propagation of the National Language, which, according to our Constitution, must be developed and used by all Filipinos.

From President Quezon, who is recognized as the Father of the National Language, all succeeding Presidents of the Philippines have valued the National Language and considered it the strongest bond of our race. I will not lag behind the previous Presidents of the Philippines, so in this period of my administration I will not take any regressive step regarding the National Language, but rather I will offer all the necessary assistance, so that the dream of the illustrious President Quezon to see our country united, not only in ideals and feelings, but also in language, we will see immediately as a beautiful reality.

The National Language is the government or official language, since July 4, 1946. We have an office or bureau that takes care of the development of our own language, and that is the Institute of National Language. Schools, whether public or private, through the teaching of the National Language from elementary school up to colleges and universities, are able to more effectively disseminate the language in all corners of the Philippines. Movies and radio, newspapers and public readings, reach even remote areas and deliver to the people there stories, news and sights in the national language. All of this is a sure sign that it will not be long before the National Language of the Philippines is used by all, in understanding each other, in dealing with the government, in studying and becoming intelligent, in making agreements and trading, and in all opportunities, we must prove that we are one race, one language, and one nation.

Rizal said that language is the soul of the nation. And since the soul of the nation cannot die, let us make this our motto this Language Week: Write and Speak in the National Language.

Thank you very much.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1949). President Quirino’s radio address in the national language, delivered on the occasion of the opening day of the National Language Week celebrations on March 27, 1949. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45(3) , 1214-1215.