Radio Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On Pre-election

[ Delivered on November 7, 1949 ]

PRE-ELECTION RADIO ADDRESS

THE DAY of reckoning has arrived. I wanted to submit in brief the balance sheet of the present administration. I regret, indeed, that our dear friend, President Roxas, is not now with us to account for and appreciate our common performance. But we are all familiar with the splendid work that he had accomplished before he was, prematurely for us, called by the Lord to His side.

I lost no time in taking up the work where he left off. Not only have I faithfully followed the program of national action which he and I had laid down as the basic structure of this New Republic, but I have also been absolutely loyal to him, and God knows it. Of course, I have tried to improve our original plan and the records show that I have succeeded in my attempt. For your information, I want to make a resumé in these fleeting moments.

Under the most difficult circumstances, when we were still busy healing wounds, we launched on July 4, 1946, the Republic of the Philippines.

In less than four years since then we have been able to rebuild our national economy and to accelerate our national rehabilitation and reconstruction.

Although we feared that we might not be able to reconstruct the country in ten or fifteen years, it is a fact that not only did we reconstruct almost all the public improvements destroyed during the war, but built more bridges, more roads, more hospitals, more puericulture centers, more irrigation systems, more schools and other public improvements than ever before.

We only have to compare Manila immediately after liberation and Manila as we see it today, with its streets widened, cemented, or asphalted, its rebuilt public structures such as the Bureau of Posts Building, the City Hall, the Philippine Normal School and dormitory, and the Custom House, and under reconstruction such old landmarks as the Legislative Building, Finance Building, Agriculture Building, Philippine School of Arts and Trades, and the piers. Inspired and encouraged by this spirit of aggressive rebuilding, private homes have been reconstructed and many new ones have been built more convenient, more comfortable, and even more beautiful and substantial than those erected before the war. Verily, Manila has been seeing remarkable and speedy face-lifting.

Farms have been rehabilitated, industries revived, commercial activities resumed, and, in general, the constructive genius of the people has been revitalized.

A mere mention of the fact that practically all our sugar centrals are again operating and a number of our mines are not only producing but paying dividends will give us an idea — and a most encouraging one — of our accelerated industrial revival.

We have immeasurably improved the lot of the common man, raised the standard of living of the humbler members of the personnel of the Government, and increased the basic pay of the enlisted personnel of the Army from eighteen to fifty pesos, and the minimum salary of the teachers from forty to one hundred pesos. We have adjusted the labor wage in many government entities as well as private institutions so that the wage-earner may receive a commensurate increase in compensation for his toil.

In the City of Manila and Quezon City alone, we have been able to clear many of the slums and have built tenement houses for laborers and low-salaried employees. We have granted vacation and sick leave even to temporary personnel. We have not neglected the great bulk of the civil service employees, granting them backpay and thus satisfying their clamor during the past two administrations for the recognition of their right to compensation during the occupation. For the veterans, their widows, and their orphans, we have been able to extend the necessary relief in the form of educational benefits and pensions for the war widows and orphans. We have also solved the problem of the redemption of the emergency and guerrilla notes and thus extended relief to private persons who helped in the resistance movement.

I want to make special mention of the farmers, the laborers, and that bulk of our masses from which I sprang. This administration, with its program of social amelioration, has endeavored to minister to their needs, giving them food, clothing, and shelter when necessary, and providing them with schools, roads, bridges in their respective localities and even granting them crop loans to rehabilitate their farms and home industries or initiate them in new constructive activities.

This administration has not only purchased big landed estates to be distributed to the landless but has also provided for the settlement of all vacant public agricultural lands for eventual acquisition by them.

The program of total economic mobilization adopted by this administration is predicated upon the necessity of providing our masses with the means for their sustenance and the improvement of their standard of living. This is not a mere plan. It is an actual program of action implemented by thousands of millions of pesos and is now under execution.

We have solved two outstanding problems which have annually embarrassed many administrations in the past — the so-called school crisis and rice crisis. No child of school age is now refused admission in our public schools for lack of room, and nobody need be afraid that he cannot buy rice for himself and his family. And the price of rice has gone down considerably, to P0.90 per ganta, compared to P2.50 three years ago.

Not only have we solved the annual rice crisis, but with an aggressive program of speedy rice production implemented by millions of pesos of appropriation for the direct exploitation of tens of thousands of hectares of rice land and with the establishment of many irrigation systems and the extensive use of fertilizers to improve our production, we can expect that in five years the Philippines may even export rice. We have embarked upon a huge program of construction of irrigation systems throughout the country and have actually set aside millions of pesos for its execution.

We have established the Central Bank which is now operating on its own income and has, besides, made available no less than 65 million pesos for the development and expansion of the hemp industry and the rehabilitation of the tobacco and coconut industries as well as the stabilization of the sugar industry.

Our foreign trade has tremendously increased, far surpassing the pre-war volume.

Our national income jumped from eighteen million pesos in 1945 to over three hundred million pesos in 1949.

We have organized a strong, stable government and have established an excellent foreign service. As a result of our performance, we have increased our international prestige remarkably—rising from the modest status of a three-year old infant Republic to the presidency and leadership of the United Nations Assembly.

Thus, we have not only rebuilt the country but built a new name and prestige in less than four years of sovereign national existence.

And we live in peace and tranquility, presently concentrating our efforts on our economic stability and national security.

What I have listed are the assets of the administration. They remain solid and beyond dispute, however hard our deprecators and political adversaries may try, for temporary political advantage, to pull down the results of our efforts at nation-building.

With this record to our credit, the Liberal Party, the genuine Liberal Party, bids for a further chance to guide the destiny of this new nation.

Tomorrow we shall go to the polls. I urge that everyone should exercise the right to vote. I am sure we will—not so much because I expect you to vote for me and my fellow candidates in the Liberal Party (for I am certain you will make a wise choice) as because we must all be on record as having exercised our rights to express our sovereign will. I address myself especially to the people who in the past have not taken much interest in the elections, and particularly to the farmers, the laborers, the artisans, and that bulk of the masses heretofore inarticulate, who have the greatest stake in these elections, and whose welfare, security, and happiness all political parties are exerting every effort to champion. All must express their voice through the ballot. Our right to do so should not be taken for granted. Our fathers have invested incalculable blood and treasure, suffered every manner of heartbreak, to secure us this right. There are still many peoples in the world today going through the most cruel ordeals so that they may secure and enjoy this right.

In the natural, the physical, and the moral world what we do not use we ultimately lose, and what we do not exercise we forfeit. God spare us the day when we cannot vote as sovereign individuals in a Christian democracy because we have neglected to exercise actively our right to do so.

We go to the polls to make a decision. On election day our citizens judge, and are judged in turn by the wisdom or unwisdom of their decision. You will have to decide whether the present set-up whose performance I have just described should continue guiding the destiny of the nation, or whether you should start anew and establish a new administration which, though replete with promises, is still untried.

Tomorrow’s elections are as much a test of the political fiber and moral texture of the people as those of the competing candidates for office. You will make a crucial decision in our national life. Its consequences will affect generations after us.

You have to approach this decision calmly and soberly. The administration has adopted all such necessary measures as may insure an orderly, peaceful, and honest election, so that you can freely express your will without being bulldozed into making a decision that will betray the common welfare.

This administration is determined and is prepared to see that our people’s opportunity to vote is in no manner restricted or violated. All measures and precautions are taken to secure this end. There must be peace and order while we go to the polls. Our duty is clear and nothing can make this administration swerve from it. But you must cooperate in the maintenance of peace and order, each and everyone, by being peaceful yourself. Once again our temperament and our political maturity are going to be tested. I am confident that they will be reasserted and confirmed.

In these the first presidential elections under our Republic, I am certain that our people will emerge victorious by their choice. I know of no victory that can give me greater happiness and satisfaction, because it will be the victory of discipline over disorder, of a self-respecting democracy over the threats and techniques of neo-totalitarians, of the sovereign popular will over the lofty pretensions of a discredited leadership and the unscrupulous manipulations of disgruntled demagogy or the political malingering of a camouflaged conspiracy to commit sedition or terrorism.

We will have a peaceful election tomorrow. And the earth will not stop turning for us after tomorrow. Under the leadership of the Liberal Party, the party that will win, we shall continue to broaden the road towards the enrichment of our life and destiny as a free people. We shall proceed in our course towards increasing fulfillment of our program of reconstruction and production. We shall count with, and keep, the friendship of the freest peoples of the world. We shall continue to cooperate in advancing and strengthening a lasting peace rooted in plenty, freedom, and self-respect for all. We shall continue to do all these because we know how to keep our own house in order and because we appreciate the responsibility of free men to their own community and to the world.

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].