EXTEMPORANEOUS SPEECH AT THE AWARDING TO THE PRESIDENT TESTIMONIAL PLAQUE AND MEDAL AS PUBLIC OFFICIAL OF THE YEAR 1952

General Duque, Ladies and Gentlemen, and Friends:

I have been trying to dig into my recent past to connect my actuations as a humble private citizen during the times when your organization was busy defending our rights to be free in the mountain fastnesses and ravines of Northern Luzon to date when I am happy to be at the head of this nation.

It is most natural for everybody to expect that I would be given the distinction as the public official of the year, as chief executive of this nation. Naturally, as the head man of our officialdom, it is not strange that I should be recognized as public official No. 1. So, I have tried to scrutinize my activities, my actuations, and my whole record during the recent past to find out why I should deserve the honor and distinction accorded me this afternoon, because there must be some meaning to it.

We were divided during the Japanese occupation into three elements: (1) those of us who, without the least effort to save the country from further destruction and cruelty, thought it best to cooperate with the invaders; (2) those of us who, instead of offering that cooperation fled to the hills, took their guns with them, and faced the enemy in an even fight in defense of our freedom; and (3) the group, to which I humbly belonged, that group of people who—not having been able, because unwilling, to cooperate with the invading forces, and unable to co­operate with our forces in the field because they were discharging the duties of citizenship in the controlled areas and were very closely watched in their movements, and in all their plans—had to remain in the centers of population satisfying themselves with the employment of their wit and all the means with which to obey unharmed the orders of the ruler and at the same time give directly or indirectly the assistance they were able to extend to our forces in the field.

As I said, I belonged to the third group. It is quite difficult for me to understand the logic of our history because when at long last the American forces were able to reconquer the Phihppines and wrest from the invaders the authority imposed upon us for a period of four years, we were able to gather our wits and institute or reconstitute our own government. The number 2 and number 3 groups pulled together and were able not only to reconstruct the Commonwealth Government but to prepare the formation of a new order, the Republic of the Philippines.

We who belonged to group No. 3 did not have the advantage of the comfort and protection afforded by the new regime while the invaders were still freely ruling this country. Nor did we have the protection of being evacuated to a foreign land plus the protection given by the receding army to the properties and fortunes of those who had been evacuated to Japan. And yet, we who had suffered in the centers of population, especially in the city of Manila, where we suffered most, at least from my personal ex­perience, had to help these people again after the clouds of war had been dispersed and we saw ahead of us our future as clear as we see it today. And we gathered together again, the Number 2 and Number 3 groups, extended to the Number 1 group the amnesty which was necessary to restore harmony and cooperation of the people in an entirely new regime.

And while we have been working hard not only to reconstruct our political institutions but develop our country on a sound basis as the sure foundation of the enjoyment of our liberty given to us on July 4, 1946, we have to grapple again with a new enemy of our freedom in our own midst. These were the people who helped us against the invaders at the height of conflict between the invaders and our own forces and American forces, but later turned against us. Many of them stay in the hills concocting macabre plans to subvert the government we are establishing. But finally we detected who they were, destroyed their organization, and, at this moment, we believe we have been able to cripple their activities.

And while we grapple against these new enemies of our freedom, those of yesterday who were better treated, better comforted, better accommodated, and better protected during the darkest hours of our history try to discredit everything we are now building, everything we are now constructing—as we make of this country not only politically stable but economically secure and going beyond our frontiers to secure regional security in an effort to preserve the freedom that we now enjoy and in defense of the freedom that the whole democratic world is now defending.

The strange thing to me is that those of us who suffered most in the past, those who went to the mountain fastnesses fighting the enemy, fighting to the last soldier at Bessang Pass; and we in the centers of population, rotting in dungeons, caught in the crossfire during the liberation; and those who have suffered most while we were constructing this new Republic—we find no encouragement from those who led a better life during the occupation.

So, I return to my brooding as to what must be the meaning of the decoration now gallantly placed on my shoulders and that citation which has just been read to me, and my only conclusion is, perhaps my fellow sufferers in the past have found a way to give a little bit of encouragement to one who, although not facing the greatest danger in armed conflict, had exposed himself, his family, and his associates in the third group and yet maintained their hope, their courage, and their determination. So, I consider this afternoon’s ceremony, humble as it may be, but solemn as my inspiration because its meaning will finally affect my actuations in the future. I can only express a feeling of deep gratitude because of the encouragement of the joint measure that you, ladies and gentlemen, have given to me this afternoon.

I appreciate the awards from the depth of my heart, and I want to assure you that in the same manner that you have shown effort to defend freedom during the darkest hour of our history, I shall rise from this moment to a higher level of public service and justify the citation and honor accorded me this afternoon, Thank you very much. (Applause)

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library