Speech of Honorable Fernando Lopez Vice-President of the Philippines Before the Manila Police Department

[Delivered on January 12, 1950]

It is a great pleasure to be accorded this opportunity of addressing the Manila Police Department and in congratulating the police officials who have just been decorated for merit in service and devotion to their duties. I am also taking advantage of this occasion to extend my personal appreciation to the Head of the Manila Police Department, Col. Eduardo Quintos, who is today accomplishing his second year in office with a remarkable record that the public could be proud of. My friends, in accepting this invitation to address Manila’s finest this afternoon, I am more prompted by my earnest desire to assist in keeping up the morale of the City police, in the face of the prevailing situation in the metropolis brought about by abnormal episode of the last war. True it is, that criticisms have been aired from some quarters about the police organization in Manila, but I am sure that those critics are motivated by their honest desire to improve the efficiency of our police force on the high plane of constructive and unselfish cooperations. And certainly those constructive criticisms are not aimed at the police organization as a unit, but a few erring individual police officials and policemen.

Members of the Manila police, I am truly conscious of the obstacles and difficulties facing the members of your force, specially as an aftermath of the last war. Handicapped by many barriers and obstacles, and by the small salary that you receive, nevertheless, you deserve the commendation of the public because as a force and as an organization, you have displayed and manifested the true spirit of service to the Manila community, despite the innumerable factors that make the metropolis today the hot-bed of conflicting elements. You have maintained the general peace and order in this busy and over-populated city in the midst of an almost abnormal situation. I am fully aware that the remuneration of the peace officers is not commensurate with the responsibilities and the risks attendant with their mission. However I also hold that firm belief that the policeman in assuming his job has pledged to dedicate his energies and patriotism to the crusade for civic service and not primarily for monetary compensation or financial advantage. Yours is a mission to work for the well-being of your fellow citizens and the community in which you live.

With your indulgence permit me to say something about the qualities that the citizenry expect of the peace officer. Authorities on police matters during the last international convention held in New York last year have approved a set of essential qualities of a good professional cop, among which are the following: He must be a diplomat and at the same time a two-fisted fighter. He must be mentally alert and upright, a two-legged reference library and information bureau when circumstances arise. He must be an all-round law-enforcing agency, a detective, a judge, and a lawyer all at the same time. He must have a steady sense of proportion whether to make an arrest or not. He must be versatility personified to survive in any subject. In uniform or in plain clothes, he must always be friendly, courteous, a good counselor and protector but at the same time holding the symbol of authority. August Vollmer, well-known authority on police administration, has set up standards of a good policeman. He said that an ideal policeman should possess the wisdom of Solomon, the courage of Daniel, the strength of Samson, the patience of Job, the leadership of Moses, the kindness of the Samaritan, the strategy of Alexander, the faith of David and the tolerance of Confucius.

The Manila City Police should be congratulated for measuring up almost to these patterns, although there are secluded individual cases of misfits, inefficiency, bribery and other kinds of corruptions and collusions. It cannot be denied that politics had been injected to a certain degree into the police force, and that the intrusion of political influence have something to do with the standard of efficiency and integrity of our policemen. This should be done away with if we want our government in this City to succeed in the maintenance of peace and order and retain the respect of the public for our constituted authorities. Politics in the City Police Department should be slowly but firmly weeded out if we want our citizenry to have confidence in the government which should not be made part of the machinery of political partisanship and party expendiency.

It is also incumbent upon the public to cooperate with the police authorities because no law-abiding citizen even if he pays his taxes accordingly could say that he is not morally bound to cooperate with the authorities or legally exempt himself from compliance with the regular obligations imposed on all citizens. If a well-to-do or corrupt citizen successfully bribes a police officer, he is just as guilty before the eyes of the public as the policeman he has bribed. Generally, a police officer who has sworn to do his duty, if left alone, is honest and sincere in the performance of his corresponding duties. But when he is invariably tempted by unscrupulous individuals, he opens his eyes and falls into the tempting offers of easy gain measuring the risk he will make with the needs of his hungry dependents at home. In order to erase this unsavory atmosphere in individual cases, the example of honesty, integrity and efficiency in the Police Department should be made by the higher officials in the force. You cannot expect the needy and low-salaried policeman to be upright and honest when the better paid peace officers do not give the examples of morality and integrity to keep up the morale of their subordinates. The general public is also called upon to cooperate with the peace officers instead of breaking down their morale and sturdiness.

Time was when police corruption was considered a disease spreading not only within the City of Manila but to some other important cities and municipalities in the islands. It is to be favorably commended that such disease has been cured at its inception and today we find in Manila a strong organization despite some secluded cases of flagrant corruption and collusion, which may be singled out as insignificant little hills on a vastly smooth plain. The medals and awards which have just been decorated on the members of this organization are fitting tokens of tribute to a service well rendered. Let this important occasion be an inspiration for the entire police institution in Manila to endear and follow. It is gratifying to note that despite the inroads of many disrupting factors, the Manila’s Finest stands as one of the best in the Far East.

It is hoped that in due time we may be able to eject the irritating factors that cause the disruptions in the smooth performance of our police system and that with the helpful cooperation of the public, we may yet have a paradigm of law-enforcing organization not only in the Far East but also throughout the whole world * * * a monumental and indestructible factor in the conservation of a clean, respectable and honest government.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Lopez, F. (1950). Speech of Vice-President Fernando Lopez before the Manila Police Department. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46(1) , 33-35.