Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On the Inauguration of radio station KZFM

[Delivered on October 27, 1946]

This is the formal reopening of the KZFM station, which henceforth will be operated under the auspices of our own government. On the basis of an agreement with the United States Information Service, which established the station, its extensive facilities have been turned over to the Republic of the Philippines. We intend to continue the information service which its organizers have been rendering until recently, this time however centering our attention more on local affairs and news for the benefit especially of our people in the far-flung communities. The present lack of means of communication because of the ravages of war makes it imperative that the government provide a suitable means of disseminating information on the various activities of the government for the benefit of our population.

This is not the first time that the Philippine government has tried to come into closer contact with the people through the widespread coverage of radio. When I was Secretary of the Interior of the old Commonwealth Government, it was my privilege to organize the National Information Board which was similarly dedicated to the organization and healthy development of public opinion in our country through popular understanding of the policies of our Government and an intelligent participation in its various activities. Subsequently the Government acquired and operated a radio station of its own, which prepared and trained our people for the dire emergency of war and which, until the occupation of Manila, steadfastly maintained the morale of the civilian population and instructed it in its duties of national defense.

Now however we face problems which are entirely different in nature if not in importance from the problems which we faced under the Commonwealth and in wartime. As a sovereign people seeking not only our unity and solidification but our internal and external security, we need to keep every citizen of the country in the constant conviction and consciousness that he is, all the time, part and parcel of this community that must struggle hard and indefatigably for our continued national existence and enduring welfare. A spirit of courage and independent self-reliance is not enough. We need intelligent and constant vigilance. That is the spirit which inspires our government—your government—and it is the spirit which should unite our people, especially at the present moment.

The administration is committed to the physical and moral rehabilitation of our country. In the fulfillment of this vital task it needs the coöperation and support of each and every citizen. The people have every right to know what the government is doing and the government has every right to know what the people can do to help the government realize its part of the task. The people have a right to know where the government is leading them and how the government proposes to get there. The government and its citizens must come closer together; they must work as one team if we are to accomplish the tremendous task of rebuilding our shattered economy and recovering our former prosperity and peace.

I should like this station to be the link between the government and the people, between the members of this great national team. Every department of the government will be given an opportunity to acquaint the country by this means with its aims, polices, and activities. By acquainting themselves thoroughly with the manifold program which the government has pledged to carry out in this new national endeavor, I am confident that both in spirit and in accomplishment our people will synchronize their activities with those of the government so that our program of strengthening the nation may be fully realized. I am certain therefore that our people will not only listen passively but actively help to make our history a steady progress toward a happy and prosperous Philippine Republic. To the radio audience now listening to me, I want to tell you that that history is our story, the story of our people and, our Republic, and with your united coöperation and eternal vigilance, we can make it the stirring and inspiring story of a free nation conquering the future.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). Inaugurating radio station KZFM, Vice President Elpidio Quirino broadcast the following speech on October 27, 1946. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 42(10) , 2570-2572 .