Extemporaneous speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Upon his arrival from the United States

[Delivered at the Manila International Airport, February 11, 1950]

My Dear Friends and Fellow Countrymen:

I thank you all for coming to receive me at the airport. Once again you have gone out of your way to show a kindly consideration to your President. Indeed, we almost did not see each other again. The ailment that compelled me to leave the country has nearly snatched me away from you. Thank God, He heeded your prayers and those of friends across the seas that my life may be preserved so that I may continue serving your interests. The distance, the longings, the sufferings and the apprehension of fatal danger have a wonderful effect upon the mind of one who, 10,000 miles away, tries always to remember his responsibilities and obligations to his country. They have caused a strange transformation in me, making me not only closer but more devoted to my country.

After going through the greatest ordeal in my life, I am happy with the knowledge that I am more fit physically and mentally, and shall I not also say, spiritually, to serve my country in every way.

Again I thank you all from the deepest recesses of my soul for your sincere good wishes and prayers that I may thus return to you. I am more determined than ever to devote the remaining portion of my years to your welfare and to the permanent interest of our country.

I come home more confident that I can discharge my duties very much better than if I had not left the country. My 34 days of absence from your midst has given me the greatest opportunity to study more intimately, even from afar, the situation in which our Republic is now placed under the precarious circumstances prevailing in the world, particularly around us.

I have had two occasions, first at tea at the Blair House and another at a conference at the White House, to review with President Truman the various phases of the established relationship between our country and the United States. It was a great opportunity not only to renew old friendships but to make mutual reiteration of loyalty and understanding between our two peoples. I have received assurances of America’s continued concern for our welfare and of effective support in our efforts to secure our economic stability and to strengthen our national security.

I am therefore more encouraged and confident than ever before in guiding the course of this nation for the next four years. I am sure we will not fail in our endeavors if we but concentrate our attention with unity of purpose in the establishment of a life of order, of substance and of security.

Yes, I come home with a new lease of life and with a renewed faith in our future. And I assure you that you have a “renewed” President in many respects. At this, my grateful moment, I ask you to renew with me the faith and confidence in one another.

I thank you.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Extemporaneous speech of President Quirino upon his arrival from the United States. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46(2) , 409-410.