Speeches of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines and Honorable Eleodoro Antenor Vieyra Argentine Minister On the occasion of the latter’s presentation of credentials

THE PRESIDENT’S SPEECH OF RESPONSE

Señor Ministro:

With sincere and profound satisfaction, I welcome you as the first Extraordinary Envoy and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Argentine Republic to the Philippines. Your presence among us is not unexpected, as it is simply the material demonstration of a long-existing relationship, the mutual sympathy and the spiritual affinity between the great Argentine people and ours. Your eloquent and emotional words of greeting, which I have listened to with intimate pleasure, confirm this relationship, not only with the glorious Argentine nation, but with the other Latin American republics.

The history of the peoples of Central and South America is not unknown to us. There is a marked similarity between their heroic struggles to achieve their freedom and our struggles for recognition of our right to govern our own destinies. Hence our affection and admiration for the Latin American peoples, whom we have always considered as brothers in culture, civilization and ideals. The Argentine Republic is for the Philippines an encouraging example, not only for its greatness and progress, but mainly for its strength and solidarity, as well as for its deep faith in its future.

Señor Ministro: You do not need to undertake a spiritual conquest in a people, like ours, whose cordial affection for the Argentine people is as old and deeply rooted as the language, culture and civilization that both countries received from the ancient Iberian motherland. This brotherhood, we hope, will be strengthened more and more as time goes by. What we need is to establish stronger relations in this era of world reconstruction, so that we can contribute to the realization of the ambition of all peoples today to ensure peace and universal happiness. For me, that is the inescapable meaning of your presence among us.

I wish to express my deep satisfaction and joy for this renewed manifestation of friendship from the great people you represent at this moment when diplomatic relations between our two countries are formally initiated. You can be assured that our Government will always be willing to collaborate in everything that may be beneficial to both peoples, in the economic, social and cultural order.

I am honored, therefore, to give you my affectionate and cordial welcome. May your stay in this land be beneficial and pleasant. Please convey to the Most Excellent Mr. President of the Argentine Republic, General Juan Peron, my fervent wishes for his personal happiness and for the prosperity and well-being of the noble Argentine people.

THE ARGENTINE ENVOY’S PRESENTATION SPEECH

Excelentisimo Señor Presidente:

I have the highest honor to express to Your Excellency the deep emotion and profound joy that I experience in finding myself in these beautiful lands after a long journey, representing my country, on a mission of peace and friendship.

In weaving together with all simplicity these phrases necessary for this act protocolar, one of the oldest in international customary law, and which in itself symbolizes the initiation of diplomatic relations between this young State and my country, I have felt the need to move away somewhat from the purely and specifically ceremonial, to approach, with warmth and affection, the spontaneous and sincerely friendly truth, since the evolution of international political regimes has almost left aside the old customs, norms and rites, adjusted and circumscribed to narrow limits, which the events of the century no longer justify.

The Philippines! . . Grandiose set of islands that form this beautiful archipelago, lulled by the majestic Pacific that eternally fertilizes its coasts, and saturated with beauties by the waters of the grandiose South China Sea, which gives its flow to the immense Bay of Manila, unparalleled framework of the gallant Capital of this nascent Republic, incorporated into the set of free nations to follow its destiny, under the sure direction of a government of competent patriots, at whose head is an eminent citizen, Your Excellency Dr. Elpidio Quirino, President of the Republic of the Philippines, with his heart and his patriotic feelings put to the maximum at the service of the engrandizement of the homeland, for the well-being and pride of its people, the purest and most worthy ideal of free men. I know the importance and profound transcendence of this act, of which my country has entrusted me with the distinguished honor of being the executor. I know that for the first time an Argentine young diplomat presents his credentials to the high authorities of this friendly nation, which has known how to win freedom in independence. I know that the sower must know, before all else, the fertility of the field and the means to that end, and that, even so, the fruit of the sowing depends on his plow and his hand.

And like the old conquerors of our lands, who left with their work the spirit, from which the ideas of freedom were born, perhaps against their will, lands they discovered not seeking them, but found them in their epic journey towards the Orient, today I come to these shores, destined for the conquest of the Orient, but not of lands but of the spirit and soul of this other part of humanity, so distant from ours, but which, like all Argentineity, loves the very reason of man, freedom, independence, principle and end for which all the homelands of the earth have been fertilized with the blood of their most conscious, most illustrious children, whose memory we today revere without distinction of place of birth and with one name: HEROES!

The Argentine Republic and the world—know the name of the great Filipino and patriot, Dr. Don Jose Rizal, his deeds—and therefore his immortal memory knows no borders.

We Argentines had the Great Captain of the Andes, General Don Jose de San Martin, forger of the independence of his people and of others in South America with whom he forged an indestructible brotherhood. Our Liberator, called the Saint of the Sword, left us, more than independence itself, the love for it. The love that loves itself in healthy men and peoples, is respected and loved in other men and peoples of the earth.

Excelentisimo Señor: the Government of my homeland, which presides over the Most Excellent Mr. President of the Nation, General Don Juan Peron, has honored this modest citizen and soldier with the leadership of the Argentine Diplomatic Representation that I have the highest honor to preside over, so that he may inform Your Excellency and evidence it in every way, that Argentina, now socially just, economically free and politically sovereign, thanks to the work of effort and sacrifice of our President, crowned by the new constitution that its people in a great assembly has just sanctioned, is not only a friend of the Philippine Republic, but wishes to practice to the fullest the cordial friendship and reciprocal relations. It is my desire, and I consider it necessary to express it plainly, to overcome the functions of a diplomat and to work in community with Your Excellency and your government, so that friendship and links of all kinds, whether political, social, economic, cultural or artistic, and all common exchange of the good manifestations of the life of the peoples, be, for their own benefit, as a symbol of two young lovers of freedom who, even at a distance, seek in close understanding, the most practical and feasible way to help each other in the solution of the problems that may affect them.

Here is my background and my end. Therefore, we could say, my mission is more delicate. The favor that Your Excellency grants me, and the collaboration of your worthy Secretaries of State, depend in large part on the success of my management.

I offer from now on the Argentine Legation to whoever, under our sky blue and white flag, emblem inspired by the purity of the sky, wants to bring or seek with the same purity, the cordial union of our shield, with its right and left hands intertwined.

Excelentisimo señor Presidente de la Republica de Filipinas: I am a bearer of the most cordial and affectionate greeting for Your Excellency, from the Most Excellent Mr. President of the Argentine Republic Don Juan Peron, who prays for your personal happiness and that of all the people of your Great Republic, which you direct so worthily.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Texts in Spanish of the speeches of President Elpidio Quirino and Argentine Minister Eleodoro Antenor Vieyra on the occasion of the latter’s presentation of credentials at Malacañan, at 5 p.m., June 17, 1949. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45(6) , 2439-2442.