Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the Squibb Building Inauguration

[Delivered on December 5, 1953]

I didn’t come here simply to participate in your ceremony to inaugurate this costly building which, according to the information you have just furnished me, all amount to about P3 million. The faith and future involved in the erection of this building is what to me counts most. Your faith in establishing this branch—one of the 95 branches, I think, that you have established all over the world—in the proper and safe development of your business afforded by our government’s protection, inspiration, and encouragement, is a compliment to our government; and your vision of expansion to the extent of exporting Philippine-made products that can well be distributed henceforth from this branch, is another significant point.

Yes, I am responsible for hustling you and your associates so that you may establish this building and stay here, not only because of your desire to develop your industry but in a spirit of cooperation in the economic development of this country.

I was very eager to see the results of our planning for general economic development. We have long wished and have made positive and even constitutional steps to afford protection to foreign capital, especially American capital invested in our economic development in our desire to accelerate our national economy and secure cur financial stability. Personally, it was my ambition to be able to exhibit achievements of my administration in the form of expanded industrial activities which, up to a few years ago, were doubtful of positive results.

We have always been regarded primarily and perhaps for an indefinite period, as an agricultural country. We have to struggle hard and employ special efforts to show that we cannot remain an agricultural country for an indefinite period and that there are possibilities of industrializing this country. In establishing the basic industries, many of which are now completed and in operation, we had nothing in mind except to provide the government initiative to be followed by private enterprises in the exploitation of our industrial resources by making available cheap electric power and by developing the materials that are necessary in industrialization program.

To some extent we have succeeded in establishing those basic industries and, more than that, we have also been able to show the whole world that we have sufficient resources with which to help industrialize this country. It was during the last two or three years that we had to invite technical men, both local and foreign, to scour our own country and examine our soil, our waterfalls, our lakes, our rivers, our mountains, and even our skies in an effort to find out what are the essential industrial raw materials that could be utilized in our program of industrialization.

And, during this period of two or three years, we have been able to gather sufficient data and materials which can now form the basis of a program of industrialization for a known period, not merely as a trial but as an initiative to a serious program of industrialization.

In establishing our basic industries, we thought at the beginning that we should provide not only the requirements that are demanded by present industrial activities of those establishments which were already in operation after the war and even before the war, but also to provide leeway for future expansion in case it will be necessary to expand on the new industries we are going to establish.

I am gratified to have found out that during the last two or three years, we found occasion not only to give encouragement to the industrialists who are willing to take the risk in making investments in this country, but also to inspire in them the response that they have shown, one of which is your company’s response to our invitation.

It is, therefore, one of my greatest pleasures to observe that during the last two or three years, we have not only succeeded in inviting foreign capital to make investments here but have also cultivated the feeling of faith and loyalty to our people and our institutions that have urged them to establish themselves permanently. This is one of the things I will bear in mind as one of those I have been able to succeed in driving home into the heart and soul not only of our local investors but of outsiders, who have found occasion to cooperate with our general economic development program.

This establishment, therefore, stands as an evidence of faith in this government and of your conviction that we can well protect foreign investments and that you found here a people ready and willing and congenial to your respective activities towards economic development.

I therefore feel happy to be with you this evening and to hear reiterations of your faith in this government and the expression of satisfaction over your dealings with the people of this country who, I am sure, are just waiting for an opportunity to cooperate towards our economic stability, with local as well as with foreign investors whom we have invited heretofore.

Mr. Green, I shall cherish and keep always in mind the expressions of faith in our country and faith in my encouragement. This time, it is your encouragement that I need so that we can continue in any other capacity to develop this country economically and financially in order that we can all derive mutual benefits in our association. Thank you very much. (Applause)

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1953). President Quirino speaks at Squibb Building Inauguration, December 5, 1953. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49(12) , 5324-5326.