Speech of the Honorable Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, delivered before the Veterans of the Philippine Revolution

PRESIDENT AGUINALDO, VETERANS AND FRIENDS:

We are here today to celebrate the First Independence of the Philippines, for which our heroes died and watered with their blood. Fifty-one years have passed since '98 when said Independence was proclaimed here in Kawit, Cavite. Unfortunately, our First Republic did not last.

The independence granted to us by America on July 4, 1946, is the reward for the effort and patriotism of brave Filipinos such as Rizal, Del Pilar, Bonifacio and our Aguinaldo, who was continued by our leaders in peacetime like the late President Quezon, President Osmeña and President Roxas.

Our independence now is complete and certain. In fact, the Philippines is now recognized as a nation in the world and a member of the UNO (United Nations).

Regarding the policy of our administration, I can tell you that the first of all is that which concerns the good of the majority of the people. Because of this, regarding agriculture, commerce and industry, I give it more attention because it is the effective way for the laborers and farmers to be lifted from poverty, and to share in the wealth of our lands, mountains, and seas, and also in the benefits of capital; so that they may live comfortably and happily.

Because of your valuable help, I hope that the dream of Dr. Rizal will be fulfilled as he said:

“* * * jewel of the Eastern Sea, With no tears in its eyes, head held high, Not timid and without a trace of any shame.”

That matter cannot be done suddenly. Give me enough time and I will strive to do my best.

Now that we have our own government, our unity and cooperation are necessary. Let us love it because you have a large investment in the country and because of this, it is our duty to defend it against anyone who desires to overthrow the Government.

Let us all unite and love our Flag and our Republic. LONG LIVE EVERYONE!

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1949). The President’s speech in the National Language before Veterans of the Philippine Revolution at Kawit, Cavite, June 12, 1949. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45(6) , 2435-2436.