Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the public rally for the Tenth Battalion Combat Team

[Delivered at the Rizal Memorial Stadium, September 2, 1950]

Men of the Tenth!

You are shortly to embark for the Korean battle front.

I am assured by our experts and advisers that you are the pick of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

To the United Nations forces now embattled there, and by whose side you will fight, you will carry our Government’s, your country’s proof that its pledge is its bond.

To your comrades there you will lend even greater courage by the proof that you will stand with them in their heroic war against that brutal tide of communist aggression—the tide which deliberately seeks to flood all the world, and to overwhelm the freedom of all good men, everywhere.

Yours is a heroic mission. It is also a historic mission. Today we begin to write a wonderful page in our history. Many of you have fought on our own soil to secure our freedom—you now go forth to a foreign land to fight for the preservation of that freedom.

Years before the soil of this earth far beyond our own borders has been enriched by the blood of your brothers who fell in the eternal war for freedom.

The seven seas have embraced the bodies of your brothers fallen in that same war.

Wherever a Filipino warrior has died, there is a bit of the Philippines. You will find such spots in Korea itself, whose free institutions we have helped to established.

But you who are to go now, will be the first to carry your own flag, the flag of your own sovereign nation, abroad in the war for freedom.

Conjointly with the heroic armies of our allies, you will march under the flag of the United Nations. Thus, your battle will be not only for the security of your own people, your own families, but for that of all free men, everywhere on earth, who yearn for peace—but who know that without liberty there can be no peace.

You will hold high your flag, and the flag of the United Nations, with all that loyalty; that courage; that honor which mark the Filipino. This, I know.

I know this—and your people know this—because we know the sources of your valor as it faces the supreme test.

These sources are not alone in the discipline to which you have been trained, and which you have assumed, voluntarily, as free citizens of a free land; not as conscripts driven to the fight.

Your valor springs from something more vital, more permanent—I should say, eternal. It springs from your invincible faith in your own people’s heroic traditions, in their devotion to liberty and to free institutions.

It springs from that faith, handed down to you from generations of your Christian, freedom-loving ancestors—that faith in the justice and the righteousness of your cause, without which life for you, for your mothers and fathers; for your wives and your children; for all who are dear to you—would have no meaning.

On the battlefields to which you go, that faith will be revitalized and strengthened. On those battlefields, your valor will prove your faith—and it will do more!

Your valor will give heart and strength to those who remain behind to tend your home fires.

Your valor will hearten the weak, support the strong, and break down the appeasers, the defeatists—those few among us who tell you that the enemy is too strong.

What you will do in Korea—and your countrymen and I know that you WILL do it—will prove to all the world that this Republic, our Philippines, all of us who are part of it, have the will and the power to survive—to make our own lives as we want them to be, and to keep them that way.

What you will do in Korea will be part of our country’s special investment in world cooperation for peace and freedom.

For if the stage on which the issue between democracy and totalitarianism—between our freedom, and our enslavement—is to be tragically enlarged; if this enlargement will sweep onto the red-lit boards of our own country—then what you will do in Korea will show the world how great a role our Philippines can play on such a stage. The greater our sacrifice, the more respect we will command; the greater our share in the glory of achievement.

Your valor, your achievements, will show that free nations, faced by a common menace of losing their freedom and their civilization, have the will and the strength to join together and to remove this menace forever. But yesterday, as on many other previous occasions throughout our beloved land, our brothers and sisters in Tarlac, Laguna and elsewhere were massacred, raped and plundered by the followers of our common enemy—you have to avenge this shuddering brutality!

It is not for us, who will stay behind, to urge you to be valorous, to be chivalrous, to be strong.

It is rather for you to show us how to follow you in the valor, the chivalry, the strength with which you go forth.

You carry our faith, you carry our hearts.

We will stay by the side of your mother, your father, your wife, your children, waiting for your return. In the old, old days warriors were told to return on their shields. I say to you: Return with this flag, your sovereign nation’s flag, high in your hands!

May God bless you and bring you home safely.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Speech of President Elpidio Quirino, at the public rally for the Tenth Batallion Combat Team at the Rizal Memorial Stadium, September 2, 1950. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46(9) , 4199-4201.