Speech of Honorable Elpidio Quirino Senator of the Philippines On women and the national crisis

[Delivered at the Philippine Women’s University, March 22, 1933]

WOMEN AND THE NATIONAL CRISIS

THE higher education for women is a question over which great minds had fought in the past and even as late as the beginning of the twentieth century. We are still familiar with the objections raised when it was first proposed that we should send our young boys and girls to the same school. It was then the belief that women are not entitled to the same education as men because they perform entirely different functions. The theory was weir established that women’s only sphere is the home. Schopenhauer argued that woman is “not called to great things. She pays her debt to life by the throes of birth, care of the children, subjection to her husband. Girls should be brought up to habits of domesticity and servility.” Thus, before the implantation of our public schools and universities for both sexes, the only secondary schools attended by our girls were exclusively for women. In these schools, the women were taught only those which they were supposed to learn. No doubt, such schools fulfilled the ends for which they were established in accordance with the traditions and the philosophy of the times.

But it did not take long for our women to grasp the spirit of modernism, and co-education was readily accepted upon its implantation in the Islands. Our women educators became so encouraged by the magnificent result that, perhaps, in a spirit of division of labor more than anything else, they have been inspired to establish their own institutions of higher learning more rapidly than their sisters in other countries. Let us cite two instances. The Vassar College, one of the most popular schools for girls in the United States, was founded long after Harvard or Yale was established. In England, the noted Girton College for women did not come into existence until after the famous Oxford College for men was established. The same thing can be said of all the noted modern educational institutions for women today. They were thought of only after colleges and universities for men were long established, and they sprang into being in answer to a necessity. For it is a fact long admitted that one sex cannot remain progressive if the other sex stays ignorant and backward. The efforts, therefore, of our educated and intellectual women to found institutions that would place in the hands of their sex all the benefits of the new and higher education, should enlist both our sympathy and support.

It is an excellent indication that our educated women are conscious of the new demands of our modern civilization. They are anxious to face their own responsibilities with supreme courage and intelligence. Today the higher institutions for women are no longer fighting for their right to teach a liberal education. They are no longer looked upon with prejudice and misgivings. Their right to contribute to the educational progress of the state is universally recognized. As a result, we now look upon our women colleges and universities for the right institutions of the future mothers of this country. Their task is fraught with bright promise and hope. Filipino women have shown ample proof that they possess the same aptitude as that of men in the field of education. It is a fact that 60 percent of our school valedictorians in the co-educational institutions of the Archipelago are women. In the short space of time during which the liberal professions were opened to women, we have produced women of remarkable and exceptional success, as physicians, lawyers, chemists, pharmacists, educators, and even as agriculturists. In spite of the existence of disadvantageous legislation, our women also have won great success in business and commercial enterprises. The possibility of women developing such character and influence as to occupy high positions needing courage, determination and action is exemplified by the appointment of a woman in the Cabinet of President Franklin D. Roosevelt to hold the portfolio of Secretary of Labor, and also by the election of other American women to the posts of governors of their States and members of the United States Congress. These instances point to a new field of service for women, and reveal the great possibilities for the cooperation of both men and women in building up not only the modern home but the new State. We are living in a rapidly changing age, wherein all our ideals and traditions and the stability of our home and our Government are being tested. The attendant problems pertain not only to one single group or region. They pertain to all of us who belong to the great human society. In this period of national crisis, we expect much from the cooperation of our women.

The new education has produced a type of woman different from the convent bred of two generations ago. This new type of woman is not without her host of critics. Her newly gained freedom and enlarged scope of action are viewed in some quarters with pessimism and distrust. There are those who would like to see her still as the artificial product of her environment, a being apart and pleasant to look at, nurtured in the cares of the home, “pictured as an ideal rather than as a reality,” the contamination of the purity and loftiness of whose character being the constant fear of her men protectors. “These men,” a noted writer has observed, “behold in women something higher than sex, something holier than sacrifice; the right to relative justice. Such men see a saintliness in motherhood that transcends natural accident; they acknowledge the sustaining of graces of womanly companionship; they feel its rapture and warmth; they recognize the dignity of her character, the sanctity of her person, and the possibilities of her destiny. They see beauty in her form, loveliness in her ways, and they fancy that they see an aura called divine hovering about her. They see all her rights too clearly to talk of ‘granting her privileges’.” But the efforts of the modern woman to free herself from her traditional bondage and confinement signify not only a revolt of sex but woman’s desire to readjust herself to new conditions. “There is nothing new,” says another writer, “in the fundamentals of the problem confronting women today, which are the same as they have been in time past and will continue to be in the future; namely, adjustment to the world in which they live to the end that life may yield a maximum of satisfaction and development.”

Viewed in this light there is nothing surprising or unusual about the so-called woman movement. On the other hand, to me it appears more greatly desirable that the new type of womanhood should continue conquering her way to the position of equality, with and not against man. It is not my intention to cast a reflection upon the character of the Filipino woman of the past when I say that the Filipino woman of today has become more energetic, more practical and a less sentimental being than her sister of yesterday. This should inspire us with new hopes. In the conditions wherein we find ourselves, the Filipino woman is not only expected but called upon to help us revise our philosophy of national life and invent a new orientation of constructive and practical thinking. We are facing practical problems of far-reaching effects. We need to profit by her experience for actual cooperation. If man is to be the right hand, woman must be ready to contribute in the national planning. With or without independence she cannot minimize her responsibility, simply because she is or will be a wife. The days of Blackstone when married women were said to be under coverture and when “The civil law allows absolute divorce if the wife goes to the theater or public games without the knowledge or consent of the husband,” are now mere recollections. Her acceptance of the sole responsibility in the affairs of the home and her demand for a joint responsibility in the affairs of the State have developed her self-reliance and toned down man’s sense of superiority over her. For in truth, the so-called inferiority of woman is nothing more than an excusable obsession and an incurable weakness of man.

The Philippines is entering upon a new life. The country is engaged today in laying the foundation of its future existence. The opportunity for service is open to all of us. Nowhere in the period of our history has such an opportunity like the present one been offered to every patriotic element of the country to contribute its best thoughts in the formation of a formula that would secure for us our longed-for independence and freedom. To the educated Filipino woman belongs the great responsibility of enlightening her own sex about the new problems brought about by new conditions. Thus, as the modern woman brings up her new-born babe, she cannot escape the responsibility of nurturing and educating it to the new outlook under which it will have to live its own life.

There is confusion in men’s minds over the solution of many of our pressing problems. Old political ties are breaking down as a result of the existence of strong differences of conviction as to whether or not in these days of war and economic distress, it would be to the lasting benefit of our nation to plunge headlong into the world of chaos by accepting racial humiliations with new political and economic fetters, in exchange for a new but empty promise of ultimate freedom, when the fulfillment of the promise is long overdue and should be forthcoming without any restrictions. The dark clouds show no prospect of clearing up as yet. On the contrary the conflict has begun, and those to whom we have looked for leadership all these years seem too hopelessly divided to show us the one clear way. In times of family crisis, we instinctively look for guidance to the father and mother of the home. In this hour, when the fathers of our Government seem unable for the present to show the way, it may not be amiss to turn our eyes to those who direct the domestic affairs of our home for light. The Filipino educated woman, by reason of her greater intelligence and broader background, is called upon to furnish this needed light. May her word be like an angel’s voice in the darkness and confusion!

This is not spoken with the desire to exaggerate actual facts. The spirit of conflict is raging throughout the country. And there are those who would rekindle personal animosities by unjust and puerile recriminations. And if this conflict has not yet pervaded the quietness of woman’s thought, it must be because of her traditional peace of mind and sweetness of character. But if our modern Filipino women are anxious, as I presume they are, to make their influence felt in the settlement of the present national conflict, they must not remain indifferent for any length of time to the present economic and political conflagration.

Obviously, we are witnessing a serious but ill-founded friction between the spiritual and the practical approach of our national cause. Conscious of the existence of a troubled atmosphere in world affairs, we must consider the foundation of our national stability in case earlier independence is granted as a result of the possible rejection of the Congressional Act which is supposed to give us independence after twelve years. Even now, there are those of us who begin to lose faith in the present structure of our spiritual as well as material life. True, an international economic war is making its repercussions felt in our country. Favored by the existence of a free American market for our products, we have enjoyed comparative prosperity at a time when other nations are suffering disastrously with the debacle of the modern economic system. However, this state of relative prosperity is now being threatened by enemies of our products in the United States and we may not long succeed in holding it on account of a determined desire among farm elements in the United States to drive our products out of competition. But what of it? In the days when the country was comparatively prosperous and peaceful, woman was by common consent the sole arbiter of our own home economy. Stimulated by the fabulous markets of the United States, years ago we entered into the speculation of raising exclusively export crops. The result is that we almost neglected the development of other products which are essential to our economic self-sufficiency. Now that times are hard and the demand for our export crops is much less in the American market, we instinctively turn to the old system of home economy for the restoration of our economic prosperity. It is here where the Filipino woman greatly excels. We need her helping hand in this period of economic distress. With her devotion to family life and her extraordinary gift as a business woman and manager of family affairs, let us hope that with the benefit of her new education the country will again regain its faith in the soundness of its institutions and in the security of its future.

You have broken away from the fetters of tradition that confined your mothers and grandmothers to the affairs exclusively of the home. If you are to be worthy of the new freedom that you enjoy, of the rights and privileges that you have wrested from the tyranny of the past, you cannot but feel yourselves called upon to face fearlessly and courageously the problems that confront your country and people. The Philippines today is passing through the most critical period of its existence. Material and spiritual values are both being tested in the crucible of the new nationalism. In hours like this, man turns to woman for inspiration. We do not call upon you for great heroism of deeds. But in the midst of the present chaos, confusion, conflict and general conflagration of ideas and purposes, of base motives and good intentions, of spiritual and material revolutions, we expect the new Filipino woman to emerge, clothed with all the beauty and virtues of her past, like a Joan of Arc, intelligent, energetic, vigorous, with the burning love of country flaming in her heart, giving the unfailing light from Batanes to Jolo and from Baler to Manila,—to illumine the mind and the soul of this suffering country and deliver it from this crisis of crises, so that we may see clear before us, straight and permanent the road to real freedom, to happiness and prosperity.

Source: Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].