Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the Liberal Party meeting

[Delivered on February 25, 1953]

COUNTRY ABOVE ALL

I DON’T know what advice to give you before we take our lunch. I was afraid that if I spoke after everybody had spoken, there would be nothing left for me, considering that there are so many speakers, and they are all in a talking mood. I want to make a few remarks, however, before you proceed with your deliberations not only to welcome the idea of this conference which I initiated, but also to lay the ground properly and adequately for the orderly conduct of this convention in. accordance with the principles which I believe ought to guide us in the discussion of party matters.

When we held our conference last year, we reviewed and freely expressed our views on matters which caused our last electoral debacle. Today, I don’t believe it necessary to bring them up again as they may create only more confusion, more dissension, and perhaps more intrigue.

I thought the time had come for us to have a huddle like a team that has suffered a setback. It is necessary that as members we get together and try a new strategy in playing the next game. Politics is a game and we, as members of the team, ought to know our respective roles. None of us should play his role alone.

When we were given the people’s mandate to run their affairs beginning with the elections of 1946, we assumed a great responsibility. We were imbued with the fundamental idea of reconstructing this country, of building a new republic. The country that we are now constructing is no longer the country that we thought we were going to rehabilitate in 1946. We have gone farther. In the realization of our dreams we became so ambitious that we ceased to depend upon our own collective or party efforts.

We have been caught, however, in a network of confusion and intrigues. Perhaps we have been influenced by our political adversaries who are desirous of dividing’ our party and creating personal interests in conflict with the collective ones, in order to gain a foothold and strengthen their organization while weakening us. We have been dragged into an internal strife that is very hard to heal immediately. It is now necessary to revert to the old fundamental objectives of our party, and remember our serious commitments to the people. Only thus can we maintain our party’s prestige and continue its beneficial service to our people.

Every time we talk about rehabilitation and reconstruction, we forget that in building, in continuing what we built before the war, we began our work from scratch. Remember 1945. We started from 1945. And what did we have then? Devastation, ruins, ashes, the stench of the dead and the morbid news of our sufferings and vicissitudes. That was what we had when we started to hold the reins of government in 1946.

And every time we speak of the present progress of this country we make comparisons between 1941 and after the war. The comparison should be between 1945 and today. If we view the country in that light, you will realize that we have taken wonderful strides, strides that have been recognized by the countries all over the world, countries that have admired us, respected us, loved us and highly esteemed us. The country that we have built is a new country, a new people, with new ideas, new ambitions, new fame, new dignity and new honor.

When we organized our party, we never thought who was going to lead the country — Roxas, Quirino, Lopez, Perez or somebody else. We only thought that the country must be rehabilitated, that it must rise from its prostration and see that the people are taken care of and strengthened, so that we may survive our independence. That was our commitment. Personalities became incidental. We thought of General Roxas at that time because we considered him the best jockey in our race for power and for an opportunity to run this country and deliver it to the next generation in a better, stronger, and more enduring state. And when President Roxas left us, it was my turn to step in his place. But we never thought when we organized the party that after Roxas, Quirino would come, or that after Quirino, Perez, Lopez, Paredes, or Magsaysay, would follow.

We forget that politics is something like a horse-race. We must have a racetrack, we must know the weather, the atmosphere. We must not place everything upon the jockey alone. No matter how good he is, if the horse is not good, how can we win the race? It is this fundamental objective that I want to picture to you now and consider our horse. What is our horse? And who is going to be our jockey? Our horse is the success of the administration. Did it succeed? If we succeeded in the administration, then we have a good horse to ride to victory.

There is no use talking too much, resorting to internecine war, destroying ourselves mutually and delaying or curtailing our activities which have been directed to such fruitful and tangible results that they are now the pride of this party and I hope our people when they come to realize what those great achievements are.

My friends, we have achieved, relatively speaking, economic security. So have we achieved external security. We have laid the foundation of a republic that can last for an indefinite period of time. We have so organized our institutions that we can use them as the basis of national action. It is a strange phenomenon that our internal security is not so stable as our external security. Our external security now is very much better than before the war. We have been able to enter into pacts, and understandings and alliances with countries that can help us defend our country in case of aggression.

The security pact we signed in Washington in 1951 and our understanding with neighbors who signed similar pacts with the United States constitute a network of defenses in this region designed to insure our external security. True, we are not enough to defend ourselves; but we have friends and allies who can help depend us. If we did not enter into these pacts, if we didn’t have these understandings and military assistance, if we didn’t have commitments with other countries powerful and strong enough to ward off aggression in this part of the world, we would be helpless as a republic no matter how strong and happy we are internally. Through such pacts we have been able to insure our security from external aggression.

We have new agencies spreading throughout the country, taking care of the welfare of our people. It is not only the PACSA, but also the PRRM and other agencies that are now activating and implementing our program of social amelioration in every corner of the archipelago, with sufficient money, sufficient technical assistance and, what is more, sufficient enthusiasm, which we never had before, to promote the welfare of the common tao and make him feel part and parcel of this nation. Our concern for the masses has won for us the growing confidence of our people in the government, despite those merciless, irresponsible and utterly malicious talks over the radio trying to disparage and belittle the advances we have made in this direction.

We have laid the foundation of a substantial economic life that is the envy of many of our neighbors. People are coming here to observe how we are conducting ourselves. These new countries in the Orient that come here ask, How did you do this? How did you develop this? How do you provide your people with such facilities to live in a civilized way? These things are our own accomplishments, my friends.

These are accomplishments of the administration: the program of industrialization and the program of agricultural extension, both envisaged in the total economic mobilization program which we have so ambitiously adopted as the watchword of our administration; and, as is well said by the Speaker, they are only the beginning. We are going to inaugurate many of these enterprises and basic industries. We will soon inaugurate some of these basic industries with which to provide our people with the beginnings of a program of industrialization which we hope will bring us success.

But, my friends, while we are engaged in this serious work of laying the solid foundation of our new government and while we have already accomplished much, we lose ourselves in mutual recriminations, in internal squabbles, in political or partisan or sectional differences that are distracting us and allowing the Opposition to capitalize on them. They are small differences — not fundamental ones. In Cebu, for instance, Osmeña would like to dominate the province. Cuenco objects. In Leyte, Torres says, “Well, we are Quirinistas. We should lead the policy of the administration because we won in the last election.” Ribo, the Avelinista, says, “No, we have already combined ourselves. Let us get together, pull together.” In Pampanga, we have two rival colossi — David and Baluyut. What shall we do? Their differences are not fundamental. Party principle or questions are not involved. They revolve around leadership. They are jockeying for influence, for power, in order to win recognition as the leader of the province and eventually of the nation.

These are typical differences among us which I know we can reconcile if we just consider our responsibility to the people and to our country whose cause we have espoused ever since we organized the Liberal party. ( Applause ) Many people believe that the country will be better run by perhaps a man other than Quirino. If that is your choice, I am ready, my friends. All you have got to do is tell me to get out. I will resign. But do not tell me that you can not stay any longer because you are sick, because you have displeased So and So, because people in Cebu or in Leyte don’t support you any more, or that our people have been suddenly disgusted because you have done nothing for them. All these are incidentals in a man’s public life. However, if I am going to be sacrificed at the altar of those differences, credit it to my bad luck. But for God’s sake, do not say that as a member of the party or as head of it, I have not always done my best to promote the general interests of the country. ( Long applause ). I challenge anybody that I have not been able to succeed during my administration in making this country respected and honored throughout the world. ( Applause )

Don’t just cheapen me in the eyes of the people simply because you have not been pleased in your respective provinces and localities, or in your individual desires. You would be giving more importance to human frailties than to our fundamental loyalty to the party, to the people and to the Republic.

I have spoken thus because I feel deeply in my heart. I am telling you this in all sincerity because I have observed that some of you don’t seem to appreciate the honest and humble efforts that I have been exerting. Many of you seem to think that I am a fallen tree and hence you can make what they call in Spanish leña of a man who has sacrificed his heart for the good of the country and for you. I am nothing but a mere incident in this administration. I shall not say that I am a model of efficiency, of honesty, of integrity, of decency, and of honor, but I am willing to submit myself to a test any time that you want to test me on that score.

As I said in the beginning, you are jockeying for positions. If the party wants to win this time, if the party wants to succeed in the coming elections, if the party wants to continue its program of building this country, a task which we have so successfully begun as recognized not only by us but by peoples abroad, let us summon all our selflessness, our love of others and not only of yourselves. You are not fighting for your personal dignity and prestige alone. There is a party, there is a principle, there is a government, there is a Republic that we are fighting for. Let us all submit to those principles and forget ourselves for the time being during our deliberations. ( Long applause ).

Source : Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].