Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the Foundation Day ceremony and his induction as Honorary President, opening the Silver Jubilee of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines

[Delivered at the Malacañan Park, October 31, 1948]

I rejoice in this opportunity you have given me to participate in the celebration of the 25th year of scouting in this country. This movement, which was sparked by private American citizens and supported by all elements in the Philippines, has produced and will continue to produce most gratifying results. No other service has proved so enriching to the lives not only of our youth but also of those who have given it their encouragement.

Since its earliest years in the Philippines, scouting has transcended the limitations of class, creed, and race. It has brought together devoted leaders and servants of varying persuasions on a common basis of cooperation. To advance the cause of boyhood, they have willingly joined efforts, offered freely of their substance, time and thought. I have no doubt that, in forgetting differences in background, belief or circumstance in order to work together for a common cause, they have found the experience itself immensely rewarding, in terms of personal satisfaction and deepened appreciation of the potentialities of human character for constructive citizenship. For scouting as a cause and movement blesses both him that gives and him that takes.

Scouting is a positive force in developing individual self-reliance, community consciousness and neighborly cooperation, and addresses itself to the service and betterment of the most valuable resource that any community and nation can ever possess or boast of—its youth.

It is a tribute to the greatness of the movement that it attracts the best types of our adult citizenry for its leaders and supporters, including respectable, organized groups such as the Rotary Club, the YMCA, the Knights of Columbus, the Catholic and Protestant churches, our public and private schools.

The only explanation for this is that scouting is concerned with the material that makes what a community, what a nation, is—our boyhood. No individual citizen, no organization, that has any sense of responsibility and community loyalty, can be indifferent to a movement that builds and moulds our manhood in the shape and image of the kind of world we believe desirable to live in.

To adult private citizens, scouting thus offers opportunity to serve their community and generation in innumerable ways that challenge and measure their civic spirit and initiative. To them, scouting becomes a voluntary school in the democratic exercise of social responsibility and action. It is their instrument, too, for preserving and nourishing the best of our liberal and moral tradi­tions.

Thus it was that scouting, developing from its English and American origins, has become an integral part of our own social institutions. Thus it was that on October 31, 1936, our legislature formally acknowledged that fact by enacting Commonwealth Act No. 111, creating the “Boy Scouts of the Philippines.” Our Government is, therefore, committed to its moral and material support, although the movement remains essentially the enterprise of our public-spirited private citizens.

If leadership in and support of scouting reflect generously on the adult citizens identified with it, the influence on the boys themselves who qualify for scouting is more far-reaching both on the individuals and on the nation. This influence draws the line between creative and constructive citizenship and individual irresponsibility; and marks the difference between social stability and community disintegration. And it roots more deeply our dependence on the wholesome resources of nature as the base of our physical and moral strength,

When a boy, having taken the scout oath, does his best to do his duty to God and his country, to obey the scout law, to help others and to keep himself physically strong, mentally awake and morally straight, he describes and proves his qualification not only as a scout but as a citizen in a free society. He actively affirms the spirit of the true knight of medieval society and shows by action its validity in a modern community. He defines the boldest, most constructive challenge that can inspire the most generous response in normal, healthy boyhood in every respect, succeeding to the responsibilities of manhood.

I am deeply heartened by the fact that as of today, twenty-five years after the introduction of scouting into this country, we have 163,000 boys who are solemnly commited to that Scout oath. When I consider that the Scout membership in the country rose from 8,000 in 1945 to 163,000 in 1948, I cannot but be profoundly impressed by the rapid development of that national moral force of incalculable social strength which the Boy Scouts of the Philippines represents. For here, definitely, is material of the most valuable kind growing daily in power and scope; here is the stuff we need to build the nation on solid and lasting foundations. In the individual boy scout with his virtues of self-dependence, social sympathy, civic helpfulness, and loyalty to his people and God, we have the making of the exemplary enlightened citizen on whom rest the survival of our country in any crisis and the contribution our nation can make towards the building of a just and decent world order.

Indeed, when we expand this concept of the potentiality of the individual boy scout to the realm of international relations, we reckon with a tremendous world moral force that should raise the faith of all peace-loving peoples. In previous international scout jamborees at which the Philippines was proudly represented, the peoples of the world have been treated to a most heart-warming spectacle of universal concord and cooperation. Boy scouts from all over the civilized world, trained under one all-embracing-code of preparedness for service, have given eloquent demonstration of the practical promise of a united mankind. What a wonderful and subtle lesson the manhood of all peoples presently breaking their head and heart to unite the world can learn from their own boyhood!

We who are past the age for qualifying as boy scouts will do well to look into the objectives and activities of the movement. This is not only in order to understand its service and benefit to youth so that we may help and encourage our own boys to take advantage of them, but also to derive a fresh appreciation of its program for ourselves, particularly with reference to the fruitful use of leisure, the significance of the great outdoors to healthy living, and the spirit of tolerance and discipline and friendly cooperation.

I urge Filipino parents not only to encourage and pre­pare their boys to take up scouting but to enter freely into its spirit and ideals as a measure of preparedness. “Be prepared” is a profoundly wise Scout’s motto. Opportunities upon opportunities slip us by everyday when we are not prepared—opportunities to make real men of ourselves, opportunities to make our home, our immediate neighborhood, our community a more healthy and more stimulating place to live in. A citizen is prepared when, in scout terms, he has health, intelligence, discipline; when he knows his duty to God and his country and accordingly has the wisdom and the reserves of character to fulfill it.

For the critical situation today at home and abroad and for all time and elsewhere, there is no better preparation than what the Scout oath suggests. There is no substitute yet, and I am sure there never will be, for the ample exercise that gives resiliency and toughness to our moral fibre, to our spiritual faith, to our loyalty to our Christian and democratic heritage.

Because scouting provides a practical program for such exercise in the fundamentals of purposeful living and citizenship in everyday experience, it becomes a duty to ourselves and to our country to know it, to advance it, to give it every possible ounce of support. We are grateful to the noble line of far-seeing pioneers who have brought it into active existence in our country. At this moment, I pause to recall in grateful remembrance the name of our great departed friend, Col. Stevenot, one of the most civic-spirited Americans that ever stepped on Philippine soil; our friend, General Lim; and to acknowledge the invaluable assistance, cooperation and leadership of Judge Camus whose influence in boy scouting in the Philippines will surely outlive him in his people’s grateful memory. We should pray for continued vision and keep up boy scouting as a broadening and hospitable adventure in the intelligent and meaningful development of our boyhood from generation to generation—to give our nation the men prepared to discharge the responsibilities of an adult world.

A world of boy scouts, every one of them prepared to do a good turn, would probably be the fulfillment of mankind’s highest dream of the good society. In our own little world, I take courage in the fact that we have the material today for such a society in the boyhood of our country. This group before me is the most impressive earnest of a better order that may be born of the difficulties that beset us at present. We should not too easily dismiss the poet who says there is no night so long but that has its morning. For this inspiring spectacle is a veritable dawn of a new day, entirely distinct from, but definitely more civic-minded and morally and physically stronger than, our boyhood of yesteryears.

Mr. President, I am proud of the honor of being your Honorary President.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Speech of President Elpidio Quirino at the Foundation Day ceremony and his induction as Honorary President, opening the Silver Jubilee of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, at Malacañan Park, at 8 p.m., October 31, 1948. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44(10) , 3779-3782.