Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Upon his arrival

[Delivered at the Manila International Airport, October 11, 1951]

Mr. Toastmaster and Fellow Countrymen:

I think this is not an opportune moment for me to deliver a long speech. I shall simply say in a few words what I have been keeping in my bosom when I was approaching our shores and saw the; great number of people congregated here at the airport this morning, in contrast to a smaller crowd when I left the country 45 days ago. This is an expression of a spontaneous recognition, and perhaps conviction, that after all, my trip was not in vain.

I left the country 45: days ago on a mission of peace and security. It is nice to be back home again with you after being away for so long a time which I did not expect to spend outside of our country. Those 45 crowded days seemed to me a period covering almost several epochs of our history. The realities that I observed are clearly pictured in my imagination. And as I drew the curtain against what I saw and upon reaching home as I raised another curtain to review perhaps! our immediate past and our present, I seem to see unfurled before me varied vistas that will take me time to describe. This and the significance of the events that I witnessed during those 45 days, I shall reserve for the pleasure of describing them in my next radio chat four days hence.

Suffice it to say, my fellow countrymen, that during this period of absence I took advantage of every opportunity to observe and study, and to promote the mutual interest and objective of our country and those of the other countries which I visited. In my trip to the United States, to Spain, and then: to Italy, and even in my short stopovers at Pakistan and India yesterday and the other day, I am positive that I have been able to enhance our national prestige, to make closer friendship, and to meet new friends—thus enhancing our international perspective, broadening our horizon, and insuring for us a life more in consonance with the aspiration and interest of our friends here and abroad.

My dear friends: You all know what transpired in the United States during my stay there. Ostensibly, I just went to, Washington to witness the signing of the mutual defense pact between our country and the United States, after which I went to the hospital at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore, where I stayed fully two weeks, for medical treatment; and general physical examination.

I did not intend to cross the Atlantic. But when I went to New York to wait for the plane to pick me up on my return Hip to Manila, I received an invitation from the Government of Spain to visit their country. Inasmuch as the doctors had recommended that I should take a long ocean trip, for I was pronounced to be weak from overwork and overweight and that I needed rest, I took advantage of the opportunity to return via Spain, taking a boat from New York to Cadiz, and thenceforth return to the Philippines.

I am very eager to join you again in this very critical period of our national history when the very existence of our country is in the balance, because of the respective issues upon which the present electoral campaign are being conducted. And I want to contribute in the enlightenment of these issues and in the choice of men to guide the destiny of this nation.

I was glad I had the opportunity to visit Spain. I think the people of Spain were as eager to see me as I was to see them j and our former mother country. You have received reports of how I was received there, not as Elpidio Quirino but as head of this nation, I am proud to have enjoyed hot only the hospitality, but the warmth and friendship, and the love and esteem of the Spanish people.

In Italy I was proud to have received the high consideration and respect accorded to me as head of this nation, an honor which has never been received by any other person from this country.

On my way home from Italy I touched India and Pakistan, continuing my work of promoting closer friendship and fostering ‘the ties that join our country with these two countries. Although there was no official announcement of my arrival, 11 was received at the airports by the governments of these two nations, with their respective diplomatic corps.

My friends: I can well say, therefore, that with the accomplishments we have achieved in the United States in the signing of the mutual defense pact and our responsible role in the signing of the treaty of peace at San Francisco where we had another chance of furthering our contact with the different nations of the world, we have been able to obtain from that country closer understanding, encouragement, strength, and security.

From Spain, I can’t say that I bring home not only the closer friendship, but also the renewal of our ties with Spain—more love, more esteem, and more sympathy; from Italy, higher respect land greater consideration; from Pakistan and India closer friendship than we have had with those two countries before.

I left, as I said, on a mission of peace and security, and I return home optimistic of our future and confident that our security in this part of the world, at least, has already been made patent in the signing at Washington of the Mutual Defense Pact with the United States.

There is one thing that I want to bring home regarding my observation in Spain. Spain has a great past but her rise in power had been harassed for the last; few years by the vicissitudes and the difficulties that she; had to go through. I have seen how this country has struggled hard to make its present and future stronger and greater than its great past, and yet she does not have the advantage we have nowadays. This fact convinces me that if we concentrate our efforts and pay attention to constructive work, our future will still be brighter than the great old countries—if we know how. I, therefore, came home with a great purpose—to urge you to give more vigor, more enthusiasm, and more concentration of our national attention in the building of our country. This is the only secret of our salvation today.

My pasalubong, therefore, to you, my friends, is for you to set aside defeatism, cast away that whining and moaning over our fate simply because you see something dark in these moments of conflict. If we wish to enhance the interest of our country, we must have more vigor and more enthusiasm in our work, more generosity among ourselves, and greater responsibility for our future. This is my pasalubong to you, and I hope each and everyone does his duty.

When I was in Toledo, I was inspired upon listening to a story about the conversation between General Mascardo who was then defending Alcazar against the Reds who had invaded Spain. It turned out that his son, a 14-year old, was held for ransom by the Reds. Because the Reds wanted Alcazar, which was being strongly defended by General Mascardo, to surrender immediately, they asked Mascardo’s son to call up his father and advise him he was going to be killed if his father would not surrender Alcazar. The boy called up His father and this was the dialogue:

“Father, I am held by the Reds. I am calling you up to tell you that if you do not surrender the fort they will kill me. I call you up to bid goodbye, because I know you have your duty there and I also have mine here.”

The father answered, “All right, my son, let each one of us do his duty to which the boy replied, “Father, don’t worry about me. You have a greater responsibility than I have. Do your duty and I will do mine. I would rather die than have you surrender Alcazar.”

My friends: This conversation appealed so much to my heart, more so because at this moment when we are struggling hard for our national survival, there are still many among us who want to surrender to people who have not done anything for the benefit of this country and this government. Let us not surrender our country, as long as there are men of the type of this young fellow, the son of General Mascardo of Toledo.

Thank you very much.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). President Elpidio Quirino’s extemporaneous speech delivered upon his arrival at the Manila International Airport, October 11, 1951. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(10) , 5061-5064.