Speeches delivered by President Elpidio Quirino and Netherlands Minister A. J. D. Steenstra Toussaint at Malacañan Palace, at 5 p. m., August 17, 1948, on the occasion of the presentation of credentials by the Minister of the Netherlands:

THE PRESIDENT’S SPEECH

Mr. Minister:

I welcome you as the permanent envoy of the Netherlands to the Republic of the Philippine. Your country has played a historic role not only in the development of a system of world jurisprudence with Hugo Grotius as your exponent but, as the permanent seat of international tribunals, has championed the promotion of international peace and security. It is therefore significant that the Kingdom of the Netherlands has decided to send Your Excellency as its permanent envoy to my country in these days when international conflicts are still raging in many parts of the world.

Our two countries can be justly proud of the heroic struggles that we have waged against the forces of intolerance and oppression and for the cause of human liberty and freedom. Filipino and Dutch patriots have made this patent by their eloquent and inspiring record during the last war. Even for this reason alone, there should exist a feeling of closer amity and friendship between us. I am particularly happy to hear the announcement that the peoples of Indonesia “are standing on the threshold of political independence” and that the Netherlands Government has assumed the responsibility to promote and to coordinate all constructive elements in order to form in that country a truly representative government. Having gone through the same painful but fruitful experience, the Republic of the Philippines cannot but be a good and friendly neighbor and will certainly rejoice when the Federal Government of Indonesia will at last find its honorable place amongst the family of nations.

I shall ask you to convey, Mr. Minister, to Her Majesty, the Queen of the Netherlands, and Her Excellency, the Regent of the Kingdom, the cordial greetings and the sincere wishes of the Filipino people for their continued health and happiness as well as for the welfare and prosperity of the people of the Netherlands. I am most grateful for the courtesy and honors accorded me when, last year, as Vice-President and Secretary of Foreign Affairs, I visited your beautiful country. I shall never forget the personal concern and attentions with which I was honored by your Prime Minister, Dr. Beel, and the Netherlands Foreign Minister, Baron van Boetzelaer, to whom I would like to ask you to convey my personal greetings.

I have no doubt that your mission in my country will be a success and that your stay with us will serve to reaffirm and strengthen the ties of friendship, understanding and goodwill which for centuries have existed between our two countries.

THE MINISTER’S SPEECH

Monsieur le President:

I feel very happy that the Netherlands Government, desirous to strengthen the ties of friendship and good understanding between the Republic of the Philippines and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, have decided to be represented with Your Excellency’s Government by a permanent Envoy. In deep gratitude, I acknowledge my appointment by the Regent of the Kingdom and Your Excellency’s approval and willingness to receive me here as Her Netherlands Majesty’s representative.

On presenting my credentials, I may be permitted to recall Your Excellency’s visit to the Netherlands last year. Prime Minister Dr. Beel and the Netherlands Foreign Minister Baron van Boetzelaer, both referring to your visit, have asked me to convey to you their personal greetings.

During that visit Your Excellency will have observed the strong similarity between our two countries in respect to war damages. Both have suffered greatly and both countries are working with energy and determination to overcome the effects of war.

The economic reconstruction, at present well on its way in both countries, has only been made possible by conditions of law and order internally, and close international cooperation amongst friendly powers abroad. It is very gratifying indeed, to observe the good results for both our countries of friendly consultation through the usual diplomatic channels as well as in the councils of the international organizations in which the representatives of the Philippines play such an important part.

Friendly council and good understanding of each other’s needs are not only necessary in the field of economic reconstruction, but as well in the development of a new political order.

In this part of the world, the peoples of Indonesia are standing on the threshold of political independence. The Netherlands Government are responsible to promote and to coordinate all constructive in Indonesia to form a government truly representative of that vast and beautiful country.

The Netherlands Government and the Federal Government of Indonesia are convinced that they will find in Your Excellency a good friend and neighbor, a willing mind and deep understanding for the necessities of this political evolution which will give to the 70 million inhabitants of Indonesia their due and honourable place amongst the family of nations.

In submitting my credentials I convey to Your Excellency, under instruction of the Regent of the Kingdom, the friendship of the Netherlands for the Philippine Republic and the heartfelt wishes for the prosperity of the Republic and the well-being of Your Excellency personally.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Speeches delivered by President Elpidio Quirino and Netherlands Minister A. J. D. Steenstra Toussaint at Malacañan Palace, at 5 p. m., August 17, 1948, on the occasion of the presentation of credentials by the Minister of the Netherlands. (1948). Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44(8) , 2648-2650.