Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On being conferred Spain’s Highest Award

[Released on February 26, 1953]

Mr. Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen:

This solemn act, the first of its kind since I stepped into this Palace, or, since our own Philippine government was established here, is symbolic of the return of Spain to the Philippines. Although in 1951 I had already received the highest honors from the Spanish government and people, particularly from their most worthy leader, Generalissimo Franco, honors that overwhelmed me during my stay in that country so dear to us, today I receive formally the highest decoration that Spain can bestow on a foreign sovereign. The decoration just awarded to me was delivered to me personally in 1951 by Air Minister Eduardo Gallarza on the occasion of his visit here. However it was only shortly before the arrival of Minister Artajo that my government authorized its acceptance and so it is only now, on this occasion, that I can accept this high honor which distinguishes the Philippines from other countries because very few outside Spain have received this decoration.

Gentlemen: I congratulate myself on the success of this demonstration, an evidence of the love and affection of Spain for the Philippines. In. accepting the award, I do so as a token of tenderness and honor bestowed on my country rather than on me personally. I assure you, however, that I will treasure this decoration as an imperishable remembrance not only of the respect and high regard of our people for the Spanish government and people, but also as an eloquent testimony of the personal affection with which Generalissimo Franco honors me.

For a long time now the Philippines has been wishing to strengthen more and more the relations existing between the two countries, both sovereign today; but this occasion is to me the most opportune, because Spain, upon resuming her international activities and seeking outside her borders, along fraternal lines, sympathizers and—why not say it?—allies, of the Spanish government in these days of international turmoil, decided to visit us. Certainly there is no other people in the Orient closer to her heart and more willing to cooperate and coordinate their activities with the Spanish government in its efforts to contribute all that it can to secure world peace than the Philippines, It is really here where Spain deposited all her love, all her affection, and all her interest to cultivate and propagate her culture and language, both of which we have cultivated and preserved not only as one of the most precious legacies of our history, but also as the secret of our cultural and social progress, particularly because it was Spain that nurtured us with her culture, language, and religion, so that we may develop as a civilized and cultured country in this part of the world.

We appreciate, therefore, this honor bestowed upon me and in doing so, I am very sure that my people join me in appreciating highly the great honor bestowed on me on the delivery of this chain. In accepting it, I reiterate not only the loyalty but also the warmest love and affection that our grateful people feel for Spain.

Mr. Minister: I have said that, with you visiting here as the highest representative of the Spanish government, Spain has returned to the Philippines. The poet truly said: “Which love has not returned?” (Deafening applause)

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1953). The President’s speech on being conferred Spain’s Highest Award, February 26, 1953. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49(2) , 462-463.