Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the New Luneta, Manila

[ Delivered on July 4, 1950 ]

WE ARE MOVING FORWARD 1

THE impressive presentation of our increasing civil and military strength which has just passed before us and the lovely panoramic prospect in which we salute the fourth anniversary of our Republic justly find us all in deep commemorative mood.

This neat spacious green on which we stand, these young trees and the trim new skyline of our capital city rising from the rubble and debris of yesterday, the balmy breeze coming to us from our amplest bay and restored harbor, the generous blue heavens above in quiet witness to this dedicative hour—all combine to touch our hearts and enhance our devotions.

In an atmosphere so rich with associations of memorable historic moments in our life as a nation, we feel a powerful surge in our spirits, to voice anew our praise to the Almighty and render homage to the procession of known and unknown heroes who have made this day possible.

We are here not merely to celebrate a glorious occasion for our country and for our race. We meet to renew our faith in ourselves and reaffirm our loyalty to the democratic institutions which we have established.

When President Roxas unfurled the Philippine flag yonder in 1946, the whole world, as it joined with us in celebration, wondered: “Will it stay there?” I am proud, we should all be proud, of the eloquence with which the Filipino people in all walks of life have since responded with deeds and admirable achievements.

The veteran has rejoined his family and resumed his normal calling, instilling in his community a high sense of productivity and security. The teacher is in the classroom to gratify a universal hunger and compulsion of a school enrollment almost double pre-war. The farmer is now producing more than ever before. The industrialist has bestirred himself, developing new industries. The financier is broadening his horizon, investing in fields not heretofore explored and exploited. The merchant has expanded his activities to different countries of the world while maintaining his trade relations with the United States. The miner has returned to his operation, extending his activities even to new fields. The common worker, by proper union organization, is asserting his rights more effectively for the promotion of his well-being and the national economy.

What has the government done on its part? It has implemented the promotion of all other productive activities and construction work with the establishment of the Central Bank, the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation, and other credit agencies. It is harnessing hydraulic power in strategic places to mobilize industries, old and new. It has constructed irrigation systems and is establishing a fertilizer plant to encourage agriculture. It has expanded and mechanized rice production to make this country self-sufficient in this cereal.

By the immediate use of its credit facilities, the government has provided the necessary capital not only for the rehabilitation of our major industries such as hemp, sugar, tobacco, coconut, and lumber, but also for launching a housing program for the low-salaried employees and expediting the reconstruction of homes, farms, and factories.

All these activities come within our government’s total economic mobilization program whose objectives reach far into the future. But already we have gone a good long way in resolving many of the problems that have taxed our people’s resources since independence.

We have evolved a system to enable the legion of our government employees to benefit from their backpay and tide them over to eventual recovery. We have raised the compensation of employees in lower brackets, the enlisted men in the army, and the public school teachers. We have ministered to the needs of the masses with our social amelioration program. We have bought lands for the landless and accelerated the settlement of public agricultural lands all throughout the country. We have created new branch banks in strategic regions, have provided for small loans to needy farmers and for the redemption of guerrilla notes and emergency bills.

Indeed we started with deficits, but these were incurred to meet initial budgetary requirements and extraordinary constructive activities. Thus we have been able to improve the lot of the less fortunate and make capital investments for the construction of more schools, more roads and bridges, more hospitals and puericulture centers, more irrigation systems and other permanent improvements, and the one thousand and one things needed to enhance the people’s moral and material life to a degree even greater than before the war. We have not only reconstructed a country; we are building a new one. We are now feeding a bigger nation and providing for its further growth and permanent existence.

On this day, therefore, as we enter upon the fifth year of our independent existence, we have a confident answer to the anxiety of our people and the possible doubt of the whole world regarding the continued existence of our independent government.

Of course, we have had our share of difficulties peculiar to any nation of our status, size, and resources. True, it is much easier to receive freedom than to achieve freedom, to obtain independence than to attain independence. But we can say that we have not made any retreat from the challenge of these difficulties. We can say that we have faced them manfully, that we have tackled them with courage and vigor, that we have made progress. What can be more heartening than the fact that we are gathered here today in testimony that we have successfully completed another year of freedom, ready to usher in the next, which although more difficult and precarious, is of greater promise?

For we have not allowed ourselves to be demoralized by the patent distortions of our difficulties and the dire predictions of imminent disaster to our Republic and to our efforts to secure its stability and happiness. We have been subjected to an increasing campaign of ill-wishers who are tirelessly drumming up a sense of tension and danger. Happily, they have not succeeded in breaking the will of our civil population to exchange for the complexities of democracy the discipline of the herd. We have not allowed the fears and confusion of partisan politics to undermine our spirit. We have shown that we know our direction and that we are moving forward.

We have become a respected member of the society of free nations. We have assumed international obligations in keeping with our new name and prestige. We have been discharging our commitments in order to advance justice and freedom especially for those who still have to become free.

Believing in peace and in mutual assistance, we have shown initiative in bringing nations in our part of the world to take common counsel in the study and resolution of our common problems. We have helped crystallize the feeling that in the determination of matters affecting South and Southeast Asia, the voice and the will of the people of the region must be considered and heeded.

Born of a background of generous apprenticeship in the ways of liberty and democracy, we have unequivocally aligned ourselves with America and other free nations devoted to liberty and peace and to the protection of the dignity of the human being.

Our Republic is only four years old, but it has taken more, much more, than that to make it what it is today. Behind it is half a century of experience in training for democracy. Behind it is four centuries of Christian culture. Behind it is the memory of a longer racial tradition rooted in sacrifice, courage, and self-respect. It is unthinkable that we should wantonly set all these aside for any system or cause that denies all the moral and spiritual values that constitute our priceless inheritance.

We have just participated in a solemn ceremony of lighting the Eternal Flame on the tomb of the Filipino Unknown Soldier. We have performed a symbolic act of faith in the principles that led our heroic dead to give their lives that our Republic might be born and survive. To every succeeding generation they left the responsibility of service to the nation as a priceless legacy. We cannot be less true to the faith that gave glory to them in life and in death. Every new generation that falls heir to that faith has the responsibility to pass on the torch of devoted service to the next. Without doubt, we of the present generation have the character, the resourcefulness, and the determination to prove worthy of the faith.

We pray today not that we may be relieved of the responsibility of facing our problems but that we may always have the vision to see them clearly, the strength to bear them, the solidarity, courage, and confidence to overcome them.

Because, fundamentally, ours is not solely a problem of survival. We have a mission to accomplish: we have continuously to make democracy work in this part of the world, as it can, and does, and shall work. We must continually show that, as a way of life, it is the richest source of happiness, security, and peace.

We are regarded as the leading exponent of a new freedom not hitherto known in this neighborhood. We must and will unite to measure up to this responsibility. We have been heretofore concerned with strengthening the different arms of the government to stabilize our institutions. Each arm in its zealous effort to give strength to the government seemed to be in a keen race for self-assertion for power and influence. But to be constructive and fruitful we must realize that all this should be coordinated and find integration with the private efforts of our citizenry to strengthen our Republic.

If national unity and solidarity must be given concrete expression, the time is now, when there is a not-far-distant threat to our Republic and national existence. Now is the time for more sober and responsible thinking, for more determination to protect and advance the national welfare, to subordinate personal interest and partisan differences to common cause, in an act of noble and patriotic self-effacement.

I am most gratified, and we are strengthened beyond measure, that representative elements of the nation realize the grave peril that confronts us and are happily closing ranks. Certainly no patriotic citizen of this country has the right to turn his back as we face again a supreme test of our devotion and loyalty to our country. I know that every Filipino, true to his name, will do his duty. This is the burden, this is the special meaning of our Fourth of July this year.

Footnote:

1 At the New Luneta, Manila, July 4, 1950.

Source : The Quirino Way: Collection of Speeches and Addresses of Elpidio Quirino