Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before conferring the Rank of Commander-in-Chief of the Philippine Legion of Honor on Generalissimo Francisco Franco

[Delivered at the Ritz Hotel in Madrid, October 7, 1951]

Before, we begin this modest banquet which I ask you to accept as an expression of my heartfelt gratitude for my having been the object of innumerable attentions and courtesies from the Spanish Government as well as from the Spanish people during my brief sojourn in Spain, especially in this enchanting city, I wish to make public acknowledgment of the warm and sincere affection shown me by an entire people, something I have not found in any other part of the world.

The long and thick rows of men and women who sallied forth to greet me everywhere with such fervent and spontaneous enthusiasm could come only from a people who love the Philippines, because I know that in entertaining and honoring me beyond measure Spain was but honoring and entertaining the Filipino people.

From His Excellency the Generalissimo to the humblest man in the street, all Spaniards have shown their fondness open and without reserve for the Philippines and the Filipino people. This has a symbolic meaning for me that is at once vital and patent.

My visit has therefore sealed the lasting friendship of our two, countries.

Once more we have contracted a spiritual and moral obligation. The Philippines from the crossroads of the Pacific, and Spain from this zone towards which the eyes of the world are turned today, will undertake a task that will weigh in the scale of international values because they will be two forces that will work in common to maintain universal peace and understanding.

Illustrious Leader: Allow me, as a proof of the respect, gratitude, and admiration of the Filipino people, to confer upon you in their name, a citation in recognition of your great personal merits as the august chief and representative of the Spanish nation.

CITATION

[Read by Ambassador Manuel V. Moran]

“Because of your genuine patriotism and unfaltering devotion to the cause of a closer spiritual and cultural union between your people and the Filipino people; because of your persevering work as Chief of State for the attainment of the stability of your nation in the midst of so many and so serious economic difficulties besetting the world; because of your constant efforts to guide your people’s thought towards a constructive nationalism and to dedicate your energies to the task^ of peace; because of your firm and untiring patronage oil Spanish arts and letters which have again awakened among the Filipino people their interest in their old mother country with whom they are united by unbreakable ties of religion and human gratitude; because of your noble and unconditional adherence to the ideals of Christianity which have kept Spain as the standard of faith to inspire and, guide faithful humanity towards the loftiest objectives of moral integrity; because of all these considerations and in testimony of the respect and esteem of the Philippine government and people, I hereby confer upon you the rank of Commander-in-Chief of the Philippine Legion of Honor.”

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines before conferring the Rank of Commander-in-Chief of the Philippine Legion of Honor on Generalissimo Francisco Franco at the dinner he gave at the Ritz Hotel in Madrid, on October 7, 1951, in honor of the Generalissimo. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(10) , 5060-5061.