Speeches of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines and Italian Charge d’ Affaires Vittorio Strigari On the occasion of the exchange of the instruments of ratification of the Treaty of Friendship between the Philippines and Italy

THE PRESIDENT’S SPEECH OF RESPONSE

Sir Strigari:

I am happy to have been able to put this in final form thus solemnizing the friendship between Italy and the Philippines.

One of my fondest recollections in my recent trip abroad when I went to Europe was the day when I was able to sign the Treaty of Friendship with Italy in Rome on July 9 last year with my good friend whose friendship I appreciate and whom I admire for his charming personality and high prestige in the Government of Italy, Count Sforza.

Long before I signed this treaty with him I already had had a feeling that Italy was always close; to the Philippines. As a matter of fact Rome is the symbol of our spiritual aspiration. With His Holiness residing there, our people have always regarded Rome, and for an endless period to come, as our guiding spirit in life.

When I found time to sign the Treaty of Friendship in Rome with Count Sforza, having seen at a close range the reconstruction of the world as a necessary aftermath of the world war, I thought then that perhaps because Italy and the Philippines had suffered almost identically and simultaneously the greatest of all sacrifices, it was time for us to rise from our own prostration and that in a practical work-a-day world we must find a basis of cooperation, our problems of reconstruction being identical in nature and urgency. One of my happiest moments in that trip was to be able to sign the Treaty of Friendship with Italy.

Today, as we exchange the instruments of ratification of this Treaty of Friendship between our two Governments, we reiterate again the admiration and acknowledgment of the Filipino people of the spiritual guidance of Rome and of the mutuality of our interests. What I have just said comes directly from my heart. “Amor con amor se paga.” On that basis, I think we can work of at our own future in the spirit of mutuality, cooperation and goodwill.

Mr. President:

It is the happiest and most successful occasion of my career, this ceremony of today for the exchange of the instruments of ratification of the Treaty of Friendship between Italy and the Philippines.

What we have laid today is the foundation stone of an edifice, which in the views of Your Excellency and of the Italian Government, shall be solid and permanent.

The foundation stone is solid because this Treaty is loyal and sincere when it records our mutual pledge that there shall be everlasting peace and friendship between Italy and the Philippines. We are two republics, both profoundly Catholic, both truly democratic and both protruding towards the same ideals of Peace, Justice and Freedom in the world, without any political friction whatsoever between us.

Today we have asserted a basis of common ideals, tomorrow we have to build upon it a network of mutual interests and real collaboration.

It is only in intensifying our trade exchanges and our cultural relations—it is only fighting together our political battles for Peace, Freedom and Justice in the world that these premises laid down today will be really implemented.

Italy and the Philippines. It is a cause for real emotion to us Italians to find here—so far away—at the limit of Asia—a people of Latin culture, of Roman Catholic religion, of the same ethics and family ideals, who can rightly claim to belong—by historical evolution and elective affinity—to the great family of Latin peoples, descending from the same ALMA MATER.

And it appears quite clear that the intellectual and moral preparation of the Latin culture, is the main characteristic which has made the Philippines so progressive, so outstanding—and, let’s say: so steady and happy today, among the present turmoil and decadence of the Asiatic world.

And now, in concluding, I would say one more thing. How should we behave for the implementation of this pledge of friendship between Italy and the Philippines?

Mr. President, you have already defined what cur mutual attitude should be and I will recall your exact words, which I would like to put as an emblem of our friendship.

One day, visiting Your Excellency for the usual routine matters, I couldn’t help but say: “Mr. President, it is a fact that every time I come to see you, you always find a way to confirm to me—with your kindness and cordiality—that the friendship between Italy and the Philippines is not a vain word.”

Your Excellency did answer:

“I have been to Italy; I have appreciated your country and the friendliness of your people towards the Philippines. And as an old proverb of your country says:

“AMOR CON AMOR SE PAGA.”

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Speeches of President Elpidio Quirino and Italian Charge d’Affaires Vittorio Strigari, on the occasion of the exchange of the instruments of ratification of the Treaty of Friendship between the Philippines and Italy. (1948). Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44(12), 4805-4807.Speeches of President Elpidio Quirino and Italian Charge d’Affaires Vittorio Strigari, on the occasion of the exchange of the instruments of ratification of the Treaty of Friendship between the Philippines and Italy. (1948). Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44(12) , 4805-4807.