Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the launching of the Community Chest Campaign

[Released on October 31, 1952]

Dear Friends:

I am glad to participate in this ceremony launching the Community Chest campaign of the year.

No cause better deserves the generous support of all our people. The civic, charitable organizations deriving direct benefit from this campaign are established community institutions, most of them with a long history of generous community service under the most trying conditions behind them.

In previous years, they individually conducted their fund campaigns. It has been rightly felt that these campaigns could be carried out with greater economy of time, effort, and expense, not to say greater convenience to established contributors, if they were coordinated under one cooperative direction.

A decision to this end was made three or four years ago, and I had the privilege of launching the initial drive in Malacañan. The wisdom of that decision has been increasingly felt since.

I, for one, rejoice in the fact that our welfare people who are in perennial need of funds are putting more system, more real scientific planning and direction in the conduct of only one annual campaign to cover the requirements of all these civic and charitable enterprises.

The program of systematic giving to these enterprises is the resulting development of our spiritual philosophy as a people. The inescapable necessity of setting aside a portion of our substance for voluntary assistance in the cause of these institutions has become an integral part of our social system and way of life.

This matter of giving is not so much a duty as a social privilege that it should, be our pleasure to use. It is not only more blessed to give than to receive, but it is our special good fortune that we always be in a position to give.

As an exercise in social compassion, it gives us the opportunity to develop the humane feeling which sets us, or distinguishes us, from other breeds and entitles us to the amenities of civilized and Christian living.

Our life acquires meaning, significance, or importance according as we take advantage of every possible occasion to share what blessings we have to make it possible for others to enjoy the benefits of decent, responsible community life.

I do not see how any life can be valid without the acceptance of the responsibility imposed by the possession of a generous measure of earthly goods by the grace of Divine Providence.

Let us not, therefore, stint in giving our portion to the community chest. To give adequately is to assume an obligation to insure the well-being of the community, without which any individual would find it awkward to enjoy his fortune.

It used to be said that we must give and give until it hurts. I think it is absurd to think that giving hurts at all. Wise giving will always bring dividends—in terms of personal satisfaction and the maintenance, not to say the advancement, of the common welfare. Wise giving enriches him that gives and him that takes, and confirms the beauty and wisdom of that sacrifice which found the supreme expression when the son of God and Master of Man gave His life that humankind might find ultimate redemption.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1952). The President’s speech at the launching of the Community Chest Campaign of 1952, October 31, 1952. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 48(10) , 4330-4331.