Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the Thanksgiving Day for returned 10 th BCT men

[Released on November 29, 1951]

Men of the Tenth

Before you left for Korea I personally delivered to you our nation’s flag with instructions to return with it high in your hands.

You have returned holding high that flag as a symbol not only of your country’s honor and prestige but also of freedom and democracy.

Your heroism in Korea’s battlefronts is the first record of Filipino valor exhibited outside of your country under the banner of the United Nations. The epic of Bataan and of Corregidor has given us a respected name in the defense of our country’s right to be free. Henceforth your valor and gallantry in Korea will give us another name in the defense of the world’s right to be free.

Our people and the whole world will long remember with great gratitude your noble adventure and the success of your mission in Korea. What you have done in Korea, we have done at home.

We who are left behind have also achieved a new record in our political history. You fought for freedom and democracy outside; we fought for the same ideals at home.

What you have accomplished utilizing the bullet, we have accomplished utilizing the ballot. You lost lives in your fight, we here lost positions and sacrificed party interests on the home front.

But your victory and ours are identical. We both fought for democracy and won our battle.

Your victory in Korea is glorious; it cost lives and blood. We did our job at home without sacrificing a single drop of blood. This was the only election in our history in which no life was sacrificed on election day.

In one well-known municipality alone in my own province where in every election there had always been a loss of one or more lives, there was not even a fist fight on the record in the last election.

In a truly democratic process we saw to it that throughout the country our people in the provinces and cities as well as in the municipalities and the remotest barrios, even where the dissidents roamed, were given the opportunity to vote freely and peacefully. I do not say that they all voted correctly, but certainly they were absolutely free even to commit an error. That is democracy’s concomitant.

We have achieved this national feat because we were determined to make the issue of democracy supreme.

There was no attempt on the part of your government and even your people in general to use to advantage whatever force or influence could be imposed to control the popular will. We decided to make a bold sacrifice in the name of democracy.

Yes, in doing so, some of us may lose political favor or even friends but we have gained and established a greater prestige for our country and people in the practice of democracy.

We celebrate this day, therefore, with two-fold meaning—a National Heroes Day and Thanksgiving Day, a day dedicated to the heroes of Korea, and as the birthday of a vigorous democracy in the Philippines. Both in a foreign land and as well as in our native land we did not only enthrone democracy in our hearts but implemented it and fertilized it with our blood and with our soul. We thank God today for what has been accomplished with His inspiration and guidance, with His blessing and protection.

At long last our people now know the best procedure not only to preserve our democracy but to correct practices inimical to its ideals through the free expression of the popular will peacefully committed to the ballot box.

This is a lesson to those who would use force to impose on our government institutions, corrections or improvements in our way of life as a people. There was no need to terrorize the people in outlying districts, nor to commit pillage and murder and all sorts of crimes, to impose on our people and government the reforms that ostensibly constitute the battle cries in the campaign for change or reforms.

We can achieve all these by freely exercising our right to choose the kind of government or program of action that we want through the ballot box. It is more economical and orderly, and the result more lasting, when we resort to this periodic expression of our desire at the polls. It is the only practice in keeping with our ambition to continue our independent national existence as a democratic people.

So, while your brothers in Korea and elsewhere in the world continue to struggle for the ideals of freedom and democracy for which you were ready to give your lives, let us pledge anew at this momentous hour to continue the struggle on our own soil in peace. I beseech you to join hands with the forces of your government in order to restore the tranquility of our people in the same spirit of devotion and dedication to the ideals for which you fought in a foreign land.

In your homes, among your folk, everywhere, transmit the spark that kindled your hearts to patriotic sacrifice. With your noble example help us free this country from the senseless internecine conflict that is retarding our country’s progress and prosperity. Help us prevent this country from disintegrating and being delivered to the enemy you have so valiantly fought on foreign soil.

Your proven love of country and loyalty to our cause now make you the admired leaders of a grateful people, the heroic defenders of your country’s permanent interest and happiness.

Members of the 10th, I salute you. You have left as warriors; may you have returned as saviours!

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). President Elpidio Quirino’s speech at the Thanksgiving Day for returned 10th BCT men, November 29, 1951. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(11) , 5592-5592-A.