Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On the anniversary of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines

[Delivered on October 31, 1950]

Fellow Boy Scouts of the Philippines:

This is one of the proudest moments of my life. I accept your award of the medal of the Silver Tamaraw with genuine gratitude.

By this token, you have perfected my qualifications as a member of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines; you have placed me alongside the noblest and most heroic boy scouts not only for our country but also of the world.

You have classed me with our most beloved boy scout, Judge Manuel Camus. You have elected me to be on the same aisle that our most distinguished boy scout and friend, Colonel Joe Stevenot, had graced.

I thank you from the depths of my soul. You have given me new strength, new faith in my resolve to measure up to the dimension of the true boy scout that I aspire to be—a true friend to every man and beast— ever considerate, ever helpful, and, above all, ever loyal to his fellow-men and his country.

At this proud moment of my life as a private citizen and as head of the state, I wish to enlarge on the boy scout’s virtue of loyalty.

To yourself be true, it has been often said, and it shall follow, as the night the day, that you cannot be false to any man. Sooner or later, your real self will manifest itself.

To yourself be true —in other words, be yourself; be your best self as God has chosen or ordained you to be.

I say that to myself every time I am tempted to be somebody else that I am not and never can be. Often in my supreme moments of anxiety to measure up to my great responsibility to the nation, it has been whispered to me, even shouted to me by my neighbors and fellow citizens, including my own well-wishers, with varied motives: be like Quezon, be like Osmeña, be like Roxas.

My friends, I challenge any fellow citizen, any Filipino, who claims that he entertains greater pride and admiration for these immortals of our race. I yield to nobody in revering them for their greatness and in loyalty to the incomparable spirit of service they have rendered to their country.

But I submit, because I know, that I can only be Quirino, not Quezon; only Quirino, not Osmeña; only Quirino, not Roxas. Within my limitations, as Quirino, I can only strive to emulate the industry, the courage, the faith, the patriotism of these great man and distinguished countrymen.

I am compelled to be Quirino only and no more nor less, and as Quirino I shall accept the measure and ultimate judgment of my fellow boy scouts and fellow men. I would not be true to my best self if I tried to be somebody else. I would not be true to my neighbors if I attempted to be that which I am not. Nor would I be true to my country and my God if I pretended to pass for something that I am not.

The seed of betrayal in any man’s heart is planted when ambition becomes presumption, when presumption becomes pride, and when pride suppresses or rejects the compulsion of self-respect simply to gain primacy and impose power over others. The good Lord and Almighty spare me and spare any fellow boy scout from such an ambition.

These are times that try our loyalty to ourselves, to our fellowmen, to our country. I can find no better insurance against the tragedy of betrayal than the boy scout code of honor which commands him to be true to his best self—the self that forgets itself out of consideration and in service for others; for what matters if you are sacrificed at the altar of public duty?

All I would ask is: pray for me, fellow boy scouts of the Philippines. Pray that I shall remain true to myself in order to be always true to my fellow men, to my country, your country, our country!

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Speech of President Quirino on the anniversary of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46(10) , 4810-4812.