Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On the occasion of the birthday anniversary of the late President Manuel Roxas

[ Delivered over a national radio hookup from Malacañan Palace, January 1, 1949 ]

The country marks today the first birthday anniversary of our first President of the Republic since his unexpected passing nine months back. But for an inscrutable stroke of destiny, he would still be with us today in the flesh to share our New Year greetings and our humble tokens of joy and grateful affection upon his achievement of another milestone in his exclusive dedication to the service of our land and people.

In keeping with the spirit of this day, he would likely chide us if we were to spend it hanging crape. I like to believe he would rather have us ponder the opportunities that remain ours, to keep on where he left off in working for the happiness of our country. I like to believe also that he would rather have us count our blessings for having had the consecrated leadership such as he and others gave our country in the past so that we might measure against them the responsibilities that are ours, to prove worthy of the heritage they left us and to enrich it for our children. And it would not be improbable he would prefer that we express our loyalty to, and affection for, his memory in terms of positive and concrete action to fulfill the ideals behind the program of service which was the breath of his life.

It usually takes years before a people can give a definitive measure of the greatness of its men. But President Manuel Roxas’ place in the roster of noble men and women produced by our country is secure. His rich and varied contribution to the cause of our country’s freedom and happiness is acknowledged by all. Our country need not wait to be told he was among the greatest of our great.

We who knew him well may now report our varied reactions to the direct impact upon us of his dynamic character and spirit. We can recite our obligations to him for his having been with us and of us.

Two days before he was stricken and snatched from our midst, he, by some uncanny prescience of what was in store for him, spoke of his thoughts on his graduation day thirty-five years back at the University of the Philippines—of remembering Shelley’s lines about being “. . . . a billow in the crowd of Common Men, that stream without a shore, that ocean which at once is deaf and loud.”

He recalled that on that day he determined to devote his life to the achievement of liberty and happiness of his countrymen.

“I have never swerved,” he said, “from that course. I am still engaged in the task of securing the greatest good for our people. In its performance I had to face quite often the bitterest struggles and the keenest tests of heart and soul. I have reaped neither riches nor material gain, but as I look back to the years that I have lived, I feel happy that I have throughout been loyal to my purpose and have not deviated in the least from the high resolves I had formed on graduation day.”

Roxas was addressing his Alma Mater as though making a final accounting, which in effect it was. He did not know it to be so, but no one who has lived with him, worked with him, struggled with him, fought with him can say that the faithful alumnus could not have been more honest.

It was a humble affirmation that shines with honest pride, It was a summation to which every student of Roxas’ life from now would have to turn every so often as the final frame of reference in estimating his stature.

Roxas felt the call to the service of his country and heeded and pursued it as few men could and did. Roxas labored for his country as one consecrated and inspired. He had to be, to achieve the success he did, starting from the humblest opportunity of service. He had the heart of an evangel, and men were but to hear him to catch his flame. The voice is now still, but the inspiration, the eloquence, is still there in his messages to his people, compounded of the tears, the sweat and the keenest wisdom that come of grueling experience in the service of his country.

People have remarked on the practically olympian indifference with which President Roxas regarded every manner of threat or menace to his political fortunes. And they have often wondered at the secret of his serenity and assurance in the face of the bitterest personal assault and revilement. I think I can hazard a guess. It is that he had incorruptible integrity and his dedication to the public welfare irrespective of politics was absolute and secure. It is also, in addition, that he had confidence in the patriotism and intelligence of the people. For the people, according to him, is not composed only of an active and vocal minority which criticizes the government every time the government touches its pockets. His watchword was to be never afraid, and to have faith in the sense of justice, in the patriotism of his countrymen.

The reverses that Roxas met in his career of service would overwhelm lesser men. Roxas rode them out and made himself well-nigh invincible in spirit. They were the price of leadership and he did not grudge to pay.

Thus it was that in the most difficult period attending the emergence of our people as a free nation, he was prepared to give us the vision, the discipline and the morale to rise to our tasks of rebuilding from the ashes of war and the moral debacle which was not only a national but a world-wide affliction. What Roxas contributed to the fight for our country’s freedom alongside other stalwarts like Osmeña, Quezon and others assures him a definite place in the gratitude and affection of his people. Greater still was the measure of faith and courage, the sharp vision and superb generalship with which he rallied the people to stand on its feet and accept the responsibilities of liberty, providing it the basic chart with which to follow its rough course to its destiny.

He was a strong man for a distracted day. He brought morale to a depressed people. He picked the loose threads of a nation’s spirit and wove them back into an orderly pattern of courage and confidence.  The amount of public obloquy he suffered in his life was surpassed only by the public affection lavished upon him in death. He proved in his case that a people could only be most cruel to one who passionately loved it.

His faults arose from the simple humanity that moved his heart in the discharge of the sternest duties. They are essentially the faults of men strictly reared to the standards of abiding democratic traditions—in which human rights and human values take precedence ahead of all other things.

He had the gift of inspiration and eloquence. The power lay in the depth of his feelings, the greatness of his spirit, and the clearness and breadth of his vision.

It will be our lasting tribute to the spacious range of his vision and sacrifice, to the largeness of his heart and spirit, to treasure the wisdom of his words and to measure up to the challenge of the program of development he left us, the supreme touchstone of which is the welfare and happiness of all our people.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Speech of President Quirino on the occasion of the birthday anniversary of the late President Manuel Roxas. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45(1) , 178-181.