Extemporaneous speech of His Excellency, President Elpidio Quirino, at the Loyalty Rally of the Philippine Government Employees Association, Rizal Memorial Stadium, July 28, 1950:

Fellow Members of the Official Family, Ladies and Gentlemen, and Friends:

I wish to express my deep gratification over the elevating spirit that has brought us together on this spot this afternoon.

On rare occasions, if ever in the past, has this big bulk of public servants of the Government been together to re-dedicate themselves to the principles of Democracy and Freedom and to loyal, faithful compliance with their duties under the Constitution and to pledge their utmost that is the discharge of their respective duties in the Government they will so conduct themselves promptly and courteously, serving our people without fear or favor, unto their best ability as decent citizens of this country.

In the past we have seen groups of civil service employees parading in the streets or in front of big offices, especially the Executive building or the Legislative building to demand benefits for their class, or to secure justice or relief from injustice.

What a contrast today. You are gathered here this afternoon not to demand any right nor to express any grievance but to reaffirm your faith in the Government and to express your loyalty to a government of which you are a part.

There is no better occasion than this for all of us to realize our great responsibility at this supreme moment. In the past, we were led by our political leaders to whom we gave almost our blind support because they were fighting for something for which we had struggled for centuries to obtain—our freedom and independence. It was easy then to employ the means of persuasion alone in order to unite the whole population and present a solid front in the strug­gle for freedom.

But the situation today is different. Once that freedom and independence has been achieved, our next work now is to maintain that freedom and independence so that we can continue enjoying its blessings for ourselves and for our posterity.

The first required leadership is thought and action, or inspiration and persuasion. The second requires leadership that will make us work and fight to maintain that freedom and independence. The first was simply inspiring; the second is thankless and tiring. We need now a great amount of cool calculation, of vision, of sacrifice, of hard work. The leadership of the past has been succeeded by the statesmanship of the present.

I shall never look again to the next elections as far as I am concerned we shall look farther than the next election, or the one after the next. Our mission is to build and build and build. And when a man is asked to work, dig and build, you cannot make him work simply by inspiration or persuasion. There is something practical something more important than being inspired that would move man into action. And that is the reason why it is difficult during this moment to employ spectacular appeals to the masses, to compel them to action in order that we may be able to maintain the freedom and independence for which our forefathers fought for centuries in the past.

I have always thought and it is my conviction that this bulk of the civil servants before me today constitute the peak of the pyramid of power and influence in the country. It is this bulk of the population that gives life and soul to the Government, and for that matter, the Constitution.

You are the ones that go out, after making your calculations in your offices, applying your trigonometry and logarithms to measure the field, to locate the wealth, to map out our potentialities and come home and prepare the blueprint for our economic development. You are the ones who go out to collect taxes, to teach our children and even our adults. You go from province to province, from municipality to municipality. You are the brain and brawn of this Government. Without you as the cog and wheel of the Government, the machinery cannot function properly. And it is for this reason that, having come from your class, perhaps in a more modest beginning than you have started in the Government, I realize how as I look from a higher plane that this class must be given its proper place and importance.

This gives me occasion to recall that all such measures that have recently been approved to improve the lot or to ameliorate the position and future of this class of employees have been approved, and have been accomplished during my time with you in this Government.

I shall not lay exclusive claim for the credit for having approved the backpay law, or for the increase of the minimum salary of employees of the Government from ₱40 to around ₱100, and the salaries of enlisted men from ₱25 or ₱30 to ₱50, and the improvement of the salaries of the school teachers and the increase of wages of the laborers in many instrumentalities of this Government which has encouraged even the private institutions to follow the example and thereby generalize these benefit in our country.

That we have not approved in the last session of Congress the social security bill providing for insurance of the employees of the Government was purely due to the lack of available funds to make the system work. Don’t tell me that I have no interest in you. Don’t tell me that this Government is not doing anything for the so-called downtrodden, humble, neglected, and discriminated against group —that group in the lower bracket of our Government. Who is responsible for the carrying out of a social program, extending relief not only to government employees but displaced persons of the communities harassed and embarrassed by the dissidents, those who in the far-flung communities are suffering because they have been separated from their relatives who cannot give them support and assistance in times of strain and stress, giving them food, shelter, medicine, schools and bridges?

This only happened, I am proud to state and assert, during my administration. I repeat, I shall not make political capital of this because I am no longer asking anything for myself. All I want is that the lot of the people whom I have served in this Government may be so improved that they too can enjoy the benefits that they have been trying in the past to obtain.

Four or five years ago, on this very spot where we are now gathered, we saw the bloody encounters of our liberators and our invaders. All around us was then ruin and devastation. And yet, as we recall that soul-inspiring epoch in our national history when we had to fight for our independence and freedom, we are again to contemplate at a distance, not a very distant place, the spectre of death and destruction caused by the war that broke out in Korea a month ago. We are still healing our war wounds and are still rehabilitating our country so cruelly devastated, and yet we have to prepare again for another, perhaps a more bloody debacle, which I wish we could prevent from extending its influence and converting this country again into another world battleground.

But, my friends, the verdict of history is not in our hands. The trouble that is now driving the countries of the world into a more serious conflict than in the past, is not our own responsibility. But whether we like it or not, as I said on another occasion, and I want to repeat it today, our people and our Government have a stake, a definite stake in the Korean war. Democracy has a stake in it. World freedom has a stake in it. And you and I, individually and collectively, whether we like it or not, in one way or another, will be affected or involved. Shall we fold our arms in contemplation of that impending spectacle of death and destruction again? That is the question of the hour.

Our Government has made a commitment not only to the United States but to the United Nations under the treaty and agreement that we have signed in the past and because of our membership in the United Nations Assembly. Under this treaty, the United States of America has pledged to assist us in training and developing our armed forces and in all such other services as may be necessary for us to carry out our obligations, international obligations, in­cluding our commitments to the United Nations. If we gave to the United States government the privilege to utilize a portion of our land to establish and maintain military and naval reservations, it was with the idea that we may mutually defend not only our shores but the interests of America and the Philippines in this part of the world, as well as the maintenance of peace in the Pacific.

The time has come for us to fulfill our obligations and poor as we are, we have to join efforts to do so in all diligent pride and with determination. You have heard of the reactivation of the civilian emergency administration that functioned during the last war. We have integrated our armed forces constituting combat teams not only to insure our internal security but to prepare our ground forces for national defense.

I want to make it dear that this Government is not making any empty gesture nor is there any vacillation on our part to actively participate in the campaign for the preservation of peace in the world and for the protection of the liberty and freedom that we now enjoy. But this ques­tion must be considered from a realistic and frank standpoint, considering our own capacity and the sufficiency of our finances. Many provinces are daily requesting the Government to send Constabulary men or combat teams to help eradicate violence or dissident activities in their respective jurisdictions. Because of the deficiency of men in the armed forces and the lack of appropriations to equip and maintain such forces, we have not been able fully to comply with the demands from the provinces. We have allowed, however, all able-bodied men in this country to enlist in the armed forces of the United States—and I know that there are many not only eager but impatient to enlist so that they may be able to take advantage of the opportunity to show to the whole world again that we are ready to fight for the freedom of the world and for the peace of mankind.

After all under the provisions of these treaties I just mentioned, Filipinos are qualified to enlist as members of the United States Army in the same manner as American citizens are also qualified to enlist in the Philippine Army. You are, therefore, ready when necessary and called upon and we have already made assurances to this effect to participate in any world conflict which may mean the preservation of our freedom and the maintenance of freedom and peace in the world.

In the meantime, however, you realize the great importance of watching and defending zealously our own home front which is as much a front as the front across the seas. I, therefore, on my part, will request the Congress to appropriate the biggest appropriation available to increase the armed forces of this country and equip them properly and adequately in order that they will be prepared not only to maintain internal security but to fight across or beyond our borders for world freedom and peace.

But, my friends, we are not going to wage any fight with weapons alone. There is something more fundamental, there is something more immediately imperative at the moment before we can equip ourselves properly for any war, and that is the morale of our people. It had been the usual practice in the past, as it is in all nations, for the leaders of the Government to inspire the masses, to lift their morale. But this congregation this afternoon, I want you to know, rather than receiving inspiration from the leaders, has given us encouragement to maintain the high morale in the highest councils of the Government. I want to assure you that now you have lifted the morale of this Government. [Applause.]

And it is necessary that, instead of you leaning on us, we have to lean on you at this supreme moment. I repeat, my friends, that we have been able to achieve our independence and freedom. But for us to continue enjoying the blessings of this freedom and independence, is something that belongs not only to us but principally to the younger generation. And if we don’t defend our rights today, if we don’t help the United Nations in the defense of democracy and freedom of the world, woe unto us! We have to fight to the last, now or never, because if we do not fight now, we have nothing to fight for tomorrow.

My friends, this is an inspiring moment for those of us who have long been working hard to put into the minds of our people that graft, corruption, irregularity and anomaly are not the general practice of the government. Loyalty to the government is not loyalty to the individual members of this government. It is loyalty to the Republic. I shall not ask you to be loyal to me personally. I shall not ask you to be loyal to the cabinet simply because you are a member of this government, no matter how humble the role you are going to play in it. But I shall demand on your loyalty to the Republic, loyalty to your people. [Applause.]

We shall not tolerate sabotage in this Government. Let us act together, and not simply sit in judgment upon one another. Let us join to contribute to a common and united effort to facilitate our preparedness and not exploit divisive factors of prejudice and self-righteousness as a condition to action.

The measure of our loyalty to our heroic heritage and its blessings which we enjoy today is our readiness to take up and uphold the nation’s common cause of survival as well as victory for the forces for freedom and human decency everywhere.

For this noble end, we rise above our individual prejudices, our personal injuries and frustrations, our partisan differences and difficulties; we will man the ramparts at home to protect and preserve our valid and lasting traditions; we will even go beyond our shores, if needed, to contribute our bit to the resolute defense of those traditions which render us kin to other peoples.

May God bless us all for all time.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library