Speech of Honorable Elpidio Quirino Senator of the Philippines Before the Chicago’s Council on Foreign Relations

[Delivered on December 20, 1933]

IN PURSUIT OF AMERICA’S NOBLE PURPOSE

I WISH to express my deep appreciation for the opportunity extended to me to bring to your attention the present status of the Filipino struggle for liberty. As you are all aware, a law was enacted in the last session of the 72nd Congress, purporting to grant Philippine independence after ten years of transition from the establishment of a Philippine Commonwealth Government provided thereunder. Before this law could operate, the Philippine Legislature or a national convention called for the purpose, must first accept it. The Philippine Legislature, however, declined to accept the law and, instead, created a new Independence Delegation to proceed to the United States to restate the Philippine case to the Government and people of this country.

For the last thirty-five years the Filipino people have unequivocally expressed their desire to be free and independent. After wresting the Philippines from Spanish power and establishing a Republic at Malolos, the Filipino army, mistaking right for might, resisted American occupation and received a staggering blow. Thenceforth, America remained in possession of the Philippines. She established therein a government which, in the words of United States Presidents, both Democratic and Republican, was intended to be merely preparatory to Filipino self-government and independence.

In 1916, Congress made patent this purpose by enacting the Jones Law which promised to grant complete Philippine independence as soon as a stable government had been established in the Islands. In 1920 President Wilson certified to Congress that this condition had been fulfilled and that it was the duty of the United States to grant the coveted Filipino freedom. Congress, however, failed to act upon this recommendation.

We have employed all means of appeal, from memorials and petitions to national prayers. Missions after missions have been sent to the United States since 1919. At last on January 17, 1933, the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act was passed, making a proffer of independence.

The natural and logical question that may be asked now is: Why did the Philippine Legislature decline to accept this law?

To those who have not closely followed the trend of events which led to the rejection of this law, or who have not carefully analyzed its probable ill effects upon the economic and political future of the Philippines, it may seem strange that the Philippine Legislature should decline to accept the offer when its avowed purpose was to grant the Islands independence. So that you may understand better the position of the Filipino people and appreciate the real purpose of the new Philippine Independence Delegation now present in the United States, may I be permitted to state the reasons for the negative action of the Philippine Legislature. I shall not tire you with all the details. I shall only point out two or three, perhaps four, of the most important reasons upon which the Insular Legislature based its action.

The first is the provision of the law which gives the United States, at the discretion of the President, the right to have and hold forever, military and naval reservations in the Philippine Islands after independence shall have been granted. At present, there are about two hundred and fifty thousand hectares of land in the Philippine Islands reserved by the United States as military and naval reservations. Some of them are located in very strategic places from the standpoint of commerce and national defense. These military and naval reservations include Corregidor, the Cavite Navy Yard, and the Mariveles Naval Station. All of them are found at the entrance to the Manila Bay and constitute the key to the national defense of the country’s capital, the center of commerce of the Archipelago. In the very heart of the city and in the midst of its most thickly inhabited districts are five military reservations: Fort Santiago, the Santa Lucia Barracks, the Arroceros Barracks, the Malate Barracks, and the San Antonio Abad Fort. In the immediate vicinity of Manila along the Pasig River, there is Fort McKinley covering several square miles. A few miles north of Manila is Camp Stotsenburg. Almost immediately west of this reservation is the Masinloc Naval Reservation. Scattered throughout the northern part of Luzon, there are other military and naval reservations: one in Baguio, Mountain Province; one in Burgos, Ilocos Norte; and one in Cauayan, Isabela Province. In the southern part of Luzon and throughout the Visayan Islands, there are other military and naval reservations. The most important of such reservations, are those in Los Baños, Laguna; Sorsogon, Samar, Leyte, Palawan, Romblon and Iloilo.

In Mindanao and in the Sulu group, and scattered throughout the coasts and occupying the best strategic points for defense and commercial ports, there are also military and naval reservations. The most important of them are Camp Overton and Camp Keithley, both of which are in the province of Lanao. There are three military reservations in Zamboanga, the most important and beautiful port of Mindanao, and military reservations in Jolo, Cotabato, and Davao. In short there are about sixty-two United States military and other reservations in the whole Philippine Islands.

Under the provisions of the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act, any or all of these military and naval reservations can be retained as the property and for the permanent use of the United States by presidential redesignation within two years after the declaration of Philippine independence.

Let us not be misunderstood in our objection to this power and discretion given to the President of the United States under the law. It is not that we are unwilling to grant or cede to the United States Government some naval or coaling stations that the Federal Government may need for its own purposes, but we cannot conceive how the Philippines could be really and truly independent if the United States is to retain and maintain indefinitely military and naval reservations scattered throughout the Archipelago and in the most important strategic and commercial places.

Another objection to this military and naval provision is the belief that it would defeat the desired neutralization of the Philippine Islands. The Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law authorizes the President of the United States to negotiate with foreign powers treaties that would guarantee the neutrality of the Philippines. It may reasonably be doubted that nations having interests in the Pacific would care to guarantee the neutrality of a country in which one of the great powers has so many military and naval reservations. We, of course, know that there are many people who have lost faith in treaties and who give very little or no importance to the neutralization of the Philippines as a means of insuring the peace and territorial integrity and independence of that little country. But as we know of no other way of protecting small nations from foreign aggression, and as, in any event, this is the course which the United States Congress has adopted, we have no objection to the accomplishment of this purpose.

The next main reason for the negative action of the Philippine Legislature on the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act is based upon the trade relations between the United States and the Philippine Islands during the ten-year period previous to the granting of independence. Under the provisions of this much-discussed law, Philippine products exported to the United States during the ten years will be limited in volume, and the excess export shall pay the full rate of tariff that is imposed upon foreign goods entering the United States. But even the Philippine products that would come into the United States within the specified limits would have to pay an export tax beginning from the sixth year of this transition period. This export tax would increase annually by five per cent until it becomes twenty-five per cent of the full rate on the tenth year. At the end of the tenth year, the full rate of the American tariff would be imposed upon all Philippine goods entering the United States. By the way, export tax, as you know, is prohibited by the Constitution.

An analysis of the probable effects of this tax upon the major Philippine industries shows that, before the end of the ten-year transition period, the Philippine sugar industry, coconut industry and cordage industry, as well as other important industries like the tobacco, embroidery and button industries, would have been ruined. This of course would have adversely affected the revenues of the Philippine Government and impoverished the country. On the other hand, American products would enter the Philippine markets free of duty and without any limitation.

The present free trade relations between the United States and the Philippines were established 1909 over the objections of the Filipino representatives both at home and in Congress. Because of this trade arrangement, the volume of trade between the United States and the Philippines has tremendously increased — from P42,343,688 in 1909 to P267,891,232 in 1932 — representing an increase in the share of the United States in the total trade of the Islands from 37.07% in 1909 to 77% in 1932. This trade also represents an increase in the total imports of the Islands from the United States, from 20.73% in 1909 to 65% in 1932 of the total import trade of the Islands, while it represents an increase in Philippine exports to the United States from 42.17% in 1909 to 87% in 1932 of the total export trade of the Philippines.

Although there has been a mutual increase in the volume of trade between the two countries, official statistics show that the proportion of increase has been greatly in favor of the United States. To illustrate, the average yearly exports of the Philippines to the United States for the ten-year period immediately preceding the establishment of free trade (1899-1908) was P90,026,915, while the average yearly exports for the ten-year period thereafter (1921-1930) was P193,461,847. This shows an increase of 391.2%. On the other hand, the exports of the United States to the Philippine Islands for the ten-year period, from 1899 to 1908, show a yearly average of P8,073,367, as compared with the average yearly exports to the Islands for the ten-year period, from 1921 to 1930, amounting to P139,921,000, representing an increase of 1,766.1%. Thus, while Philippine exports to the United States have increased only 391% the exports of the United States to the Philippines have increased 1,633%.

Official statistics show also that as a whole, from 1909 to 1930 Philippine exports to the United States have increased by 615% as compared with 1,113% increase in the exports of the United States to the Philippines during the same period.

So, despite the fact that the United States has derived more advantage from our present free trade relations, the Philippine Islands, which takes from the United States 77% of the total import trade of the Islands, and exports to that country 87% of the total Philippine export trade, has become completely dependent upon and is now economically at the mercy of the United States as a result of these free trade relations.

It is not, however, the desire of the Filipino people to continue indefinitely with this arrangement if the wish of the American people be otherwise. But it is evident that the Filipino people should be given ample time, and under favorable conditions, to set up its own economic structure independent of the United States. It may be argued that such is precisely the reason why there is provided under the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law a period of ten years during which the Philippines is expected to make its economic readjustment. Ten years are sufficient for this purpose, and if the limitation imposed upon the free entrance of our products into the United States was based upon the status quo , that is to say, upon our present exports, and the export tax were eliminated, the provisions of the law as amended in this manner would meet the situation.

It should be emphasized that our desire to safeguard the economic and financial position of the Philippines is not predicated upon any intention on our part to give undue importance to the material things of life as compared with spiritual and moral values. To us freedom is everything. But in these times in which we live, no country can be independent unless it can support itself. And it is precisely because we want to insure and maintain our independence once given that we feel duty bound to call the attention of the American Government and people to the financial and economic difficulties which would confront our country under the trade provisions of the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law.

The trade relations between your country and ours were forced upon us by Congress. In the course of years such trade relations artificially fostered by the American tariff have made the Islands dependent upon the American market. A sudden closing of this market or an undue curtailment of our exports into the United States before we have time to prepare ourselves for world competition would be disastrous. Should such happen there would be many people who, unaware of the cause, would attribute it to the incapacity or inability of the Filipino people to establish and maintain their own government. The reaction in this country to such a situation in the Philippines would likely be to withhold the grant of the promised independence at the end of the ten-year transition period.

Resuming, the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law is self-defeating in that with the provisions regarding United States military and naval reservations complete Philippine independence would be incompatible, and with the trade relations thereunder our country would be ruined.

One sentimental, but not secondary, objection to the law is that under it, Filipino immigrants to the United States would be treated as subjects to enter under quota during the transition period, and thereafter as undesirable foreign elements to be absolutely excluded from the mainland. On the other hand, for the benefit of the sugar planters in Hawaii, these immigrants may go into that territory of the United States in any number, depending upon the needs of the plantations and subject to the approval of the Federal Secretary of the Interior. If it were not for the fact that under the commonwealth constitution, the Filipino people are compelled to acknowledge, respect and safeguard the existing rights of American citizens and corporations in the Philippine Islands to the same extent as if they were Filipino citizens and corporations, and that during all the period of transition American citizens in the Islands would enjoy the same rights and privileges that Filipinos enjoy in their own country, the discriminatory provisions of the law against Filipino immigrants into the United States would not have the importance that the Filipino people have attached to it out of racial dignity and pride. Certainly, we cannot conscientiously understand why we should be considered as undesirable foreigners in one case and as subjects or mere commodity in another, depending upon whether or not the Filipino immigrants could be utilized by the American people. If the Filipinos are not wanted in this country, we could perhaps find another scheme for our honorable exit.

There are several other secondary objections to the law that compel us not to accept it. Among these are the denial of currency autonomy, immigration autonomy and foreign relations autonomy, subjects which are all placed under the direct control and supervision of the United States during the transition period, but which are essential instrumentalities in the preparation for a Philippine independent existence. However, we cannot indulge in fault-finding or hair-splitting and scrupulously quibble over the provisions of a law that makes an honest offer of liberty. But the Filipinos would not be loyal to the American people if we did not frankly and sincerely lay bare before this country the reasons for not accepting it in the form in which it has been offered.

As a whole, it is the honest belief of the Philippine Legislature that the provisions of the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act do not achieve the very purpose of the American Congress in disposing of the Philippine question. The Filipino people are not unmindful of the highest motives of the American Congress in approving the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act. It constitutes another source of the traditional gratitude and loyalty of the whole Filipino race towards the American government and people. But precisely because the United States meant to give our people the freedom for which they have been struggling for years under conditions that would be compatible with America’s altruistic purpose announced upon the inception of her occupation of the Philippines, the Philippine Legislature did not hesitate to take advantage of the very privilege offered by the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act itself to decline the offer so that we might have the opportunity to restate our case before Congress. May I say that the act of the Legislature is in pursuit of the noble purposes of the United States towards the Philippine Islands. We have been encouraged by the pronouncements of the Chief Executives of this nation, Democrats and Republicans alike, by the specific pledge of the United States Congress, by the history of American administration over the Islands, and by the lofty traditions and ideals of the United States as a liberty-loving country whose liberating mission among other weaker and subject peoples has not failed.

We are confident that our moral cause is won. What remains now to be done is perhaps to lay down anew at a round table the cold facts and figures from both sides of the Pacific, in a last supreme effort to make them tally and coincide with the march of the minutes and the seconds of the independence clock so that when the hour of final redemption shall strike it will strike to the satisfaction and honor of America and the Philippines.

Source : The Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1955). The Quirino way : collection of speeches and addresses of Elpidio Quirino (1st ed.). [S.l. : s.n.].