Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before the NACTU National Convention in Iloilo

[Read by Secretary of Labor Jose Figueras, May 1, 1951]

Gentlemen of the Convention:

May first is a yearly reminder to me. On a day like this I take stock of what has been done for the Filipino workingman to give him a sense of security, stability, and faith. I know that on Labor Day I must commune with my fellow workers and fellow-builders not only to celebrate the day with them as the consummation of their ideals of democracy and justice but to re-examine their social concepts of freedom : and industrial peace.

Labor Day is more than an ideal. It is an institution that will live through the years as long as there are men who believe in the dignity of the human person-and his indispensable role as a third force in the trilogy of modern society—Government, Capital, and Labor. Every year on May 1, the working masses cast away their political and religious creeds and join hands in glorifying their efforts to enhance their pursuit of happiness in wider latitudes of equal opportunities and free enterprise.

I am happy to greet you on this momentous occasion. I believe that the national security is better served if every man is assured of his rights to provide his family with decent comfort. I believe that labor, like any other element of society, is a potent factor in the shaping of our national destiny. It has always been, and it shall always be, the objective of all democratic institutions to provide the greatest good for the greatest number. That is why in our program of government, we have always respected the rights and prerogatives of the laborer as guaranteed for him by the Constitution. Peace, freedom, and democracy are indivisible. To maintain the peace in our time and within our own borders, it is proper that we recognize the fact that the Filipino workingman is a human being possessed of honor and of innate dignity.

In recognition of this fact, I have recently signed the Minimum Wage Law. That is a signal victory for our working masses. By that law, they are now adequately protected against unscrupulous landlords and employers who would impose starvation wages on their laborers. One of the purposes of this legislation is to develop in our country a strong middle class which will form a formidable bulwark of our economic prosperity. In my total economic mobilization program I have envisioned the growth of a sturdy and patriotic working class that will defy the onslaughts of an alien ideology, an ideology that is now being forced upon us and the rest of the world by the enemies of democracy.

I have faith in the good judgment and patriotism of our people. I know that against the excesses and impositions of totalitarianism, they will not hesitate to embrace the blessings of democracy. It is unfortunate that dissident elements, coaxed and coerced by Red agents, have resorted to the use of arms in an attempt to disrupt peace and order in our country. The sporadic assaults upon our peaceful citizens by the Huks have been now wittingly used by our critics to discredit this government not only here but before the eyes of the world.

The adverse effect of this smear campaign does not only diminish our prestige but also reflects on cur capacity as a free people. This attitude of our detractors brings grist to the mill of communist propaganda, the main object of which is to create dissension within the rank and file of the working masses. This is the communist pattern—the disruption of the social order through the infusion of hate and discontent among the people.

Those who, wittingly and unwittingly, or for personal or political ends, allow themselves to become tools of the Kremlin, particularly at this precarious stage of our independent systems, are violating the Constitution. And yet they have the temerity to invoke our Magna Carta to shield them in their murderous attacks and wanton depredations.

These criminal assaults upon society is a direct challenge to you, the working people, because it is your home, your families, perhaps your wives and daughters that the Huks prey upon and attack whenever they go on an orgy of looting and vandalism. The solution, therefore, to our problem of peace and order lies largely in your hands. The choice is between a social system that insures the peace and tranquility of your friends and an ideology that in the long run strips you of all that you hold dear, including your rights and freedom. I have no doubt of your choice, lovers of peace and of freedom as you all are.

The trade union movement in this country has already reached a stage where it can be relied upon to do its share in the task of national rehabilitation. This government has devoted itself to the social amelioration of the masses as a prerequisite to our national economic development and progress. We have adopted every conceivable measure to promote the plight of the common men and to elevate his status as a responsible member of the community.

The people’s welfare is our main and daily concern. Our Constitution has guaranteed for them certain inalienable rights. Successful democracy springs from the proper protection of these rights.

Gentlemen of the Convention: Three years ago during the Labor Day rally at the Rizal Memorial Stadium in Manila, I made it clear that the concern of the Republic for the welfare of the workingman is made patent in our Constitution and that the rights guaranteed him may riot be disregarded with impunity.

I have kept faith with that commitment. I have for the past three years taken every necessary step not only to improve the lot of labor but to strike a happy balance in its relationships with capital.

I said then, and I will say it again. “It is not the aim of this government to impose its will or to dictate the manner in which labor shall organize or its problems with capital shall be handled.” The freedom of association is the birthright of the workingman, or any man for that matter. There must not be any encumbrances in his relations with his fellowmen, nay, in his pursuit of the good life.

The Filipino tradition of freedom dates back to the dawn of history, but its flowering in the hearts of our people has been fostered and won by the patriotism and candor of our working masses. One of the recognized schools of democracy today is the trade union movement. It has come to stay in the Philippines. But to make it healthy and strong, it must be guided by leaders who are unselfish and trustworthy.

Today let us pledge ourselves to the determination of moving forward towards national solidarity. Labor can lead the way. So can Capital. Sinister powers are challenging us in our effort to establish a lasting foundation for industrial peace. Men of evil designs have not only wormed their way into the labor ranks but have gone to the extent of inciting the poor and the ignorant barrio folks to acts of subversion.

Suffering makes a people great. We have suffered. We have fought and suffered for our right to be free from foreign domination, to be masters in our own country, and never to be tools of any foreign power. Let us keep that spirit, the spirit of all our heroes.

Self-imposed discipline and an equal measure of self-denial in order to promote the general welfare—that is what I ask of you now. We are in the process of vast development. Any attempt to retard it will endanger our national existence. Your government is busy encouraging new industries. This will mean more and better opportunities for employment.

Let us not be deceived by the promises of Utopia by the Messiahs of a so-called new faith. There can be no greater faith than the Christian idea that man, under God, is his own master. There is no greater democracy than that which assures for every man his right to self-development and self-expression.

Fellow-Workers: I regret that owing to a previous and similarly pressing engagement, I could not be with you today. However, I have asked your good friend and mine, Secretary of Labor Jose Figueras, to convey to you my message of goodwill and best wishes. May you continue to march forward with the other workers of the world in their search for universal and lasting peace.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quiriño, President of the Philippines, before the NACTU National Convention in Iloilo, May 1, 1951. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47(5) , 2275-2278.