Extemporaneous speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the convocation of the student body of the University of the East

[Delivered on September 30, 1953]

President Dalupan Members of the Board of Regents Members of the Faculty Student Body of this Great Institution Fellow Guests and Friends:

I want to thank you for the opportunity to be with you this afternoon. I assure you I was more than eager to stand before this huge assemblage if only to show to this intelligent and understanding group that your President, using a popular idiom, is still kicking around. (Applause)

Filipinos are rich in imagination (laughter), and richer-still in speculation. (Laughter) There is nothing rhetorical about these expressions. They are true to form in my case.

I understand that some newspaper publishers, in their eagerness to make a scoop—natural in the newspaper profession—had extra editions ready announcing my death when it was learned from sources not too friendly that my second surgical operation was not responding satisfactorily to treat­ment. Had that happened, that is, the announcement of my premature death, I would have enjoyed reading my own obituary upon my return from the United States and experiencing the unique opportunity of finding out how my people felt towards me and my stewardship in the last five years.

I thank the Almighty that I came back not dead but rid of the ailment that would have hampered my efficiency and usefulness to the nation and now able to lead a life of further fruitful achievement, if given a chance to do so. (Applause)

About, a year ago, invited to appear before the student body of this great University, I was asked point blank if I was running for re-election. Desirous not to harm my administration by arousing suspicion regarding the motives of my actuations thereafter, I shied at the question.

Now I am prepared to answer it in the affirmative. I must say at the outset that in seeking nomination I did not beg for it. I simply made my position clear. I was lying flat in my bed on May 12 of this year when my party nominated me unanimously as its standard-bearer.

My friends, I have been serving for more than five years, pushing a program not only of administration but of nation-building of the greatest scope, its effect most far-reaching upon our people. You are all familiar with conditions obtaining in Manila immediately after Liberation. You know what have transpired in our life as a nation, how we have established our Government since we inaugurated this Republic on July 4, 1946. The residents of Manila, in particular, and those of the neighboring provinces who went through the darkest hour of our history, bear witness to the great strides we have since taken politically and economically. I need not recite my role during this period of reconstruction, rehabilitation, and nation-building. The record speaks for itself. My conscience is clear. One thing I know, that my descendants will be proud of the fact that I presided over the destiny of this nation, encouraging and enabling our people to stand on their feet and establishing a government now respected—even loved and envied—by friends and associates from across the seas.

I do not attribute the great development of this country during the last six or seven years solely to my personal efforts. But I must say that whatever this country has been able to accomplish under a national program of action has not been done by accident. Somebody must have planned that and generated the motive power and pushed the program through to enable us to attain the economic and political stability that we now enjoy. I repeat I do not attribute all of this personally to my efforts, but I am proud to state there has been proper coordination, and as a result, despite the systematic obstruction in recent years by the opposition, we have pushed our program through successfully. In the last three years, we have inaugurated one project after another in our program of development.

Now that we are about to complete our program, new issues have cropped up, confusing the public mind and retarding, even stultifying, our advance to our national goal.

I want to thank you, Doctor Dalupan, for the opportunity to elucidate on some of those issues and to stress their importance to our future existence as a nation.

We are still in the midst of that task. We have, so far, broadened the foundation of this Republic and set up there on the essential parts so that the superstructure could withstand the impact of increased activity. Unfortunately, there has arisen a body, a band, a demolition squad, so to speak, the professional wreckers of this Administration, pointing out not only to us but to the whole world that we have been a failure. But only yesterday those people, now harassing and embarrassing us, where my associates who found words insufficient, to describe our progress in nation-building.

Strange things do happen in politics. Friends today, enemies tomorrow. Why? Because political power is so viciously attractive that it makes one easily forget past associations and affections. The tantalizing lust for power brings out one’s uglier traits. Detractors predict that this coming election is the last call for democracy in our country.

But this country is going to last. The foundations are well laid and made secure not only locally but internationally. Aside from the bold total economic mobilization which we launched in 1949, we have established relations to achieve our external security, entering into pacts and understandings with the United States and our associates in the Pacific and in the Atlantic.

Heretofore the issues in this campaign have centered on the matter of qualifications of the candidates—that so and so is too young, that so and so is too old, that so and so is inexperienced, that so and so loves the common tao. I am prepared to show that under the direction of my party, the Liberal Party, this country has attained stability and strength. I rely on that record and on the sense of fairness of our people as the hour for final decision approaches.

However, a new issue has cropped up—an issue that endangers this country after having climbed from humiliation in recent years. The opposition has raised the bugaboo that the party in power in order to win in the next election would commit fraud and terrorism and that it is necessary for the United States to intervene, in the name of democracy, so as to preserve the institutions we have succeeded in establishing in this country. As a matter of fact, the opposition is signaling throughout the world for help because its rightful leader is afraid to fight for his own party and to face me in this election.

Now the opposition is dragging down the name and prestige of this administration with the threat that a foreign country is supporting my opponent and that I must watch out because, if my tenancy in office and the present administration are prolonged, the United States will withdraw the assistance being extended to us. My opponents are calling on a foreign power to supervise our internal affairs avowedly to restore democracy. Let me tell you with all possible emphasis that democracy in this country has never been more vigorous.

What kind of democracy do they want, what kind of political institutions, what kind of tolerance, what kind of patience do they want? Is it not a fact that most people you meet in the streets, in the bars, in the restaurants, on the platform, on the radio, and in the press freely and loudly criticize your own President even exceeding the limits of decency and decorum? Some even go to the extent of conveying the impression that I am lame, that I am sick, that I should no longer continue in office, that it is time for me to retire. Retire—I would like to do that, but not in the way they have been trying to persuade me—through intimidation and threat.

First, they invited me and the presidential aspirant who failed in 1949 to withdraw from the presidential race, in the name of patriotism and democracy, in order, it was claimed, to avoid bloodshed and revolution. Instead of accepting that proposition, believing that the one I defeated in 1949 was ready—and I felt ready myself—I told him (Doctor Laurel) to stand up and fight for himself. They failed in that. Then they sounded out the alarm that, if I ran for re-election, there would be violence, bloodshed everywhere. That did not scare me or my party.

Again they went to the people and told them that if I were re-elected or the present administration were to continue, the United States of America would stop the assistance we have been receiving from her. They kept on anticipating that there would be fraud, terrorism, and bloodshed in the next election, urging a foreign power to come to the Philippines to restore peace and order and to secure the election of the American candidate to the same post.

That is the true and naked issue that the opposition has raised lately. Are we going to allow the United States of America—or any other power for that matter—to come to the Philippines, supervise our election, and place ourselves under foreign control in order to make way for the candidate avowedly supported by the United States of America?

Unfortunately, such threats, which in the past I considered childish, have been fanned lately by a susceptible American correspondent who, after a few days’ visit, had the cheek to tell us that the candidate of the United States—of the American people and official Washington—was my opponent. Now, these have been half-hearted attempts from opposition quarters to deny that the opposition’s candidate bears the American brand, but my own opponent himself has had the temerity to assume the role of spokesman for the United States, repeatedly proclaiming that, if the present administration continued in office, America would withdraw her aid from the Philippines. Speaking of colonial-mindedness, this takes the cake.

My friends, I have come to you with a message and a mission. It is necessary to know the background of what I am going to say. The bugaboo of fraud and terrorism, which they claim will be perpetrated by the present administration, is nothing but an advance alibi for the defeat they fear to encounter in the coming election. It provides a convenient smokescreen for their own fraud and terrorism.

The trouble is they cannot conceive the Filipino people of being capable of grappling with multifarious problems, going farther than did past generations faced with problems of less magnitude, and making readjustments, collectively or individually, to enable this country to meet the present world exigencies. My opponent cannot understand that our people can just smile at those threats and promises being dished out in the barrios and the outlying districts—threats of putting people to jail for graft or corruption, fantastic promises of improvement for the common tao— as so much rigamarole to distract the people away from the primary and real issue, in this campaign, which is to continue building this nation in order to insure its stability and durability. It is not a question of whether one party should be given a chance to hold the reins of power. This is not a race for power. The issue is, which party can serve and promote the interests of the country better, politically and economically.

In other words, shall this country continue in its momentum of upward surge in the preparation of its stability and durability or shall we entrust the future of this country to untried, adventurous hands merely hungry for power and relying on foreigners who may destroy the very independence and sovereignty of this country?

This continuous talk of bloodshed, of fraud, of terrorism, of intervention of the United States is destroying the morale of the people, driving away prospective investors, discouraging the development of industries, poisoning the economic and political life of our people, smearing the name and prestige of this Republic, and sacrificing the honor and dignity of our people.

My friends, you need not be afraid of fraud, of terrorism, of bloodshed, of revolution. Revolution cannot come from this administration. Revolution cannot come from the governing power. Revolution means defiance of the established order. The people’s will is supreme here. The established order is in our hands, your hands.

Revolution must come from the minority, and if the minority wants to make good its threat, I want to announce now that I am prepared to meet that threat without the assistance of any foreign power. (Applause) I shall die fighting for our sovereignty and dignity. (Applause)

In the early days, when we were organizing our own government and preparing our treaties and understandings with other nations, especially with the United States, I had the great privilege of being instrumental in concluding each and every treaty entered into by our Republic. And I have shown, and the minority must admit, that I have never ceded any single territory, not even an inch, by any dubious concession of extraterritorial rights in the very City of Manila. (Applause) And as long as I am at the head of this nation, as long as I have the power and the strength of life to stop those who would like to take advantage of this most mercenary, undignified attitude and who would invite foreign intervention, I will resist to the last drop of my blood any such attempt. (Applause)

Why did we work so hard, fight for centuries, repel enemies who came here in successive waves, and make our shores crimson with our blood? Why the struggle for centuries and centuries to be independent and sovereign and now, simply for the election of one candidate for president, barter everything—the fame and dignity and sacrifices of our people? We survived national crises to attain liberty and freedom, prosperity and progress. Why should we now turn the clock back and return to servitude and servility to oblige a presidential candidate?

My dear friends, you who are going to lead this country tomorrow, this is a great lesson in political philosophy. Those in the past who cried out loud for nationalistic, assertive principles of government and opposed creative political cooperation with the United States are the same individuals now banded together, foisting on our people a new type of nationalism, a patriotism to subordinate our interests to those of a single man, simply because they want to down one person, Elpidio Quirino. I knew the personal feeling of hatred, of suspicion, of envy, of bitterness involved in this effort, and our country is being pulled down by this issue, invoking principles when they don’t know what principles they are relying on now.

These Nacionalistas of today—where were they when we needed the assistance of the United States? They faced northward, toward the Mikado, and associated with our enemies in the name of the East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. They never wanted America to come back. Now America is asked by these Nacionalistas to be the savior of democracy. What a mockery!

My friends, I do not want to be unkind by making a comparison of the conduct of our leaders during the darkest hour of our history and the attitude of those leading the nation today, but history will show you that those who are now crying loud to the sky for intervention did not want American intervention when we needed it most. As a matter of fact, they openly defied America, and now that America could be their source of power, strength, and influence in this country, they turn their backs and cry: “America, come and save us.” All in the name of democracy and patriotism!

I want to stress, my friends, that there will be no fraud; there will be no terrorism by the administration. We don’t need that to win. As far as I am concerned, I make the solemn pledge that no matter what is going to be the result of the election I would rather sacrifice everything than besmirch the good name and sovereignty of this government. (Applause) My long years of association in our government affairs and the opportunities given me to serve my country and people are too precious to be sacrificed for a brief continuation of the present honor that I now enjoy as the head of this nation.

My friends, I must tell you once more that this bugaboo of fraud and terrorism is being raised to cow the people, to cow the administration, to intimidate—meaning us— that if you don’t vote for the American candidate, this country will go to the dogs. The challenge is for you to make use of your intelligence and express your real sentiment—your patriotism and appreciation of the historical development of this country. (Applause)

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Extemporaneous speech of President Quirino at the convocation of the student body of the University of the East. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49(9) , 3836-3842.