My fellow countrymen:

There is no place like home is not a mere fancy of the poet. You have to be away from home to be struck by the force of this old familiar sentiment. We yield to it in life, we accept it in death. I have rushed home from a strenuous American journey to be with you this morning in obedience to this feeling. The mortal remains of the Father of his country have found their final resting place in the soil of his motherland because of this compulsion. And I know I would be most unhappy if I did not join you today in our homeland in the celebration of his birthday anniversary and dedicate ourselves anew to the task that gave meaning to his life and to our national existence.

The success of our recent mission to America is due in great part to the tremendous fund of respect, friendship and goodwill that President Quezon had built up for our country abroad in his lifetime. Wherever we turned, we stood to benefit from the grace of this fortunate inheritance. I have no doubt that we can continue to be blessed by it if we take care not to squander it, if we continue to prove to America and the world that we are worthy of the Father of his Country who exemplified self-respect, self-reliance, love of country and of freedom.

We have brought home to the American people once again of their special relation to us, as largely developed and nurtured by Manuel Quezon. Our American visit has renewed it and strengthened it beyond measure. The American people, by the warmth and sincerity of their hospitality, have increased our trust a hundredfold. Our own countrymen, by the warmth of their welcome on our Return, have unmistakably indicated common ratification and appreciation of this renewal and enhancement of mutual respect and cooperation. No development can be more appropriate as we pay homage to the man who in peace and in war, sealed this special relation for our people.

On this his 71st birthday anniversary, it is my greatest pride to report and my greatest joy to affirm before his great spirit that we have been loyal to his vision— his vision of a people devoted to liberty and the ways of democracy, of a people imbued with a lofty, incorruptible sense of obligation to preserve and advance them, not only at home but among our neighbors. We have gone some ways since he left us. We shall continue to move forward.

We take this occasion to reconsecrate ourselves to this vision. We are renewing our solemn covenant with his memory that we will enrich what we have inherited from him. We shall pass on to our children and all subsequent generations a heritage that bears the immortal mark of our great leader—justice for the common man and the expanding fulfillment of his gifts and potentialities in the service of his fellows.

We pledge to continue to do justly to every man, to walk humbly with God, and to develop our patrimony of freedom and the democratic way until every citizen of our country, until every inhabitant of our good earth, may share their benedictions. This is our strongest armor in defense of our common cherished traditions, of our free institutions. With this, we are determined to prevail against any aid all threats of totalitarian enslavement.

I know of no better way of striving to be worthy of the memory and legacy of the Father of our Country, and of all others who, before him, with him, and after him, have given their lives in the service of their country and people. They have been creators all. The very memory of their Service continues to generate active forces and to increase our material and spiritual resources for the reconstruction and redemption of our damaged land, for the strengthening of our Republic, and for the building of an order of abundance, freedom, and peace. And as we build this country it is our duty to construct our history right. We must be gracious and honest in the acknowledgment of each one’s contribution to our country’s advancement and prestige. One of the essentials in this tasks self-effacing loyalty to noble traditions and disciplined will to traduce important national events in our development as historical annals that shall merit repetition from the lips of succeeding generations.

It was the special virtue of Manuel Quezon’s creative genius that he transmuted his very own limitations into constructive opportunities for serving and lifting his own people. His humbly birth, his poverty, his physical ills, his moral limitations, have all been the means of providing his people increasing opportunities to rise above them, to conquer them, as he did with himself in his own fashion. Out of his tortured experiences as a dedicated leader and public servant, he exemplified the enforcement of a disciplined spirit that is basic to mastery of a people’s destiny. Thus it was that towards the end of his days, his thoughts constantly touched on the character of our youth and the “molaves” of our race for inspiration. This preoccupation came of an immeasurable faith in his people, in their capacity of face and survive every manner of disaster, which they have vindicated since Lapulapu through the dark colonial period, the Philippine revolution, the Spanish-American war, and the Japanese occupation.

Men everywhere today bless the name of our people because Manuel Quezon had lived, labored and suffered among them. To invoke his memory is to exalt them. He served his fellowmen because he loved them. He loved his country because it gave him an appropriate field in which to exercise and fulfill his genius for consecrated service. He is great because of his country, and his countrymen are respected because of him.

Words are feeble instruments of loyalty and affection. Our greatest obligation to Manuel Quezon is a steady, continuing endeavor on the part of every Filipino to strengthen his faith, to exercise self-dependence, and to share the blessings of freedom, peace and cooperation in a broadening world community.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Speech of President Quirino at the birthday anniversary program for President Manuel L. Quezon, at Quezon City, August 19, 1949. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45(8) , 3275-3277.