Speech of Honorable Paul V. McNutt United States Ambassador and Honorable Ruperto Kangleon Philippines Secretary of National Defense On Navy Day

Ambassador McNutt’s speech:

The role of the United States Navy has always been one of the proudest, just as its record has always been one of the most brilliant, in the history of the United States. In the structure of Philippine-American relations, the Navy has been especially prominent, and has played its part in the magnificent manner that we have grown to expect from that great branch of the armed service.

The dawn of Philippine-American associations was heralded by the guns of Commodore Dewey’s famous fleet in Manila Bay. The scarred and rusted hulks of the enemy fleet can still be seen in the harbor, lasting evidence of the Navy’s early presence in these waters.

Between 1898 and 1941, the Navy played a friendly and constructive role in the Philippines, maintaining watch and establishing for itself an enviable record of smartness and efficiency.

Recently, only very recently, the ships and men of the United States Navy wrote themselves an epic of undying glory in the liberation of the Philippines, and in the mighty counter-assault on Japan which contributed so much to the ultimate victory. That victory was also the victory of the Filipino people. It was a victory of our common arms and our common aims. But in the deathless operations which led to the liberation, the naval forces of the United States, in the face of overwhelming odds in the early days, carved, an immortal niche in the military annals of this part of the world.

The American and Filipino soldiers who gave their lives for victory have a common brotherhood with many of our naval heroes who gave up their lives on the unmarked stretches of the sea, that this nation, the Philippine Republic and the United States might grow and prosper in freedom and security.

I have spoken of the Navy’s contributions to our common victory in war. Likewise in peace the Navy has served valiantly on shore and on sea to cement our mutual interests, to insure our mutual security, and to draw closer the ties which bind our two countries. The Navy has a long tradition in the Philippines. I know that that tradition will always be maintained in shining splendor.

As an American citizen, I am proud of the American Navy, of its past glories and its present accomplishments. I feel a thrill of pride in every bluejacket, in every officer, in every sleek vessel I see, flying its proud ensign in Manila Bay. I hope that the men and ships of that branch of the armed service will continue to carry on, as I know they will, with their essential missions. I know that the security that they afford both the United States and the Philippines, by the strength and power of their mighty organization, as well as by the traditional courage and heroism which has always characterized them, will always be appreciated by peace-loving men and women.

I raise my hat in salute to those hardy men of the far-flung seas, who protect our frontiers and constitute our first line of defense, the United States Navy!

Pursuant to the provisions of Republic Act No. 10352, otherwise known as the “Philippine Benchmark Price Act,” and its Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR), the Department of Energy (DOE) hereby announces the following benchmark prices for liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) as of November 1, 2023:

*   Auto LPG: Php 44.85/kilogram
*   Shredded LPG: Php 34.48/kilogram

Ang mga presyong ito ay batay sa average ng mga imported contract price (ICP) ng LPG sa buwan ng Oktubre 2023, at ang mga kaukulang adjustment para sa shipping, insurance, at iba pang bayarin.  These benchmark prices shall serve as reference for the pricing of LPG products sold to end-consumers.

All LPG retailers are directed to comply with the aforementioned benchmark prices.  Any violation hereof shall be subject to the penalties provided for under R.A. No. 10352 and its IRR.  Ang DOE ay patuloy na susubaybayan ang presyo ng LPG upang matiyak ang makatarungang presyo para sa mga konsyumer.

This Order shall take effect immediately upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

SO ORDERED.

[Signature]

ALBERTO B. MAGSAYSAY
Secretary
Department of Energy

Secretary Kangleon’s speech:

It is a distinct honor and privilege to convey to you, on behalf of the Republic of the Philippines, our greetings and sincere wishes for your continued success and prestige on this memorable day. The observance of this day has linked us to that historic event of Dewey’s victory in Manila Bay on May 1, 1898, which marked the beginning of America’s experiment in the Philippines.

The maintenance of a nation’s navy is as important as its army. Our experience in the two World Wars has shown the important role a navy plays in winning a war fought overseas. No army, however brave and powerful it may be, can hope to win a modern war without the help of the navy. The navy transport the army and sustains it with arms and ammunitions, food and other vital supplies at the fronts.

No people on earth can appreciate the magnificent role played by the U. S. Navy during the last global conflict, better than the Filipinos. The navy operated and maintained the lifeline of the resistance movement in the Philippines against almost unsurmountable difficulties and dangers. I refer to the great work performed by the U. S. Navy’s undercraft forces particularly the USS Narwhal and the USS Nautilus which, during the Japanese occupation, brought supplies to the Guerrillas all over the Philippines. This bolstered the morale of the Filipino people who steadfastly maintained faith in their ultimate redemption by the forces of democracy and freedom. I also refer to the great work performed by the U. S. Navy’s air forces which, in the month of September of 1944, bore the initial brunt of the counter-attack and destroyed the air supremacy and exposed to attack the military installations of the enemy in the Philippines. The appearance of hundreds of hellcats, helldivers and wildcats in the air, and their display of aid might brought to the oppressed people of the Philippines hope and confidence and inspired them to new heights of courage. The Filipinos saw in the first aerial offensive the forces of liberation coming to dislodge the brutal enemy in the Philippines. The period between the landing of General MacArthur on the island of Leyte, and five days thereafter, was the most trying of all. On October 24th three naval task forces of the Japanese Grand Fleet coming from North, South, and West of the Philippines converged on the gulf of Leyte to attack the American convoys of more or less 600 ships. Those task forces were destroyed one by one by the great American Armada. The naval battle which took place in the vicinity of Leyte was not only thrilling but also the most decisive naval operation in the Philippines. Had the United States Navy failed in that crucial encounter, the liberation of our country would have been delayed, and many more lives would have been cruelly sacrificed. To the United States Navy, therefore, we of the Philippines, cherish a special feeling of gratitude and admiration.

The war is over. The victory has been won. The Filipinos have won their freedom. But the war has taught us the price of unpreparedness. As a new independent country, preparedness should be our watchword if we expect to preserve our territorial integrity and the security of our democratic institutions.

Our plan for the defense of this country will be coördinated with that of the United States Forces in the Pacific. We may be lacking in material means, but we have the manpower, the proven courage and determination side by side with the United States and all forces of freedom, to defend this outpost of democracy in the Pacific.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). Speeches broadcast by United States Ambassador Paul V. McNutt and Philippines Secretary of National Defense Ruperto Kangleon on Navy Day, October 27, 1946. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 42(10) , 2566-2568 .