Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines On the Barangay Day celebration

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, December 16, 1950]

Heretofore, our Government has adopted a paternalistic attitude in considering measures that should have been the concern of local governments. This fostered weakness and developed in our local governments an attitude of complete dependence on the national government. Although local political subdivisions have been vested with specific powers, these powers have not been utilized to the extent of cultivating in these units the spirit of independence and strength. Consequently, the national government, in the spirit of helpfulness, has been extending to these political subdivisions the necessary aid not only in matter of administration but in all matter of improvement and even in relief.

As a matter of fact, it is the national government that strength from local political entities. Like to stress now to the local officials should derive its This is what I should who are gathered today on this momentous occasion. The responsibility for the success of the barangay is placed squarely on your shoulders from the moment you raised your hands and pledged your loyalty to the barangay organization. Whether you like it or not, it is incumbent upon you to see to it that the organization is set up in your respective jurisdiction. Whether you like it or not, the people will expect from you success in the execution of the policy of this organization. Whether you like or not, you are required to work hard in cooperation with the national government to see to it that this ancient idea of rural organization revive, revitalize, and invigorate the nation.

Do not minimize the situation of the Philippines simply because our own compeers see it fit once in a while to discourage individuals or groups, or their actuations during the times of political upheavals, especially during elections or immediately thereafter, when we place before our people, before the scrutiny of the population, the prestige that they enjoy and the honor that they should deserve. Let us not minimize the grave responsibilities to future generations because whether we like it or not we have accepted the challenge of these responsibilities and we will have to be made accountable for the success of this enterprise.

But the most important thing is that it is of immediate concern to preserve this country to which you pledged your ability, your capacity, your genius, and all your efforts to uphold and establish not only to dignify our race but to enable our people to enjoy the new blessings that democracy has brought here.

My friends, each governor, city or municipal mayor, and district official—and I also extend this address to councilors and even to barrio folks—should be made to realize his respective responsibilities in the community. We have to extend the benefits of this Government and the liberty and freedom that we now enjoy to communities heretofore neglected or ignorant of what is happening in our centers of populations. It is necessary that we strengthen the small units in the villages, in the valleys, and ever in the mountain fastnesses and ravines because it is not only in the centers of population that we breathe free air but throughout the length and breadth of the country. In order to do so, we need instrumentalities to reach these small units. The governor cannot inspect all the municipalities as often as necessary. The municipal mayors and officials do not expect to be able to reach all the barrios within their respective jurisdictions as frequently as they are expected to do, and even councilors quite often do not go beyond the confines of their respective local jurisdictions. It is necessary that we reach our friends in their homes, in their barrios, and make them feel the concomitant responsibilities of those civic organizations in order that they may realize the great benefit to be derived if they will accept the responsibility of being the agent of the municipality, of the city, of the province, of the national government, in the realization of the national policy which may involve distribution of benefits as well as equitable responsibilities to be placed upon their respective shoulders.

This is the spirit of the barangay. I did not conceive this organization as a new scheme. It is a legacy from the past. It is a recognition of a nation’s custom which, ingrained far and deep in the minds of our populace, has had its beneficent results not only in matters of government but especially in matters of community or individual family life. In those days the barangay organized here by the Spaniards were highly respected by our former masters. In those days even the small officials, desired so queerly that we used to ridicule or disparage them in after years, are now memories to us but their influence, their beneficent intervention in the promotion of the welfare and protection of the respective communities, still lingers in our memory.

It was during those times when I was still young that I had an opportunity to observe in Manila the last glimpse of the aging sovereignty of Spain. I still remember some of the early barangays, and remembering them as I recall them today I think that we might go back and call upon the people in the barrios and villages to assume the responsibilities that our forefathers assumed during their time and see if we can have the success exhibited by our ancestors.

The barangay is not a military unit, much less a political or partisan organization. It is purely a civic organization voluntarily organized under the supervision of responsible persons. It can be converted into an agency of the national government not merely for relief or assistance but as interpreter or mouthpiece of the national government in all the undertakings sponsored by the central government. It may also serve as an instrumentality for members of each community to study their common problems, to feel their respective responsibility in their limited jurisdictions, and to promote immediate relief to family or neighbors. We cannot expect our population to realize that responsibility unless we impose it upon them. No one would volunteer to assume the role of leading a community at the risk of his own life and fortunes. It is necessary to infuse in the mind of every citizen that idea of responsibility, that idea of common interest, that idea of applying or developing the genius of each in order to draw something from individual initiative. We cannot expect our citizens to come forward and offer their services to the community. It is necessary that somebody has to tell them. Somebody has to induce them. Somebody has to prompt them and somebody has to inspire in them the necessity of getting together. That is the reason I conceived the organization of the barangay—to revive an old custom and infuse in the mind and soul of the people, especially of the newly created municipalities and districts, so that they plan an orderly development of their respective communities.

There is one practical question now which can afford us a test to the validity, the efficacy, the usefulness of the barangay associations at this moment. I have decided to distribute to the poor, to the farmers who have no means of promoting farms or agricultural interests because they have no farm implements or seedlings to start with, all the idle portion of the goods still in the bodega of the PRISCO. I also want to extend relief to the needy, especially in those places where the innocent inhabitants have been harassed or victimized by lawless elements who enjoy killing, raping, kidnapping, murdering, committing arson, and robbing the people of their limited possessions.

It is my desire to extend relief to the people in many communities which have been the subject of depredations, of cruel and inhuman treatment by the lawless elements. It is my desire to give impetus to increased production and I would like to distribute as much seedlings or initial capital that may be needed by the poor who cannot afford to start a decent livelihood with their own means.

All this help, pooled together, will be placed in the hands of a committee composed of national officials who are called upon to place before the people in a systematic, orderly, and scientific manner, a plan of distribution so that we may be able to benefit the needy. All these are to be carried out in the plans of the committee, utilizing the barangay agency for the purpose of reaching the masses in their outlying communities.

This will be the first test of the efficacy of the barangay association. Those municipalities or barrios which do not have a barangay system may be helpless, and it will be necessary for us to utilize the agencies like the PACSA to work for them. You know how difficult it is to depend upon these agencies when they are limited in personnel. I shall ask, therefore, the provincial, city, and local officials gathered here this noon to prepare the ground for this new activity, not only to present to them a new occasion to revive their interest in community life, but also to make the people realize that the Government has not forgotten them.

The time has come to render not mere lip service to the scheme of bringing the government closer to the people, or the people closer to the government. The time has come for us to act, and I want you to be the effective and prompt instruments of this policy in this area of our national organization. (Applause)

On the question of peace and order, many have been misguided by political fear; others, by military fear in connection with the issuance of the executive order providing assistance when called upon to do so by the barangay association or by the armed forces to cooperate with them in their activities. We are not arming members of the barangay with weapons to fight the lawless elements. We don’t require them to be attached to the Army, to the Constabulary, or to the local police in order to discharge duties in cooperation with the peace and order agency of the government. All we want is for them to see to it that in every barangay there is a record of each and every member of the community—of women, children, transients—so that at a given moment each barangay association can tell how many people there are in that association; how many of them are women, how many are children, how many are transients, how many are in need of relief, and perhaps how many are electors. The last accounting is the fear of our friends who refuse to join the barangay movement because they think that we are going to utilize the association for the benefit of the party in power. Whichever party is going to be in power, whichever administration will have to direct the affairs of this nation, will utilize this system to promote the civic welfare of the community. And it will furnish an effective way of checking what is known as padded electoral census.

There are other purposes specified in the executive order organizing the barangay association. But it is sufficient that this salient feature be brought to the mind of those who do not understand the patriotic aim of the barangay association so that the people may be able to appreciate it.

The governors and city mayors are expected to be the leaders in the dissemination of information in their respective jurisdictions. I have accepted the recommendation of the reorganization commission to place the Department of the Interior directly under the Office of the President, because I would then have direct contact with the governors, city mayors, and other officials of the political entities. Hence, if there is any municipality which fails in the accomplishment of its duties, I have to share the responsibility. (Applause)

If there be opportunities, I must likewise share in those opportunities. As it is, local officials who desire to make any complaints with the Department of the Interior have to report to the Secretary of the Interior first and then to my office. I want to cut the red tape so that instead of coming to Manila to see the Secretary of the Interior before coming to my office, you can take a short cut. You can come directly to me every time to talk and discuss the matter with me directly in order to secure immediate action. This is your opportunity. Do not misinterpret the recommendation of the Reorganization Commission regarding the Department of the Interior, and do not misinterpret my readiness to accept it.

I should like to have a heart-to-heart talk with you to thresh out many new policies. You have one more year to stay in office. I still have two years. I should like to utilize that time in the service of our people. If we put our shoulders together to the wheel, we shall succeed.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Extemporaneous Speech of President Quirino on the Barangay Day. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46(12) , 6011-6015.