Speech of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines Before the Senate of the United States of America

[Released on August 9, 1949]

OUR MOST URGENT PROBLEM: SECURITY

Mr. VICE PRESIDENT, DISTINGUISHED MEMBERS OF THE SENATE:

FIFTEEN years ago in this very hall, I took the oath as a member of the federal bar. It was this august body of the Senate that, for several months before the Tydings-McDuffie Act was converted into law on March 24, 1934, I had also frequently visited as ranking member of the last Philippine Independence Mission headed by our friend, the late President Manuel L. Quezon, to watch developments in the discussions of the provisions of the bill, in the original drafting of which, I now recall with pride, I cooperated with my dear friend, Senator Tydings.

I have come as a bidden guest of your Government. I am happy to report that America’s handiwork in the Orient has justified its existence as the first English-speaking republic in the East. When Commodore Dewey entered Manila Bay and God gave victory to his arms against the Spanish fleet, the American people little thought, and the Filipinos thought less, that 50 years afterwards America would assume a role, and the Filipinos an obligation, unparalleled in the history of liberty-loving peoples. In spite of herself, America assumed the responsibility of leadership in the extension of freedom and security to the peoples in that part of the globe. And the Philippines, correspondingly and in deep gratitude, is under obligation of extending the democratic way of life, as richly enjoyed by the Filipino people, to our neighborhood and elsewhere.

Today the Republic of the Philippines stands as a monument to the great American dream of freedom—the freedom to which the American nation was born and by which it lives, and which it has shared increasingly with the peoples of other lands.

I have recalled this little bit of history because time presses for a redefinition of the relations between the United States and the Philippines. I speak of the Philippines in a very special sense, not as just one more State with which this great Republic maintains certain ties, but ‘as a vital outpost of freedom and democracy in our side of the world—the very freedom which you taught us to treasure and of which you are today the great champion and defender.

How far we have proved ourselves worthy of freedom, the world knows. And the world will know that we are determined to fight for freedom so long as Bataan and Corregidor exist. So far as we are concerned the history of our unremitting struggle for liberty during the last four hundred years has predetermined our future course, should our freedom be menaced from any quarter.

Our Republic is only three years old. It was born under exceedingly difficult and trying circumstances, drawing in its birth not only the blood and tears of my countrymen but of yours, as well. Our faith in democracy is being tested most severely. But I ask you, remembering the history of your own original thirteen States that formed the Union, to believe that the Republic of the Philippines will emerge from these troubled times stronger in its faith in the soundness and incomparable advantages of the democratic way. The Filipino people have found in the democracy you have implanted in our land the fullness of life and enjoyment of its blessings, and they will not surrender them in exchange for the false Utopian promises of any totalitarian system.

But today the most urgent problem that confronts the Philippines and the other free countries of Asia is the problem of security. It is, in fact, the principal problem that besets all those States that He athwart the advancing tide of communism.

The Philippines rejoices with the rest of the free world that there has at least been erected a mighty bulwark against the advance of communism in Europe. That sector of the globe has been secured and the peace of the world, to that extent, has been stabilized.

However, it is obvious to everyone that the task of securing our free world is only half done. No one who realizes the extent of the menace to which Asia is exposed—the threat to Korea, the infiltration into Viet Nam, the debacle in China—can well afford to rest at ease now that the North Atlantic Pact is in full force and effect.

Asia with its vast population which accounts for more than half that of the world and with its incalculable resources, cannot and ought not to be lost to communism by default. And yet this is bound to happen unless something of the courage and vision that went into the forging of the democratic defenses in Europe is applied to the forging of a similar system of defense in Asia.

My concern over this problem has led me into taking the first steps towards this end. I realize fully that there are strong reasons why the United States may not too readily welcome the obligations that its active participation in this project would entail. I have not, therefore, made such participation a necessary condition for the initiation of the project itself.

But I feel very strongly that the free countries of Southeast Asia and the Pacific must themselves start the movement for closer cooperation in furtherance of their common interests in the political, economic, and cultural fields. No military commitments are contemplated at the moment. The reason is simple. The countries concerned have presently no armies, navies, or air forces to muster under the terms of a military alliance. Most of them have but newly emerged into independent nationhood and are faced with grave domestic problems. They count with no industrial base of sufficient strength or magnitude to support a major military undertaking and, by constitutional mandate, the Philippines renounces war as an instrument of national policy. Above all, it is my feeling that we have time in the still free countries of Asia to halt the advance of communism by non-military means.

Our problem is therefore basically economic. Asia must properly feed and clothe and house its millions, and raise their living standards. Technical aid is needed as well as capital to tap and develop its agricultural and industrial potentialities. Fortunately, President Truman’s four-point program and the United Nations’ project of technical assistance to under-developed countries give promise of aid to come.

We realize that, in the end, our salvation must come from self-help, and that the advantages of self-help will be enhanced tenfold if, as we now propose to do in the projected Pacific Union, we can convert self-help to mutual help.

This is the fundamental aim and purpose of the Pacific Union: To forge stronger ties of economic cooperation and collaboration among the free countries of Asia in order to enhance their prosperity, to hasten the march of self-government in order to afford concentration on internal development, and to preserve their freedom. If, after the Union has been organized and the modes of collaboration have been determined, the United States and the other democracies should desire to offer such help as should lie in their power to give, it need hardly be said that the offer would not only be warmly received but justly blessed. I am confident that the member States of the Union will gratefully accept the renewal, in peace and for peaceful ends, of an alliance that was forged in the last war for the sake of a common victory.

The time runs short and the margin of our common security grows narrower each day. As President of the Republic of the Philippines, I consider it my supreme responsibility in this perilous hour to call upon our friends everywhere, but especially our friends in America, not to tarry too long in the redefinition of fundamental attitudes towards Asia to which I have earlier referred. May I venture to hope that this process, which may well determine the fate of more than half of mankind in the next thousand years, will be a calm, deliberate movement towards clarity, vigor, and resolution.

I am grateful to the members of the Senate for this singular opportunity to say a few words from this mighty rostrum. I have spoken with a degree of frankness that might possibly sound somewhat unusual coming from almost any other guest of this powerful body. But for this I invoke the memory of our long association in the common endeavor of freedom and democracy that culminated in the establishment of the Republic of the Philippines. I invoke also the bitter sacrifices that the American and the Filipino peoples endured together in the recent war for freedom in the Pacific as sufficient justification for the grave concern that I have here expressed on behalf of that self same freedom.

That freedom is in peril for more than half the population of the globe. Only the blind will say that the menace does not concern America, because the history of the last two world wars shows all too clearly that this great democracy cannot remain unconcerned wherever and whenever the survival of free men in a free world is at stake.

Source : Quirino Foundation

Quirino, E. (1949). The new Philippine ideology . Manila : Bureau of Printing.