Transcription of Extemporaneous Address of His Excellency Elpidio Quirino President of the Philippines At the Youth Rally, under the auspices of the Manila Junior Chamber of Commerce

[Delivered at the Rizal Stadium, August 14, 1948]

Mr. Chairman, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:

I wish to thank the Jaycees for having given me the opportunity to address the youth of the land today. I have been a very close observer of the activities of this body and I believe I can safely assert of its achievements: It is a youthful organization with adult accomplishments.

This meeting, which I did not expect to be as huge a demonstration as it turned out to be, will be one of the great flames which will spur me to action in the discharge of my official duties. In my whole public life, I have never experienced such an inspiring spectacle as this one. There is a happy combination of youth, of beauty, of music, of art, and if I may say so, also of love [applause’], much of enthusiasm and a great deal of potential strength.

After enduring the vicissitudes of life for many years, I feel that it is a blessing to live today—but to be young is heaven! [applause]. It is heaven to me. I am really transported to higher levels. The enthusiasm I have seen in the face of the youth of the land today is unlike that in similar demonstrations of previous years wherein political interest and power pervaded. Such enthusiasm makes me really very, very happy at this moment. Even those of St. Scholastica [applause] , where my Wife had studied and my only daughter is still studying, seemed thrilled by the music of the Constabulary who this afternoon are not trigger happy but flute and drum happy.

My friends, I did not come here for the purpose of proselyting. I came so to speak, to blow the coal of useful flame, as Emerson would say. I came to commune with you at an hour when it is necessary that we understand each other. Many a time in the past, I also occupied seats on the platform, but more times I occupied the seats on the ground floor and heard my elders address me on topics of importance to our nation’s history. Many a time appeared national leaders in universities and colleges, converting those institutions as sounding boards for economic, political or partisan theories and issues. Today, I have not come for anything of that sort. I came to talk to you shoulder to shoulder on matters affecting mutually both young as well as old. It is not true that only the old can teach the young. It is as true to say that the old can learn from the young, because if you review the history of world movements among the youth, you will realize that it is the youth of every land that many times opened the eyes of their respective countries.

I shall not recite the facts of history at this moment. You know that the liberties that people now enjoy have been won not because of the promptings of the old but often because of the impetuosity or perhaps impatience of the young. The old empire, the old kingdoms, the old oligarchies have crumbled to pieces because the youth of the different lands have seen to it that they be changed in their respective regions. In the Philippines we have our own history. As early as the time of Rizal, we were guided by pure idealism. Rizal and Del Pilar and Lopez Jaena and Jacinto and Ponce and all the others who went to Spain were spurred to action there and conducted intensive propaganda for the Philippines not with personal and sordid but with pure and idealistic motives. Those were the days when idealism actuated the minds of our people, then unfortunately unsuccessful in their attempt to achieve their ideals.

It is our young people that led the unsuccessful revolution against Spain and later against the United States. Quezon and his comrades at that time were young and inspired when they started the campaign for independence under a democratic regime during America’s sovereignty. It was the youth again during the Japanese occupation that spurred our country to resist the cruel test of our character. The young guerrillas who went to the mountains and the youth who stayed in the city, with or without arms wherever they were, faced the Japanese under such daring and cruel circumstances that again showed the mettle of the Filipino race. So during the different stages of history, the youth of the land have opened our eyes and spurred us into action.

Today, I did not come to kindle any flame. I repeat, I only came to blow the coal to useful flame. What is this useful flame? My friends, the history of the Philippines has produced different types of leaders for different epochs. During the early days, our national impulse, as I said before, was idealistic. Then it took the form of force. Then it became a campaign for liberty and freedom under a democratic regime during peace time; then again it became a test of our moral caliber. But all these have nurtured the nature of the Filipino race.

Even during the Japanese time, when, we seemed powerless and unable to resist any longer, our country, though devastated, preserved its spiritual courage. Our country rose again because of our moral strength. Today, we live in a new epoch, an epoch of nation-building. What is expected of us at this stage of our history? This concern urged me to come and plead to you for peace and solidarity. Maybe because I still hear the reverberations in my whole being—the roar of cannon in the Revolution of 1896, in the Insurrection of 1898, and of our fight against the Japanese in 1945—and because I found myself in the crossfire during the liberation of 1945—I feel as if war, war, and war and more war is the problem in my lifetime. It must be for this reason that I love peace so much. I have been a child of wars and I am giving all the strength in me to achieve the peace that we need.

Peace, my friends, is the heritage that we are called upon to transmit to our children. We have already gone through sufferings and bloody orgies during so many years of struggling, after so many years of fighting every nation that set foot on our land. It is now up to us to preserve what still remains for us and for our posterity.

My friends, what are the essentials of peace? These, I have been trying to scrutinize day in and day out, at daytime and at night time, and I discovered that the only enemies of peace in this country are inside, perhaps in our inner being, in ourselves. We have been paying too much attention, specially recently, to those who dangle before us the goods of this world. We have been apt to forget the Creator when we love only the created. The inner feeling, the inner life, the ethical and spiritual strength of our being wavers. We lack self-discipline, that spiritual force that guides us in our action.

I do not often boast of my career as a public man, but I can tell you that since the very beginning, there has been one thing that I have remembered, the one thing that I have kept in mind, and that is to so conduct myself in public as well as in private so that I can look straight into any man’s eyes and tell him to go to hell. [Applause.] That self-discipline, that self-determination, that inner feeling, are things that anybody can achieve. It is the inner individual discipline that we need and there can never be an enduring national peace in our country unless we individually train ourselves in the arts of peace and the ways of peace, and be at peace with our conscience.

My friends, this material world needs today much of that feeling in ourselves. I have on many occasions been faced with the choice of whether my actuation should be guided by what I see and what I am forced to see and to hear or by what I think I should do in my own conscience. I have never been happier than when I followed the latter. After all, service to the people is also service to the inner being.

We are apt to surrender the Eternal Kingdom to the external world in our struggle for national existence. I do feel that there is something in our feeling that must guide our action everywhere and at all times, and .hat thing is the one I want to impart to you.

As I have said, it is only by training ourselves, by determining to lead a life of peace that we can avoid conflict with others, conflict with our brethren. The greatest and most unhappy mistake in our public life will be to see again, after we have fought so many years for liberty and peace, the loss of our peace simply because there are rivalries, designing and calculating minds who would squander our newly-won freedom for the sake of temporary advantages. This, my friends, is the whole gist of my appeal to you. Let us avoid such an eventuality. Let us avoid brothers killing brothers. Let us avoid our country going into disintegration simply because we are eager to assert again our power in arms or our individual political supremacy in our country. The whole world is watching us. The whole world is observing us. The whole world is lauding us not only because we knew how to rise from our prostration but because we have learned the ways of peace and are following the examples of peace.

The greatest commentary against this generation is that the future of our country is being shaped by both political and ulterior designs. My friends, the time has come when this generation should realize its own responsibility. Those so-called world saviors, those who seem to monopolize patriotism, those who would champion all championable causes and play the role of exclusive authors of beneficent things, those who alone claim the capacity to transmit to future generations a stronger and happier future—those are to be told that they are not the only ones responsible for the maintenance of the government we have established. You and I are responsible; you are not too young to assume responsibility.

The Jaycees, composed of young men between 21 and 35, are just the type of men who must now help assume responsibility. Although young, they can help greatly. There is nothing better, there is nothing surer and more helpful to an idealistic movement than the expression of approval on the part of the youth including those not yet 21.

But we must not , my friends, devote our time to denunciations and demolitions. We must also erect, construct and establish. We live in an era of nation-building when we have to dig our mines, when we have to reconstruct our devastated communities, when we have to develop our international commerce, to live with other nations, to be friendly with them, to cultivate the world’s friendship and goodwill. We have to make this country productive and active as a member in the new world organizations. We must be an asset and not a liability to the United Nations. We must contribute our efforts to the peace of the world by maintaining in the Philippines a unit of peace and solidarity.

My friends, I believe that the youth of the land will know its responsibilities. The young of today work hard; many of them are now earning their daily bread and even supporting their families. They know better than the youth of yesterday who simply sat snugly in the laps of their fathers and mothers waiting for assistance. The youth of today is active and alert, born in an age when everybody has to play a hard part, and the part that you are to play is creative, substantial, and constructive. Your participation should not be secondary; it must be direct and decisive.

Your creative genius, therefore, faces a challenge, and your high sense of responsibility a test. My friends, if this generation is going to deliver this country to the next generation in better shape than now, we must begin to realize and to shoulder the responsibility. It is only when you face responsibility that you realize that you are powerful, that you are safe from those who would poison your mind to convert you into a tool for the fashioning of their designs. You are not going to allow yourselves to be the victims of any such individuals or organizations. Your responsibility, liberty having been won, is to keep that liberty intact for your country, and your people will be proud of you.

So, my appeal today is please help maintain our peace of mind. Tranquility in our country will enable us to concentrate on the activities that are productive and creative and that will make us greater and stronger. I wish you to share the responsibility in our task of construction in this our new epoch. And I challenge you, my friends, to utilize your creative genius and help fashion and nurture our future. The future is yours. It is in your hands. May you live and labor hard and long so that you can enjoy to the fullest the privilege and the glory that constitute your rich heritage. I thank you. [Long applause.]

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Transcription of extemporaneous address of President Elpidio Quirino at the Youth Rally, Rizal Stadium, at 5:30 p. m., August 14, 1948, under the auspices of the Manila Junior Chamber of Commerce. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44(8) , 2643-2647.