MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 898

REORGANIZING THE COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION COOPERATIVES AND BROADENING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS

WHEREAS, under Memorandum Order No. 395 dated 19 October 1973, there was created the Committee on Transportation Cooperatives in the Office of the President for the prime purpose of promoting and facilitating the early formation of transportation cooperatives;

WHEREAS, under Executive Order No. 708 dated 27 July 1981, the Committee on Transportation Cooperatives was attached to the Ministry of Transportation and Communications to enhance the efficiency of government in the control and supervision of facilities and services related to transportation;

WHEREAS, under the existing government organization, transportation cooperatives are now supervised by both the Ministry of Agriculture, through the Bureau of Cooperatives Development and the Ministry of Transportation and Communications, through the Committee on Transportation Cooperatives;

WHEREAS, a single agency, the Ministry of Transportation and Communications, can more effectively coordinate the regulation and operations of transportation cooperatives, in line with the integration and rationalization of public transportation systems in the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. Composition . The Committee on Transportation Cooperatives (CTC), created under Memorandum Order No. 395 dated 19 October 1973, is hereby renamed, Office of Transportation Cooperatives and reconstituted to be composed of an appointee from the Office of the President as Chairman; the Deputy Minister of Transportation and Communications as Co-Chairman; the Deputy Minister of Labor and Employment, the Director-General of the Philippine Constabulary/Integrated National Police, the Chairman of the Board of Transportation, the National Chairman of Katipunan ng mga Kooperatibang Pansasakyan ng Pilipinas, Inc., as members and who shall serve in an ex-officio capacity.

There shall be an Executive Director of the Office of Transportation Cooperatives who shall also sit as member thereof. He shall be appointed by the President and shall serve for a term of two (2) years with an annual compensation to be fixed by the Committee.

The officials next on rank to, or such officials duly designated by the regular members shall serve as alternate members. The alternate members shall attend meetings of the committee and receive the corresponding per diems, whenever their principals are absent.

The Chairman and each member of the Office of Transportation Cooperatives shall receive a monthly commutable representation allowance and a per diem for every meeting actually attended at such rate as may be determined by the Committee.

SECTION 2. Powers and Functions . All powers and functions now exercised by the Bureau of Cooperatives Development over the transportation cooperatives and such other allied business operated by said cooperatives are hereby transferred to the Office of Transportation Cooperatives. However, the privileges, benefits, assistance and all other aids enjoyed by them, as well as, the limitations, restrictions and constraints imposed by the Bureau of Cooperatives Development on cooperatives shall also be applicable to the transportation cooperatives. The Office of Transportation Cooperatives shall coordinate with the Bureau of Cooperatives Development, in order that the total cooperative movement shall remain integrated.

The Office of Transportation Cooperatives shall promulgate and implement rules and regulations to govern the promotion, organization, registration, regulations, supervision and development of the transportation cooperatives, subject to the approval of the Ministry of Transportation and Communications.

Said office is authorized to call upon any official/personnel of any Ministry, Bureau of Office for such technical assistance it may require in the performance of its objectives.

SECTION 3. Privileges . All existing transportation cooperatives and those that shall hereafter the formed are exempt from payment of common carriers tax, in lieu of sales tax as provided for in Section 5(a) of P.D. 175, including exemption from income tax for a period of five (5) years from the date of registration with the Office of Transportation Cooperatives; provided that a substantial portion of the net income of the cooperatives is returned to the members in the form of interest and/or patronage refunds. All such cooperatives shall also continue to enjoy and be extended all the privileges and incentives granted to cooperatives under P.D. 175 and other existing laws.

SECTION 4. Repealing Clause . All charters, executive orders, proclamations, rules and regulations or parts thereof, that are in conflict and inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 5. Effectivity . This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 28th day of May in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty Three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1983). [Executive Order Nos. : 858 – 927]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.