MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 168

CREATING A SMALL FARMERS COMMISSION

WHEREAS, small farmers and settlers who have migrated to Mindanao and other parts of the country need the protection and assistance of the government from landgrabbers and the machinations of vested and powerful interests;

WHEREAS, tension and social unrest, if not bloodshed, are often the outcome of conflicts among Christian and non-Christian settlers and farmers especially in Mindanao;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Small Farmers Commission composed of the following:

The Commission shall be responsible for the formulation and implementation in coordination with other governmental agencies of a program of action for small farmers and settlers.

It shall look into the problems of small settlers and farmers arising out of conflicts involving public lands, land conflicts among Christian and non-Christian settlers and farmers; and it shall settle their conflicts and differences. The Commission shall give assistance and protection, especially to small settlers and farmers in Mindanao against landgrabbers.

It shall also investigate situations and study problems peculiar to small farmers and settlers, take appropriate action or submit recommendations to the President and/or other government agencies concerned for necessary decision or action thereon.

The Commission is hereby granted all the powers of an investigating body under Section 71 and 580 of the Revised Administrative Code, including the powers to summon witnesses, administer oaths or take testimony or evidence relevant to the investigation, and shall have access to, and the right to examine any book, document, paper or record, as well as the right to require production thereof under a subpoena duces tecum .

The Commission is empowered to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may need for the accomplishment of its task and to create such sub-bodies as may be necessary to implement this order.

The Land Administrative Division of the Land Authority shall be the Secretariat of the Commission through which all communications involving conflicting claims between settlers and farmers and other claimants shall be coursed through for processing and action, and the Chairman may, when the need arises, request the temporary assignment of such competent personnel of any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government to the Commission in furtherance of its purposes and functions under this order.

The Commission shall adopt the necessary rules and regulations including a standard operating procedure, not inconsistent with existing laws and orders of the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources and other agencies of the government, to implement the provisions of this Order.

Executive Order No. 73 and 117, series of 1967 and 1968, respectively, are hereby repealed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 168, February 5, 1969