MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 829

WHEREAS, the proper enforcement and effective execution of the laws of the land is the duty and responsibility of the national government;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Presidential Letter of Instructions No. 824-79, a National Committee on Anti-Organized Crime was established to formulate and implement plans and control all activities relative to the integration of the five pillar approach to the National Criminal Justice System, particularly on organized crimes;

WHEREAS, the Peace and Order Council created pursuant to Executive Order 727 s-81 has responsibilities which encompass those of the National Committee on Anti-Organized Crime created pursuant to Letter of Instruction No. 824 s-79 and to prevent overlapping of functions, a need exist to abolish the National Committee on Anti-Organized Crime;

WHEREAS, there exists a need for closer cooperation among all law enforcement agencies of the government involved in the enforcement of general and special laws to insure unified direction and integration of effort throughout the country in the suppression of criminal activities on a day-to-day basis, particularly at the operating levels.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct the following:

1. The National Committee on Anti-Organized Crime, as established pursuant to Letter of Instructions No. 824 s-79 is hereby abolished and its functions, duties, responsibilities and instrumentalities absorbed by the Peace and Order Council created pursuant to Executive Order No. 727 s-81.

2. Law enforcement coordinating bodies to be known as Law Enforcement Coordinating Committee are hereby created and constituted at the national, regional and provincial levels of the Peace and Order Council to serve as a venue for the coordination of all law enforcement activities of various government law enforcement agencies.

3. The Law Enforcement Coordinating Committee at the national level shall consist of:

Chief of Constabulary/Director General, Integrated National Police – Chairman Director, National Bureau of Investigation Director, Finance Ministry Investigation Bureau Director, Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Commandant, Philippines Coast Guard Commissioner, Commission on Immigration and Deportation Chief, Operations Control, National Intelligence and Security Authority Commissioner, Bureau of Customs Commissioner, Bureau of Internal Revenue Director, Bureau of Forest Development General Manager, Philippine Ports Authority Commanding General, Aviation Security Command Director, Bureau of Land Transportation Commanding General, Civil Relations Service, AFP Executive Director, NAPOCCENT, and corresponding heads of all other national government agencies with law enforcement functions.

4. The regional Law Enforcement Coordinating Committee shall consist of the PC/INP Regional Commander, who shall be the Chairman, the heads/administrators of regional or field offices of government agencies mentioned in paragraph 3 of this order, and the Peace and Order Coordinator of the region.

5. The provincial Law Enforcement Coordinating Committee shall consist of the PC/INP Provincial Commander, who shall be the Chairman; the heads of provincial field offices or stations of government agencies mentioned in paragraph 3 of this order, and the Peace and Order Coordinator of the province.

6. The Law Enforcement Coordinating Committee at all levels shall each maintain a coordinating center through which it shall coordinate the day-to-day law enforcement activities of the various member-agencies.

7. Each Law Enforcement Coordinating Committees at all levels shall meet at least once a month to discuss, monitor and assess the law enforcement programs of the government.

8. The Chairman, Peace and Order Council shall issue appropriate rules and regulations in the implementation of this Executive Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 759 – 862]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.