MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1071

AUTHORIZING THE COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS TO PAY OVERTIME COMPENSATION TO ITS EMPLOYEES AND TO FIX THE RATES THEREFOR

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 1177 provides:

“SEC. 70. Additional Compensation for Overtime Service . Officials and employees of the National Government when required to work overtime after regular working hours during ordinary days, during half-day sessions, or on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, by the heads of departments concerned, to finish work that must be completed within a specified time, may be paid overtime compensation from any unexpended balances of the appropriation from any salaries and wages authorized in the General Appropriations Act and under such guidelines as may be issued by the President.”

WHEREAS, the work and activities in connection with the holding of elections and other political exercises have to be completed on or before certain fixed dates and the scheduled day of completion thereof may not be met by rendition of work solely during regular working days and hours;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me by vested by the Constitution and by law, hereby direct that the Commission on Elections may authorize the payment of compensation from appropriations provided for the election or for the Commission, to its officials and employees and those assigned thereto, except the Chairman and Commissioners of said Commission, for overtime services rendered on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, or after required office hours on regular working days at the rates to be fixed by the Commission on Elections which shall not exceed, for any one month, the equivalent of their respective regular monthly compensation.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030 – 1093 ]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff .