MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 743

TRANSFERRING THE MANAGEMENT OF THE RIZAL MEMORIAL SPORTS COMPLEX AND THE GINTONG ALAY TRAINING CAMP IN BAGUIO CITY TO PROJECT: GINTONG ALAY

WHEREAS, the intensive and extensive training program of Project: Gintong Alay has achieved significant improvement in athletic performance not only in track and field but also in other sports as shown by results in international and major competitions;

WHEREAS, present efforts to further develop and improve the program of Project: Gintong Alay for the training of athletes are hampered by the lack of centralized facilities to provide the venues for training and competitions;

WHEREAS, the renovated Rizal Memorial Sports Complex, can, for the meantime, adequately meet the requirements of Project: Gintong Alay;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order that:

SECTION I. – The management, operations, supervision, direction, administration and control of the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex and the Gintong Alay Training Camp in Baguio City originally attended to, administered and supervised by the Ministry of Youth and Sports Development and the Ministry of Education and Culture, respectively, is hereby transferred to Project: Gintong Alay.

SEC. 2. – The transfer of such authority and supervision from the Ministry of Youth and Sports Development, now absorbed under the Ministry of Education and Culture, shall also include the transfer of all assets, whether fixed of variable, i.e., land and improvements thereon including facilities, previously disbursed and allocated to said ministries.

SEC. 3. – To insure immediate and orderly transfer as hereby provided and ordered, the Ministry of Education and Culture shall submit to Project: Gintong Alay a detailed inventory list of all its assets, fixed or variable, and other pertinent data information with respect to the status and progress of the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex and the Gintong Alay Training Camp, and shall conduct through its resident COA auditor an audit examination of the funds of the said sports complex and training camp within (6) days from date hereof, preparatory to the formal transfer thereof to Project: Gintong Alay its audit findings and report duly certified by the auditor shall be submitted to, and formally accepted by, Project: Gintong Alay.

SEC. 4. – Gintong Alay is hereby authorized, subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines, to enter into such contract with the private sector, as it may deem necessary for the purpose of administering, managing and developing the Memorial Sports Complex and the Gintong Alay Training Camp.

SEC. 5. – All appropriations or funds authorized under the 1982 budgetary appropriations under the Ministry of Education and Culture for the project shall be transferred and allocated to Project: Gintong Alay.

SEC. 6. – All Decrees, Letters of Instructions or Implementations, Circulars, Orders, Rules and Regulations or parts thereof, that are inconsistent herewith are hereby revoked or modified accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 706 – 780]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.