MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 175

FIXING OFFICE HOURS DURING THE HOT SEASON

WHEREAS, Section 564 of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended by Republic Act No. 1880, reduces the period of labor in the government service during the hot season to five continuous hours but at the same time leaves the observance thereof to the discretion of heads of departments, bureaus and offices subject to the requirements of the service; and

WHEREAS, this Administration is determined to protect the health and welfare of government employees without, however, impairing the interest of the public at large, especially at this time when we are strengthening the foundation of a sound and efficient public service;

NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the provisions of Section 564 of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, the office hours from Monday to Friday of all departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government, including the provincial, city and municipal governments and all corporations owned or controlled by the Government, during the period from April 1 to June 15, 1969, both dates inclusive, shall be from seven-thirty o’clock in the morning to twelve-thirty o’clock in the afternoon. The provisions of this Order shall not apply to the offices in the City of Baguio, whether national, provincial or municipal and to officers and employees engaged in field work.

However, in the interest of the service, the heads of departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government, including the provincial and municipal governments and all corporations owned or controlled by the Government, are enjoined to require at least one-half of their personnel to be on duty in the afternoon.

Heads of government agencies and/or offices involved in the implementation of the Administration’s crash rice program and public works construction projects shall make proper and necessary arrangements and/or adjustments in their respective jurisdictions of their office hours with a view to utilizing available manpower services without detriment to the deadlines and time schedules of the said program and projects, provided that the five-hour office schedule herein set shall not in any case be reduced.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 175, March 22, 1969