MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1092

CREATING THE CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM COMMISSION

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to initiate substantive changes to establish a fully responsive government and to reflect the mandate of the people as expressed in the special elections of February 7, 1986:

WHEREAS, to achieve the above objective, it would be necessary to effect changes in the Constitution;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution hereby order and ordain:

Section 1. Creation of the Constitutional Reform Commission . – There is hereby created a Constitutional Reform Commission, hereinafter referred to as the “Commission”.

The Commission shall be composed of a Chairman and thirteen (13) members. The Vice-President of the Philippines shall be the Chairman of the Commission with the following as members: three (3) representatives to be nominated by the majority ruling party, three (3) representatives to be nominated by the dominant opposition party, one (1) representative each from the Integrated Bar of the Philippines, the Philippine Bar Association and the Philippine Constitutional Association, and the four (4) surviving retired Chief Justices of the Supreme Court of the Philippines.

Sec. 2. Primary Responsibility . – The Commission shall review existing constitutional provisions, particularly the structure of government and the powers of the different branches thereof and Amendment No. 6, and recommend proposed amendments to the Constitution.

The Commission shall submit its study and recommendations to the Batasan Pambansa not later than 90 days from date hereof.

Sec. 3. Effectivity . — This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 20th day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030 – 1093 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.