MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 940

OPTIMIZING THE USE OF EXISTING TRAINING AND EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES THROUGH THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A VOCATIONAL TECHNICAL (VOCTECH) NETWORK OF TRAINING AND EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS ON A VOLUNTARY AND COOPERATIVE BASIS.

WHEREAS, the National Manpower and Youth Council hereinafter referred to as NMYC, and the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports hereinafter referred to as MECS, are major partners in human resources development;

WHEREAS, the NMYC has existing manpower training centers;

WHEREAS, the MECS has existing vocational/technical schools;

WHEREAS, the NMYC is currently implementing its World Bank-assisted Vocational Training Project and the MECS its Asian Development Bank-assisted Vocational/Technical Education Project;

WHEREAS, there is a need to optimize the use of existing scarce resources and integrate the multiplicity of activities in vocational and technical education;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. Establishment of a VOCTECH Network . There is hereby established a voluntary and cooperative network of vocational/technical education institutions and manpower training centers.

SEC. 2. Statement of Objectives . The Network shall have the following objectives:

a. To integrate, coordinate and systematize the development of vocational/technical education and training in the country through a comprehensive plan to ensure the continued production of skilled manpower needed by industry;

b. To optimize the use of limited funds from relevant programs and projects assisted by the World Bank (WB) and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and from other related foreign-assisted projects by sharing expertise and resources in the management and implementation of such projects;

c. To maximize the use of limited expensive training tools, equipment, and facilities through sharing among the members of the network;

d. To ensure the availability, retention and continued development of highly qualified and motivated vocational/technical trainors and teachers; and

e. To upgrade the quality of vocational/technical education and training through the adoption of national training standards and publications and dissemination of training modules and course materials.

SEC. 3. Advisory Board . There is hereby created an Advisory Board for policy direction to be composed of the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports as ex-officio to chairman, the Chairman of the National Manpower and Youth Council as ex-officio co-chairman, and ex-officio members: The Presidents of vocational/technical state college and universities, the Chairman of the Advisory Committee NMYC-WB Vocational Training Project, and the Executive Director of the Project Development Implementation and Management Office of the MECS (PDIMO/MECS).

SEC. 4. Executive Committee . There is hereby created and Executive Committee which shall direct the implementation of policies. The Committee shall be composed of the following: Chairman of the Advisory Committee, NMYC-WB Vocational Training Project as Chairman, the Executive Director of PDIMO-MECS as vice-chairman and as members: the Director General of the NMYC and the Director of the Bureau of Technical Vocational Education of MECS.

SEC. 5. Secretariat . There is hereby organize a Secretariat to plan and implement the policies and programs of the Network to be headed by the Project Director of NMYC-WB Vocational Training Project as Secretary General and assisted by the Project Manager of MECS-ADB Technical and Vocational Education Project as Assistant Secretary General.

The Secretary General shall organize regional networks throughout the country with the NMYC as its Secretariat and a National Network Committee composed of the chairman of the various regional network.

The Secretary General shall organize Program Committees for trainors/instructors training, curriculum/course development, learning materials development, training equipment/facilities, trades standards/information system/data bank, evaluation/research, manpower guidance, and special programs.

SEC. 6. Assistance from other Agencies . The Executive Committee may call upon any government entity for any such assistance as may be required in the pursuance of the Network’s objectives.

SEC. 7. Funding . To support the activities of the Networks, funds shall be made available by the NMYC and the MECS.

SEC. 8. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Executive Order Nos. : 928-1029]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.