MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 185

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 10 DATED FEBRUARY 24, 1966, ENTITLED “CENTRALIZING THE CUSTODY AND DISPOSITION OF CONFISCATED GOODS AND PAYMENT OF REWARD TO INFORMERS”

The second, third, fourth, and fifth paragraphs of Executive Order No. 10 dated February 24, 1966, are hereby amended to read as follows:

“Every seizure or confiscation of goods under internal revenue or customs laws shall, within twenty-four hours, be reported by the government agency or official concerned to the Secretary of Finance, describing the goods with particularity and stating the quantity thereof. In addition, the physical custody or possession of such goods shall be transferred to the Administrator of the CADA, or to his designated representative, by the government agency or official concerned within thirty-six hours from seizure or confiscation: Provided however , That leave of court shall be obtained thereof in any case where a court has already assumed jurisdiction over said goods: and, Provided , further , That adequate samples thereof may be retained for purposes of evidence in appropriate administrative and/or judicial proceedings, with prior leave of court in the latter case, which shall be instituted by the officer concerned without undue delay.”

“The Administrator of CADA in addition to his present duties and responsibilities is hereby further authorized to conduct investigations under Section 580 of the Revised Administrative Code and to maintain intelligence activities in order to carry out more effectively the above objectives, call upon or detail any government officer or employee outside of CADA for temporary service and avail of the facilities and personnel of existing offices in the Bureau of Customs and the Bureau of Internal Revenue which are presently performing such functions mentioned above. The Administrator may also perform such other functions as may from time to time be assigned to him by the President or the Secretary of Finance.”

“The Administrator of CADA shall issue such implementing rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out this Order.”

“Funds necessary for the implementation of this Executive Order shall be allotted from proceeds of sales derived from seized, confiscated, abandoned and/or unclaimed goods from all ports of entry, including the Collection District of the Port of Manila and the Manila International Airport.”

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 185, July 24, 1969