MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 277

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE COPPER INDUSTRY

In order to promote the orderly development of the copper industry and to hasten the further processing of copper ores and concentrates into blister and refined copper products, and to protect the interests of the country in the long run, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby establish and create the Presidential Advisory Committee on the Copper Industry which shall be composed of the following members:

From the Government:

1. Chairman, Board of Investments 2. Secretary of Finance or his representative 3. Director, Bureau of Mines

From the Private Sector:

The chief executives of the copper producing companies, or their authorized representatives

It shall be the primary duty and responsibility of the Committee to plan for an orderly development of the copper industry, specifically the relationship between the expansion of mining and the further processing of ores into blister and refined copper products. It shall also assess the future trade possibilities considering world production and consumption of copper products. In addition, the Committee shall also look into the effects of by-products especially the production of fertilizer.

The Committee is hereby empowered to create a steering committee to assist it in the performance of its functions.

All heads of departments, bureaus, agencies and instrumentalities of the government are hereby directed o extend full cooperation to the Committee. The Chairman of the Committee may, when the need arises, ask for the detail and temporary assignment of personnel and equipment from other offices,

The Board of Investments shall act as the Secretariat of the Committee.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.