MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1020

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL COUNCIL FOR INDUSTRIAL PEACE

WHEREAS, the promotion and maintenance of industrial peace is a vital component in the national efforts for development;

WHEREAS, recent experience in labor management relations indicates an increasing incidence of labor disputes and work stoppages resulting in tremendous loss in production and worker’s income;

WHEREAS, a concerted effort is imperative in promoting productivity and industrial partnership as well as in preempting industrial unrest in order to minimize its deleterious effects on our efforts for national economic recovery under a regime of free collective bargaining;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby create a Presidential Council for Industrial Peace.

SECTION 1. The Presidential Council for Industrial Peace shall be composed of the following: three (3) representatives from the Workers sector; three (3) representatives from the Employer’s sector; and four (4) representatives from the Government sector, namely the Minister of Labor and Employment, Minister of Trade and Industry, Minister of Agriculture and Minister of Agrarian Reform.

The Minister of Labor and Employment shall act as Chairman of the Council and the Minister of Trade and Industry, as Vice-Chairman.

SECTION 2. The Council shall have the following objectives:

(a) to integrate and harness the efforts of the tripartite sectors – government, workers and employers towards the promotion of industrial and agrarian peace and stability as an essential element of development;

(b) to pursue the higher levels of productivity and economic development through improvements in labor-management relations and the formulation of voluntary cases of conduct to insure industrial harmony and cooperation;

(c) to respond to the causes and factors of labor and agrarian unrest through the application of agreed methods, collective bargaining as well as innovative and indigenous approaches in the prevention and settlement of labor disputes; and

(d) to promote national development through the participation of the tripartite sectors in the formulation and implementation of appropriate plans and programs

SECTION 3. The Chairman of the Council shall provide the Secretariat to the Council, to be composed of officials and employees of the appropriate agencies of the Ministry of Labor and Employment and shall perform the following functions:

1. To hold regular meetings for the purpose of formulating plans for carrying out the objectives of the Council;

2. To convoke national and regional tripartite conferences and other meetings to gather views and recommendations in identifying the causes of industrial and agrarian unrest and remedial measures that should be taken.

3. To coordinate with all agencies of the government and employers’ and workers’ organizations in the formulation and implementations of measures designed to attain maximum productivity in an environment which assures of peace, stability and justice;

4. To submit periodic reports to the President, the Cabinet and the Batasang Pambansa on the projects and programs of the Council;

SECTION 4. The Council is authorized to allocate such amount as may be necessary for the operational expenses of the Council including the per diems and allowances of its members to be drawn from the respective appropriations of the four member ministries.

SECTION 5. This Executive Order shall take effect upon its approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this First day of May, 1985.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.