MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1068

AUTHORIZING THE MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO ESTABLISH AND OPERATE A BARANGAY EDUCATIONAL AND ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM

WHEREAS, it is a declared policy of the state to promote the development of every barangay as a basic political and socio-economic unit;

WHEREAS, in recognition of such policy, the government has provided barangay development funds and fully mobilized available resources to establish productive enterprises that would provide sources of livelihood within the barangay;

WHEREAS, despite existing government efforts, there is an urgent need to reach the fully energized 18,500 barangays in the country and provide them with educational, informational and entertainment programs that would enhance the range and quality of participation of barangay members in the basic functions of government and society;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. Barangay Educational and Entertainment System . – The Ministry of local government is hereby authorized to establish, operate and maintain a Barangay Educational and Entertainment System, hereinafter referred to as the “BEES,” in each barangay throughout the country.

SEC. 2. General Objectives . – The BEES project, utilizing immediately available audio-visual equipment and technology, shall have the following general objectives:

(a) To provide a scheme of educational, informational and entertainment programs at the barangay level consistent with the requirements for accelerated socio-economic development.

(b) To assist in establishing the necessary linkage between the barangays and other government instrumentalities in terms of affecting a direct flow of communications, regarding local and national development efforts.

(c) To assist in providing basic information to barangay-based livelihood enterprises and activities regarding the marketing of goods and commodities.

(d) To assist in disseminating researches and studies relative to the effective development and implementation of agricultural programs and livelihood projects.

SEC. 3. Implementation . – To achieve the objectives of this Executive Order, the Minister of Local Government shall have the following functions, duties and powers:

(a) To promulgate the implementing procedures and guidelines of the BEES project.

(b) To establish and supervise a working staff which shall provide support services to the project. The services of personnel from other agencies may be availed of as necessary and the payment of honoraria is hereby authorized for deserving personnel.

(c) To enter into contracts with private institutions or entities, whether foreign or domestic, for such services as may be necessary to effectively establish, and operate and maintain the BEES project.

(d) To call upon any office, agency or instrumentality of the government for such assistance or may be required in the effective implementation of the provisions of this Executive Order.

SEC. 4. Coordination . – The Ministry of Local Government may create or organize regional, provincial or local coordination centers as the need arises to coordinate, oversee and monitor the implementation of the BEES.

The Office of Media Affairs and the Ministry of Local Government for the accomplishment of the objectives of this Executive Order.

SEC. 5. Reports . – The Minister of Local Government shall submit to the President regular reports on BEES programs, and target activities and implementation strategies and accomplishments.

SEC. 6. Importations . – All importations of equipment, accessories, spare parts, materials and supplies, directly and actually needed and to be used exclusively by the Ministry of Local Government in the implementation of the BEES project shall be exempted from any and all tariff and customs duties, dues and charges, any provision of existing laws to the contrary notwithstanding.

SEC. 7. Funding . – The BEES project shall be financed and supported by allocations from available funds of the Ministry of Local Government or other sources as may be authorized by the President.

SEC. 8. Repealing Clause . – All provisions of existing laws, proclamations, orders, decrees, instructions, rules and regulations or parts thereof contrary to or in conflict with the provisions of this decree are hereby modified or repealed accordingly.

SEC. 9. Separability Clause . – Any portion or provisions of this Executive Order that may be declared unconstitutional shall not have the effect of nullifying the other portions thereof; provided, that such remaining portions can still stand and be given effect in their entirety to accomplish the objectives of this Executive Order.

SEC. 10. Effectivity . – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th day of November, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030 – 1093 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.