MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1040

TRANSFERRING THE NATIONAL POLICE COMMISSION TO THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

WHEREAS, under Executive Order No. 1012, as amended, operational supervision and direction over all units of the Integrated National Police (INP) force stationed or assigned in the different cities and municipalities all over the country, has been transferred to the city and municipal governments concerned, until further orders from the President of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, in furtherance of the constitutional mandate for the integration of the INP, the INP should be subject to the command, control and general supervision of the President of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, there is no existing organization within the Office of the President to assist in the exercise of the power of administrative control and supervision over all INP units;

WHEREAS, it thus becomes necessary to return the National Police Commission to the Office of the President to serve as the Presidential arm in all matters affecting the INP;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested upon me by the Constitution and by law, particularly Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The National Police Commission shall henceforth be under the Office of the President of the Philippines. As may be directed by and under the control of the President of the Philippines, it shall exercise administrative control and supervision over all units of the Integrated National Police (INP) force throughout the country.

SEC. 2. All such appropriations for the Integrated National Police for the current year as may be necessary to implement this Executive Order shall be transferred to the National Police Commission, after consultation among the Chairman of the National Police Commission, the Director-General of the Integrated National Police, the Minister of the Budget and all other agencies concerned.

SEC. 3. All laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations and other enactments, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SEC. 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 10th day of July in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030-1093]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.