MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 313

CREATING A COTTAGE INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL AND A COTTAGE INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT ENTERPRISE

WHEREAS, unemployment and under-employment of workers have been among the main cause of poverty, low income and substandard living conditions;

WHEREAS, cottage industry development is one of the most effective ways for the implementation of employment policy by the National Cottage Industries Development Authority and the National Manpower and Youth Council which are undertaking the main task of mobilization of human resources;

WHEREAS, there is necessity for the integration and coordination of planning, programming and implementation of projects relating to skills training and employment generation through cottage-industry entrepreneurship, organization of cottage industry producers’ cooperatives, and like projects both by the government and the private sector; and

WHEREAS, efficient planning, coordination and implementation of such program could best be achieved through functional cooperation among various government agencies charged with the responsibilities relevant thereto;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Cottage Industry Development Council as central planning and coordinating authority, and a Cottage Industry Development Enterprise to implement the policies of the Council.

A. Cottage Industry Development Council (CIDC) .

1. Composition . The Council shall be imposed of:

2. Functions of the Council . The Council shall have the following duties and functions:

a. Formulate and adopt an integrated employment promotion plan and program in cottage industry development as component of the over-all social and economic development plan;

b. Correlate the functions of the agencies represented therein to cottage industry development with emphasis on generating massive employment opportunities for the unemployed and the underemployed;

c. Determine such functions as will maximize employment and enhance income levels among cottage industry workers and producers and recommend a production program oriented to both the export and domestic requirements for cottage industry products;

d. Formulate such policy on cooperatives development as may be found viable and feasible with the context of cottage industry development; and

e. Study and formulate such functions as shall ensure the social and economic objectives of the program.

3. Cottage Industry Development Enterprise (CIDE) . The Enterprise shall serve as implementing agency for such plans and projects as may be approved by Council. The Administrator of the National Cottage Industries Development Authority shall serve as concurrent Executive Director thereof. The Executive Director shall appoint, designate and assign such personnel and perform such functions as may be necessary to carry out specific responsibilities in connection with said projects.

4. The CIDE, with the approval of the Council, is authorized to draw from available budgetary appropriations of any of the agencies therein represented such funds and other assistance as may be required to carry out and implement said program; negotiate loans from financing institutions and receive such financial and material assistance as may be made available from other public and private sources for use of the Enterprise.

5. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FLORES BAYOT Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 313, April 23, 1971