MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 512

CREATING A TASK FORCE ON THE FORMULATION OF A NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAM ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

WHEREAS, it is recognized that science and technology is a critical resource in the promotion of national development and improvement of people’s well-being;

WHEREAS, it is a constitutional responsibility to strengthen and develop science and technology to the fullest possibility as per Article XIV Section 4 of the Philippine Constitution;

WHEREAS, an effective solution to the problems confronting the country requires a science and technology program responsive to and effective in meeting our national development goals and objectives.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President and Prime Minister of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. It is hereby declared that for the purpose of supporting national development for the benefit of majority of the people, a competent study be conducted to formulate a national action program on science and technology development and delivery.

Section 2. It is hereby further declared that a national action program on science and technology be formulated in conjunction with the aforementioned study, to consist of the following:

a. Overall program plan on science and technology development and delivery which provides policy guidelines, priority programs and general scheme for development in this concern;

b. Project studies, which must include, but not limited to, the following:

(1) identification and establishment of a network of research institutes necessary to support the needs of industry and of government according to prioritized key sectors, to include determination of manpower, resource and organizational requirements;

(2) formulation of a program on the utilization of Filipino expertise here and abroad, to include schemes on how such experts may be mobilized to support national development efforts and a review and assessment of the Balik-Scientist program and the Science Attache System;

(3) development and organization of an inter-linked information system on science and technology in order to systematically organize the necessary foreign and local information base and monitor developments on science and technology;

c. Technology delivery programs and impact projects relating to, but not limited to, agricultural development, industrial development, infrastructure programs and delivery of social services.

Section 3. To achieve the above mentioned purposes and objectives, there is hereby created a Task Force on the Formulation of a National Action Programs on Science and Technology.

a. The Task Force shall be composed of the Chairman of the National Science Development Board as Chairman and the following as members:

(1) The Director General National Economic and Development Authority

(2) The Minister Ministry of Industry

(3) The Minister Ministry of Agriculture

(4) The Minister Ministry of Energy

(5) The Minister Ministry of Public Works, Transportation and Communications

(6) The Minister Ministry of Health

(7) The Minister Ministry of Education

(8) The Deputy Minister Ministry of Human Settlements

(9) The Director General Technology Resource Center

(10) The Director National Manpower and Youth Development Council

b. The specific functions, duties and powers of the Task Force are as follows:

(1) To assess current and proposed policies, programs and structure of science and technology;

(2) To provide guidelines on the formulation of projects and plans constituting the action program on science and technology;

(3) To determine technology delivery pilot projects relating to but not limited to agricultural development, industrial development, infrastructure programs and delivery of social services;

(4) To establish and supervise a Task Force working staff which shall provide support services;

(5) To contract academic and research institutions and consultancy services in specified areas as may be deemed necessary to further the achievement of its objectives;

(6) To call upon the staff of the member and any agencies or instrumentality of the Government for such assistance as it may require in the performance of its duties and functions;

(7) To undertake and perform such other activities as are needful and desirable to promote the attainment of the aforementioned purposes and objectives.

Section 4. In carrying out these directives, the Task Force shall be supported by a working staff headed by an Executive Director, for the Technology Resource Center, the National Science Development Board and the member of any agencies as may be called upon by the Task Force.

Section 5. The Chairman of the Task Force shall:

a. Preside over meetings of the Task Force;

b. Receive gifts or donations in whatever form and from whatever source;

c. Administer, obligate and disburse appropriations, gifts, or donations upon approval by a majority of the members of the Task Force.

Section 6. The Chairman of the Task Force may constitute ad hoc committees consisting of the members of the Task Force and such other experts as are necessary to assist the Task Force in the discharge of its functions.

Section 7. For this purpose, the Budget Commission shall allocate such amount as may be necessary as determined and recommended by the Task Force.

Section 8. The Task Force shall submit its report to the President as soon as possible.

Section 9. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1978). [Executive Order Nos. : 436 – 530]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.