MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 601

ESTABLISHING THE PRESIDENTIAL PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION MONITORING CENTER, DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS, PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, it is essential for the decision-making process of government that comprehensive and timely information on the development efforts of government be made available at all times;

WHEREAS, for lack of a unified and centralized monitoring, this information is not generally available;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby order and direct the following:

Section 1. Presidential Program Implementation Monitoring Center . There is hereby created a Presidential Program Implementation Monitoring Center within the Presidential Management Staff, Office of the President. The Center shall be headed by a Director. The powers and functions are:

a. Provide the centralized feedback mechanism on the implementation of all projects of government.

b. Identify bottleneck areas, issues and potential sources of delays and recommend the solutions and remedial measures thereto.

c. Maintain a data bank and Operations Center on the progress and status of project implementation.

d. Establish the necessary linkages with all ministries, bureaus, agencies and other government instrumentalities on the local and national levels to enable the free flow of communication regarding the government’s development efforts.

e. Coordinate with and require the different line-agencies to submit regular reports on their plans, programs and targets activities, status of projects and implementation strategies.

f. Draw up the implementing guidelines, organizational structure and staffing pattern, and management information system necessary or incidental to the attainment of the purposes of this Order.

Section 2. Appropriation . The Minister of the Budget is hereby directed to release the amount of Five Hundred Thousand Pesos (P500,000.00) out of the appropriation for Special Activities Fund, Current Operating Expenditures, or from any applicable appropriations thereunder, as shall be necessary for the organizational and operational expenses of the Center during Calendar Year 1980. Thereafter, the amount necessary for the annual operation of the Center shall be included in the budget of the Presidential Management Staff.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of June, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Executive Order Nos. : 531-605]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.