MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 802

AMENDING REGULATION NO. 33 (A) OF LETTER OF IMPLEMENTATION NO. 23, AS AMENDED

WHEREAS, cooperative development is a major concern of the Government, especially in the agriculture sector and all efforts at developing and maintaining the growth of cooperative leaders in the rural areas should be sustained;

WHEREAS, a great number of these cooperative leaders throughout the country have been elected as barangay captain in the recent barangay elections;

WHEREAS, in the event of their election as barangay captains, these cooperative leaders will be disqualified from holding any elective position in cooperatives under Regulation No. 33 (a) of Letter of Implementation No. 23, as amended, thus resulting in the possible depletion of the ranks of rural cooperative leaders who have been painstakingly developed and trained by the Government for almost a decade;

WHEREAS, holding of an elective barangay position is not intrinsically in compatible with the holding of an elective position in cooperatives and, therefore, the disqualification imposed in the aforementioned Letter of Implementation is not necessary to preserve the integrity of cooperatives;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby ordain:

SECTION 1. Regulation No. 33(a) of Letter of Implementation No. 23, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“Regulation No. 33. Disqualifications . Members under any of the following circumstances are disqualified to be voted upon to the position of director or committee member or continue as such in any Kilusang Bayan:

(a)    Holding any elective position in the government except barangay captains and councilmen.

SECTION 2. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of May, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Acting Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 781 – 857 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.