MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 814

EXPANDING THE PROGRAM FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF CONSULS AD HONOREM

WHEREAS, the pursuit of national economic development depends greatly on the country’s ability to expand its export trade;

WHEREAS, the task of expanding export trade can best be achieved by means of a program which is focused, integrated, and unified;

WHEREAS, there exist honorary consulates in various centers of the world;

NOW THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, do hereby order and ordain;

SECTION 1. Nominations . – The Minister of Trade and Industry, as a strategy for export promotion, may nominate, with the concurrence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, honorary Philippine consuls subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines.

SECTION 2. MFA Accreditation . – Upon approval by the President the Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall facilitate the accreditation of honorary Philippine consuls nominated by the Minister of Trade and Industry, to enable them to assume office and performs their duties and functions effectively.

SECTION 3. Role in Export Promotion . – Honorary Philippine consuls nominated by the Minister of Trade and Industry, in addition to their functions, duties and responsibilities under the regulations of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, shall undertake in their respective jurisdictions, specific export promotion programs defines for them by the Minister of Trade and Industry.

SECTION 4. Program for Appointment of Honorary Philippine Consuls . – To implement this Executive Order, the Minister of Trade and Industry shall draw up a program for the appointment of honorary Philippine Consuls in key commercial centers of the world where they are needed, as strategy for the country’s export promotion effort.

SECTION 5. Coordination with the MFA . – In implementing this Executive Order, the Ministry of Trade and Industry shall coordinate closely with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in order to assure that the trade promotion objectives are carried out effectively.

SECTION 6. Repeal . – All acts, decrees, executive orders and regulation inconsistent with any provision of this Order are hereby repealed amended accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity – This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 759 – 862]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.