MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 544

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE TAMARAW, DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, hereby order and direct the following:

Pursuant to the declared policy of the state to conserve the Tamaraw as a source of national pride being the only species of its kind in the world, and in order to strengthen present government programs for the conservation of the Tamaraw, there is hereby created a Presidential Committee for the Conservation of the Tamaraw which shall be composed of the following:

The Committee shall exercise the following functions and powers:

a. Recommend to the President policies to be adopted with regard to the protection of the Tamaraw;

b. Initiate programs and projects as may be necessary for the conservation and protection of the Tamaraw and coordinate the implementation thereof;

c. Prescribe rules, and regulations or otherwise institute measures necessary to implement the plans and policies adopted for the conservation of the Tamaraw;

d. Coordinate programs and activities of government agencies and private organizations involved in Tamaraw protection and conservation;

e. Take such action as may be required including the delineation and fencing of any areas within the Tamaraw habitat for the establishment of gene pools or captive herds to ensure the Tamaraw’s survival; Provided, that, such gene pools may be established in any other place considered appropriate by the President;

f. Solicit and accept donations in cash or in kind from domestic and international sources in support of its activities;

g. Initiate programs and activities geared towards encouraging the active participation and involvement of the private sector in the conservation efforts of the Committee;

h. Enter, make and execute contracts of any kind as may be necessary or incidental to the attainment of its purposes with any person or corporation;

i. Call on any government agency, office or instrumentality or local governments including the Armed Forces of the Philippines for such assistance as it may deem necessary for the performance of its functions and powers;

j. Undertake such activities as may be necessary to promote the Tamaraw and its habitat as a tourist attraction;

k. Encourage, support, coordinate and/or undertake scientific studies and researches concerning the Tamaraw and cause the publication of such studies as may be deemed appropriate by the Committee;

l. Do all such things, transact all such business and perform such functions directly or indirectly necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of the purposes and objectives of the Committee.

For the implementation of the purposes and objectives of this order, the Committee is hereby authorized to organize and establish a Technical staff composed of qualified personnel and may hire services of experts and consultants, both local and foreign. Further, it may enlist the services of government officials and employees as may be necessary, and through the PANAMIN, tap to the widest extent possible, the services of members of the national minorities within the various Tamaraw reservations.

Pending formalization of its funding source, the Committee is further authorized to draw its funding requirements from available funds of the Office of the Presidential Assistant on National Minorities, and/or other government agencies and offices participating in the Tamaraw conservation program.

The Committee shall report regularly to the President on the progress of its activities.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1979). [Executive Order Nos. : 531 – 605]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.