MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 422

EXTENDING THE TERM OF THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON REORGANIZATION UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 281, SERIES OF 1970

WHEREAS, pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 186 dated May 10, 1973, full implementation of the Integrated Reorganization Plan, as amended, has been effected through the Budget for Fiscal Year 1973-1974;

WHEREAS, the next phase of the reorganization work that remains to be done is the proper installation of the Reorganization Plan which will involve all administrative actions that need to be further taken to effect the actual transition from the existing to the reorganized set-up, to include: (1) the selection and appointment of officials and employees to appropriate positions in the staffing patterns; (2) the orderly transfer of records, property and equipment; and (3) similar administrative actions that are designed to make the agency fully operational as reorganized;

WHEREAS, there is need to oversee the installation process in order to assure that the reorganization is implemented not only in form but more importantly, in substance as well;

WHEREAS, there is also need to provide continued technical assistance in the revision of the draft Revised Administrative Code to ensure consistency with the provisions of the Plan, as amended;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby extend the term of the Presidential Commission on Reorganization up to June 30, 1974.

The Executive Secretary shall issue the necessary directives for the detail or the extension of the detail of such technical personnel as may be needed by the Commission, under the same conditions as prescribed in Executive Order No. 281, as amended.

The Commission is authorized to disburse and defray all expenses for its operation from January 1, 1974 to June 30, 1974, from funds as may be available from the Office of the President.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1973). [Executive Order Nos. : 366 – 435] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.