MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 628

CREATING A UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES IN THE VISAYAS AS AN AUTONOMOUS MEMBER OF THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES SYSTEM

WHEREAS, the Constitution mandates that “the State shall establish and maintain a complete, adequate, and integrated system of education relevant to the goals of national development;”

WHEREAS, the attainment of food sufficiency, of a healthy, vigorous and versatile citizenry, of informed, committed and effective managerial leadership are priority goals of national development;

WHEREAS, P.D. No. 1200, otherwise known as the Five-Year Philippine Development Plan (1978-1982), directs that:

“. . . state colleges and universities, particularly the U.P. System, will take a more dynamic role in upgrading higher education to promote the Philippines as an international center of learning. As an apex of tertiary education in the Philippines, the facilities and programs of U.P. in allied fields of agriculture, business, economics, and the natural and physical sciences will be improved, while an integrated University of the Philippines campus in Iloilo based on food and marine sciences will be expanded.”

WHEREAS, in the same Five-Year Philippine Development Plan for 1978-1982, Region VI has been designated as “the site of the University of the Philippines in the Visayas with emphasis on marine sciences;”

WHEREAS, the President of the Philippines is authorized to reorganize the government by virtue of P.D. No. 1416;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order:

Section 1. Establishment of the U .P. in the Visayas . The U.P. in the Visayas is hereby constituted as an autonomous university within the University of the Philippines System. It shall consist of a College of Arts and Sciences, a College of Fisheries, an Institute of Fisheries Development and Research, a Brackishwater Aquaculture Center, a school of development management, a graduate school, a school of development technology, and such other units as may be approved and funded pursuant to the provisions of the General Appropriations Act. It may acquire, subject to pertinent law and regulations and to budgetary constraints, land for its main campus in Miagao, Iloilo, and such other land and water resources as may be suitable for the academic, research, and extension education purposes of the U.P. in the Visayas.

Sec. 2. Organization . The U.P. in the Visayas shall be headed by a Chancellor, who shall be a member ex-officio of the Board of Regents of the University of the Philippines System. The Chancellor shall be the executive officer of the autonomous University and shall discharge the following functions and responsibilities:

a. To prescribe rules for the governance of the autonomous University, consistent with its purposes and the policies laid down by the Board of Regents of the University of the Philippines System;

b. To submit to the President of the University System for approval by the Board of Regents the courses of study and academic programs, rules of discipline, and awards of degrees and diplomas as recommended by the University Council;

c. To maintain links with other units of the University System, other institutions of higher learning, and government ministries so as to ensure fruitful academic interchange and the maximization of the use of human and physical resources;

d. To submit to the President of the University System an annual report on the operations of the autonomous University and such other reports as may be required;

e. To prepare and recommend to the President of the University System for the approval of the Board of Regents the budget of the autonomous University;

f. To perform such other functions as the Board of Regents may delegate; and

g. To institute or effect the appropriate and efficient exercise of such functions or responsibilities as may be necessary for the expeditious administration of the autonomous University.

The Chancellor will be assisted by Vice-Chancellors and the administrative and support services components traditionally required by a University.

Sec. 3. Staffing and Compensation . The staffing and compensation structure of the U.P. in the Visayas and the Office of the Chancellor shall be determined in accordance with P.D. No. 1177, P.D. No. 985, and other pertinent budget and compensation laws.

Sec. 4. Funding . The sum of two hundred and ten thousand pesos (P210,000) shall be released to the University of the Philippines in the Visayas in Calendar Year 1980 for purposes of operationalizing the Office of the Chancellor. This shall be charged to uncommitted funds of the National Government pursuant to B.P. No. 40 which are authorized for use by new organizational units of Government. Amounts necessary for the operation of the autonomous university beginning in Calendar Year 1981 shall be drawn from the funding authorized by Batas Pambansa Blg. 80.

Sec. 5. Effectivity . This Order shall be immediately effective.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of October in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Senior Presidential Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Executive Order Nos. : 606 – 630 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.