MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 219

ABOLISHING CERTAIN COMMISSIONS, COUNCILS AND COMMITTEES

WHEREAS, several commissions, councils and committees created by executive and administrative orders of the President of the Philippines have been found to have either accomplished the purposes and objectives for which they have been created or are merely duplicating the functions of other agencies or entities of the Government.

WHEREAS, the agencies or entities whose functions embrace the functions and activities of said commissions, councils and committees could adequately perform the said functions and activities; and

WHEREAS, it is the policy of this Administration to streamline and simplify the operations of government agencies and avoid as much as possible the duplication of efforts, functions and activities.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby abolish the following entities and revoke the executive or administrative orders creating them:

Entity

Created by

The functions of the Peace and Order Commission, the Anti-Smuggling Fund Committee and Presidential Committee on Rehabilitation of Released Prisoners are hereby transferred to the Peace and Order Coordinating Council, those of the Historical Documents Committee to the Department of Education, and those of the National Coordinating Committee on Reforestation and Tree-Planting to the Reforestation Administration.

The funds, equipment, property, and records of the Peace and Order Council and the Presidential Anti-Crime Coordinating Office are hereby transferred to the Peace and Order Coordinating Council.

All executive orders, administrative orders, and rules and regulations inconsistent with this Order are hereby revoked.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Executive Order Nos. : 141-280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.