MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 131

AUTHORIZING PAYMENT OF HAZARDOUS DUTY PAY TO OFFICERS OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, certain activities connected with underwater naval operations, bomb disposal, and research and development, such as deep-sea diving; arming, disarming or disposal of fused bombs, mines, torpedoes, booby traps and other lethal devices; preparation or testing of lethal materials or devices such as explosives, incendiaries, poison gases and radioactive materials; testing of new and dangerous equipment; and underwater demolitions, expose military personnel to extraordinary hazards and risks;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the authority vested in me by Section 90 of Commonwealth Act No. 1, as amended, do hereby authorize payment of additional pay (hazardous duty pay) to officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines while performing hazardous duty under the rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of National Defense requiring therein that all requests for hazardous duty pay will contain a description of the hazardous duty performed, the period covered and the place where such duty was performed, attested to by the commander or officer-in-charge of the officer applicant. The hazardous duty pay shall be equivalent to fifty per centum of their respective base pay and shall be paid monthly, subject to the availability of funds; Provided , That officers receiving flying pay or jump pay shall not be entitled to hazardous duty pay.

This rescinds Executive Order No. 437 dated July 10, 1961.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.