MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 440

DESIGNATING THE NATIONAL IRRIGATION ADMINISTRATION AS THE IMPLEMENTING AGENCY FOR THE MAGAT MULTI-PURPOSE PROJECT IN ISABELA

WHEREAS, the Magat Multi-Purpose project is designed to provide dependable water supply critical for the country’s present food production effort;

WHEREAS, the Magat Multi-Purpose Project is also designed to utilize water resources for purposes other than irrigation;

WHEREAS, the National Irrigation Administration (NIA) is a government agency involved in the execution of various national irrigation projects and as such has the necessary experience and expertise required for the speedy and successful implementation of projects such as the Magat Multi-Purpose Project;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby designate the national Irrigation Administration as the implementing Agency for the Magat Multi-Purpose Project.

As Implementing Agency, the National Irrigation Administration shall have the following functions:

1. To insure the early and successful implementation and completion of the project;

2. To negotiate with and receive from the proper financing institutions loans to finance the project;

3. To ensure the proper integration and coordination of all related development programs and activities in the region in the light of the Magat Multi-Purpose Project;

4. To coordinate with the National Water Resource Council in the planning and supervision of this project;

5. To recommend to the President through the National Water Resource Council policies, rules and regulations that will govern the proper operation of the project after its completion including the powers, obligations and responsibilities of each and any agency that may be involved in the project subject to the provisions of applicable laws and/or agreements with the financing institutions; and

6. To submit quarterly progress reports to the President.

All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of government are hereby enjoined to cooperate with and assist the National Irrigation Administration (NIA) in the performance of its assigned tasks, to ensure the early and successful implementation of the project.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1974). [Executive Order Nos. : 436 – 530] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.