MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1007

INCREASING THE COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD OF PARDONS AND PAROLE CREATED UNDER ACT NUMBERED FOUR THOUSAND ONE HUNDRED AND THREE, AS AMENDED, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE INDETERMINATE SENTENCE LAW, AND INCREASING THE COMPENSATION OF THE MEMBERS THEREOF

WHEREAS, under the New Republic, national development shall be pursued with renewed dedication and greater determination through a more efficient, effective and economical government;

WHEREAS, the present membership of the Board of Pardons and Parole created under Act Numbered Four Thousand One hundred and Three, as amended, otherwise known as the “Indeterminate Sentence Law” does not include members of the legal profession;

WHEREAS, the Board is confronted every now and then with problems involving questions of law arising from the performance of its duties;

WHEREAS, it has become imperative to increase the present membership of the Board to include two members of the Philippine Bar in order that said Board may have the services of lawyers to cope with the aforesaid problem;

WHEREAS, present conditions necessitate a realistic increase in the emoluments of the Members of the Board; and

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416 as amended, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416 as amended, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. The present members of the Board of Pardons and Parole created under Act No. 4103, as amended, exclusive of the Minister of Justice  who shall continue to be its Chairman, are hereby increased from four to six members; Provided , That one member of the Board shall be a trained sociologist, one a clergyman or educator, one a psychiatrist unless a trained psychiatrist be employed by the Board, one a person qualified for such work by training and experience, and the additional two members of the Philippine Bar for five years who shall be appointed by the President: Provided , further , That at least one member of the Board shall be a woman: Provided , Finally , That in case any vacancy arises by reason of resignation, death or incapacity of any member or for any other cause, the Minister of Justice  shall have the authority to designate a person qualified for such work by training and experience to perform the duties attached to the position until the President shall have appointed a regular member to fill the above-said vacancy.

SECTION 2. The Chairman and each member of the Board shall be entitled to receive a per diem of two hundred pesos, and the Executive Director who shall serve as Executive Secretary during the meetings of the Board shall be entitled to receive a per diem of one hundred fifty pesos, for actual attendance at every meeting of the Board, and in addition thereto, reimbursement of actual and necessary traveling expenses incurred in the performance of their duties: Provided , however , That in no case shall each of them receive a total monthly per diem of more than three thousand five hundred pesos.

SECTION 3. Any deficiency in the amount appropriated for compensation of members of the Board of Pardons and Parole provided for in the appropriation law that may arise from the implementation of this Executive Order shall be charged to the savings realized from the appropriations of the Ministry of Justice.

SECTION 4. All laws, decrees, orders, proclamations, rules, regulations or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 31st day of January, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.