MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 354

CREATING THE INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE ON ASEAN AFFAIRS AND DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, upon recommendation of the Philippine Delegation which participated in the 2nd Meeting of the Permanent Committee on Commerce and Industry of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) held in Manila on April 15 to 17, 1971, do hereby create an inter-agency committee, to be known as the Inter-Agency Committee on ASEAN Affairs, composed of the following:

The Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Committee shall be selected by the committee members on the basis of the particular subject matter to be discussed or proposed to be undertaken.

The main function of the Committee is to formulate and recommend appropriate Philippine policies and programs of action on various areas of economic cooperation under ASEAN. It is given the authority to recommend through the Secretary of Foreign Affairs the composition of Philippine delegations to the various permanent committee meetings of ASEAN. The ASEAN National Secretariat of the Philippines under the Department of Foreign Affairs shall be given the task of convening the meetings of the Committee and providing the necessary staff support.

In order to carry out its functions, the Committee is hereby authorized to constitute technical committees whenever it deems it necessary. It is also authorized to call directly upon any department, bureau or office in the executive branch of the Government or upon any government-owned or controlled entity or agency for such assistance as the Committee may need and to request for, utilize and make use of the services of their personnel. It may request the services of members of the private sector for advice consultation.

Done in City of Manila, this 23rd day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.