MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1048

REHABILITATION PROGRAM TO FACILITATE THE REINTEGRATION TO SOCIETY OF DISSIDENTS WHO RETURN TO THE FOLDS OF THE LAW TO INCLUDE THEIR MASS SUPPORTERS AND PROVIDING FOR A PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION THEREOF.

WHEREAS, national reconciliation is the basic policy of government in the handling of subversives and dissidents to include their mass supporters;

WHEREAS, in the pursuit of this policy, the government must attract dissidents to return to the folds of the law and provide rehabilitation programs to assist their return to peaceful society and live useful and productive lives;

WHEREAS, the amnesty granted pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1429 dated June 10, 19 78 is still in effect and could be availed of by all concerned;

NOW, therefore, it is hereby ordered that a comprehensive rehabilitation program be established for dissidents of all persuasions and their supporters who return to the folds of the law and that a Presidential Committee be organized for its expeditious implementation.

1. PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE . A Presidential Committee is hereby organized to carryout this order composed of the following:

2. DUTIES, FUNCTIONS, AND POWERS OF THE COMMITTEE . The Committee shall perform the following duties, functions and powers:

a. Formulate, adopt, and implement a comprehensive rehabilitation program for dissidents who return to the folds of the law to include their supporters;

b. Direct, supervise, coordinate and monitor implementing projects and activities in compliance to this order by participating agencies;

c. Establish regional and provincial committees to implement this order particularly the grant of amnesty to all concerned pursuant to PD 1429 and the corresponding rehabilitation activities at local levels;

d. Promulgate the necessary implementing rules and regulations governing the activities of all participating government agencies.

3. MAJOR PROGRAMS . The programs covered by this order envolves: the intensification of the policy of attraction; the grant of amnesty to dissident-returnees pursuant to PD 1429; the grant of cash awards or purchase of firearms surrendered; and the delivery of socio-economic programs designed to facilitate the reintegration of rebel-returnees and supporters to society. The Ministry of National Defense in coordination with the Office of Media Affairs shall enhance this policy of attraction by appropriate public information activities and with local government units to establish as many dissident-returnees processing centers as maybe needed to provide for their expeditious acceptance and processing. Likewise, the Ministry shall, in coordination with the Ministry of Justice, revitalize the amnesty commissions established pursuant to PD 124 for the speedy grant of amnesty in accordance with the provisions of the cited amnesty decree. The Committee shall also prescribe rules and procedures on the grant of cash awards for the purchase of surrendered firearms.

4. SUPPORT AND PARTICIPATION OF OTHER GOVERNMENT AGENCIES. The Presidential Committee is hereby authorized to call upon the following ministries and agencies for support and participation as prescribed hereunder:

i. All other government ministries, agencies and instrumentalities to include local government units shall participate in the rehabilitation program as galled upon.

5. FUNDS . All government ministries and agencies called upon by the Committee to participate in this comprehensive rehabilitation program for dissident-returnees and their supporters as embodied under this order shall initially utilize their programmed funds. In succeeding calendar years, they are to include such expenses in their respective budgets. The Minister of the Budget and Management is hereby authorized to allocate out of the current CY 85 Budget Reserves the amount of Fifty Million Pesos which shall be used by the Committee for the expeditious implementation of this order.

6. The Committee shall prescribe implementing rules and regulations to carry out the intent of this order.

7. RESCISSION CLAUSE . All Memorandums, Executive Orders Letters of Instructions, Rules and Regulations inconsistent with this order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

8. EFFECTIVITY . This order takes effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of August, 1985.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030-1093]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.