MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 140

CREATING THE COORDINATING COUNCIL FOR BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY.

WHEREAS, it is necessary that all activities covering all phases and areas of business and industry should be coordinated and integrated in order to accelerate the economic development and industrialization of the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND S. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby establish and create the Coordinating Council for Business and Industry which shall be composed of the following members, to wit:

It shall be the primary duty and responsibility of the Council to coordinate and integrate the activities of all departments, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government affecting or having to do with business and industry in the country, including foreign investments, with a view to achieving the goal of industrialization end business development in the best and most effective manner. For this purpose, the Council shall coordinate find harmonize all phases end areas of industrial and business activities such as research and experimentation, financing, production, distribution and/or marketing, management and manpower training dispersal and all information drives relative thereto.

The Council shall maintain a continuous dialogue and liaison with the private sector of business and industry by meeting with the latter’s representatives at least once in each month.

All heads of departments, bureaus, agencies and instrumentalities of the government are hereby directed to extend full cooperation with the Council and the Chairman of the Council may, when the need arises, ask for the detail and temporary assignment of personnel and equipment from other offices.

The Board of Investment shall act as Secretariat of the Council.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.