MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 795

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE COMMISSION FOR THE INTERNATIONAL YOUTH YEAR AND DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS

WHEREAS, the United Nations has declared 1985 as International Youth Year, by virtue of UN General Assembly Resolution No. 34/151;

WHEREAS, the Philippines, as a member of the United Nations and with its commitment to the development of the youth, must participate in the celebration of the International Youth Year;

WHEREAS, there is a need to create a commission which shall administer, implement, coordinate all activities related to the celebration of the International Youth Year in this country; and

WHEREAS, the commission is envisioned to mobilize all available resources and tap support agencies for the effective implementation of its functions;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. The Philippine Commission for the International Youth Year . — There is hereby created a Commission to be known as the Philippine Commission for the International Youth Year which shall be attached to the Office of the President for general direction and coordination.

SEC. 2. Composition . — The Commission shall be headed by the Chairman of the Kabataang Barangay, the KB being the premier youth organization in the country, with representatives from the following agencies, as members:

1. Ministry of Foreign Affairs 2. Ministry of Education and Culture 3. Ministry of Social Services Development 4. Ministry of the Budget 5. Ministry of Agriculture 6. Ministry of Labor and Employment 7. National Manpower and Youth Council

SEC. 3. Functions . — The Commission shall have the following functions:

1. Set forth the guidelines for proposed program of activities for the celebration of International Youth Year;

2. Plan and coordinate all activities for the 1985 celebration;

3. Supervise the implementation of all plans and programs for the celebration of the International Youth Year;

4. Receive and disburse all allocated funds for the Commission.

5. Have custody of all files and records pertaining to the International Youth Year, and tap the assistance of the private sector of its functions;

6. Undertake evaluation of all activities related to this celebration;

7. Represent the Philippines to the United Nations Commission for the International Youth Year;

8. Perform such other functions as may be necessary for the successful implementation of its programs.

All other government ministries and institutions, including local governments, shall assist the Commission in the successful implementation of its programs. The Commission shall have a Secretariat as Staff support which shall be initially manned by the PKKB until such time as the Commission shall have appointed its own personnel.

SEC. 4. Powers of the Commission . —

1. To promulgate, implement and enforce its policies with regard to the International Youth Year;

2. To identify the requirements of the Commission and work for the fulfillment thereof;

3. To review, coordinate, integrate and approve resolutions, rules and regulations, and decisions promulgated by the various committees with respect to their functions within the Commission;

4. To appoint members to the committees which may be formed by the Commission;

5. To promulgate such rules and regulations for the implementation of its policies;

6. To grant allowances and per diems or fix the salaries of officials and the staff it may employ, in accordance with existing law, rules and regulations.

SEC. 5. Funding . — The Ministry of the Budget subject to the approval of the President is hereby directed to set aside and release from the Special Activities Fund of the President such amounts as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Order.

SEC. 6. The Philippine Commission for the International Youth Year shall constitute itself immediately and shall exist for five (5) years from the issuance of this Order, unless earlier abolished by the President of the Philippines.

SEC. 7. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 781 – 857 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.