MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 723

REVISING THE MFA INDICES ON OVERSEAS AND LIVING QUARTERS ALLOWANCES OF FOREIGN SERVICE PERSONNEL

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 1285 establishes the Foreign Service Compensation Plan for staff members of the National Government who are stationed abroad;

WHEREAS, Letter of Implementation No. 63 provides the necessary rules and regulations to be observed in the payment of compensation for personnel of the National Government stationed abroad;

WHEREAS, Section 4.3.2 of the aforesaid Letter of Implementation No. 63 authorizes the Permanent Committee created for the purpose of PD No. 1285 to recommend to the President such adjustment in the MFA Index as may be warranted by changes in the exchange rates and price levels in the affected posts of assignment;

WHEREAS, in view of the continuing world-wide serious increase in price level and decline in the purchasing power of the United States dollar against certain currencies, the officers and employees of the Philippine Foreign Service have been experiencing financial difficulties;

WHEREAS, it is necessary that the officers and employees of the Philippine Foreign Service be provided with adequate financial means to be able not only to protect and advance the country’s interests abroad efficiently and effectively but also to represent the country in a manner worthy of the esteem and respect of the country to which they are assigned and accredited;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby ordain the recommended revision of the Permanent Committee of the MFA Indices contained in Letter of Implementation No. 95, as follows:

The amount to cover the adjustment of the overseas and living quarters allowances of the personnel of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs who are stationed abroad shall be taken from the P20 Million appropriated for the purpose in the CY 1981 General Appropriations Act, net of reserves. The amount to cover the adjustment of the same allowances of Service Attaches shall be from the programmed expenditures for CY 1981 of agencies concerned, net of reserves.

This Order shall take effect on April 1, 1981.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of August in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 706 – 780]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.