MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 549

CREATING THE OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER FOR ISLAMIC AFFAIRS

WHEREAS, the establishment of Autonomous Regions in Southern Philippines with their respective Regional Assemblies and Regional Executive Councils requires corresponding administrative changes in the administration of Islamic Affairs by the Office of the President;

WHEREAS, the President needs a more efficient system of staff assistance in the coordination and integration of all government activities affecting Islamic affairs;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Presidential Decrees Nos. 1, 830, 831, and 955, the President is granted continuing authority to reorganize the Office of the President consistent with the requirements imposed upon the Presidency as Chief Executive of the Government;

WHEREAS, the President is granted general and continuing authority to reorganize the entire administrative machinery of government pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1416;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, and pursuant to the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416, do hereby order:

SECTION. Creation . – There is hereby created an Office of the Commissioner for Islamic Affairs under the Office of the President. It shall be headed by a Commissioner who shall be appointed by the President.

SEC. 2. Powers and Functions . – The Commissioner for Islamic Affairs shall have the following powers and functions:

a. Assist and, when so authorized, represent the President on matters concerning Islamic affairs;

b. Provide advice and assistance to the President in the formulation, coordination, and implementation of policies affecting Islamic affairs;

c. Serve as the link between the President and agencies and entities, both internal and external, that are involved in the administration or pursuit of operations, activities and projects involving Islamic affairs;

d. Coordinate for the President all development programs on Islamic matters being implemented by various government agencies and entities;

e. Recommend to the President development programs and projects on Islamic matters, including their implementation schemes;

f. Monitor for the President all development programs being implemented, whether public or private, concerning Islamic affairs as well as recommend such actions as may be necessary for their efficient, effective and economic implementation;

g. Act as the government entity through which the Islamic communities can seek government as well as private assistance and serve as the instrumentality through which assistance from both the government and the private sector may be extended to the Islamic communities. For this purpose, the Commissioner is hereby authorized to give grant-in-aid out of its appropriations or other funds from whatever source to cooperating government or private entities for such programs or projects geared to the development of Islamic Communities;

h. Enter, subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines, into such contracts, agreements or arrangements, with the government or private agencies as may be necessary to attain the objectives of the Office;

i . Accept grants, donations, gifts, funds, and/or property for the benefit of Islamic communities in whatever form and from whatever source, and administer the same in accordance with the terms thereof, or in the absence of any condition, to administer the same in such manner consistent with the interests of Islamic communities; and

j. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President or assigned by law.

SEC. 3. Organizational Support . – The Office of the Commissioner for Islamic Affairs shall recommend to the President for approval such supportive administrative arrangements as would enable it to best carry out its functions, exercise its powers and achieve its objectives. It may have such consultants and other experts as may be needed, who may be drawn from the private sector by appointment or on contractual basis or from government agencies or instrumentalities on detail or through other arrangements, whose compensation, allowances or honoraria shall be in accordance with such schedules as may be approved by the President.

SEC. 4. Appropriations . – The Office of the Commissioner for Islamic Affairs shall receive an annual lump sum appropriation in such amounts as may be sufficient to finance its operation and its programs, projects and activities.

SEC. 5. Repeal of Inconsistent Laws . – All laws, orders, proclamations, rules, regulations, or parts thereof which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Executive Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 6. Separability Clause . – Any portion or provision of this Executive Order that may be declared unconstitutional shall not have the effect of nullifying the other provisions thereof: Provided , That such remaining portions can still stand and be given effect in their entirety to accomplish the objectives of this Executive Order.

SEC. 7. Effectivity . – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1979). [Executive Order Nos. : 531 – 605]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.