MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 28

CREATING A BOARD OF MANAGEMENT UNDER THE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY TO HANDLE AND MANAGE PHILIPPINE PARTICIPATION IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE FAIRS AND EXPOSITIONS AND GOVERNMENT-SPONSORED NATIONAL COMMERCIAL AND TRADE FAIRS

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Board of Management under the Department of Commerce and Industry to handle and manage Philippine participation in International Trade Fairs and Expositions and government-sponsored local and commercial fairs.

The Board of Management shall be composed of the following:

The Board of Management shall assist and advise the Secretary of Commerce and Industry in the management, supervision and operation of Philippine participation in international fairs and expositions and government-sponsored local trade and commercial fairs; in soliciting financial or other assistance from any department, bureau, office or agency in the government including government-owned or controlled corporations in connection with the government participation in such fairs and expositions; in conducting fund drives as may be authorized by the President for the purpose of raising funds for use in the furtherance of the Board’s purposes and objectives, any amount collected to be deposited in the name of the Department of Commerce and Industry as a trust fund to be administered by the Department and in encouraging Filipino manufacturers, producers and businessmen to take active participation in international fairs and expositions and government-sponsored local trade and commercial fairs.

The Board shall keep books of accounts in connection with the fund raising campaign to be conducted pursuant hereto which shall always be open to, and available for audit by, the Auditor General or his duly authorized representative.

The Undersecretary of Commerce as Executive Director of the Board shall keep all records relative to the participation of the Philippines in all fairs and expositions, apportion the spaces for rentals of booths for Filipino participants and/or exhibitors, the award or cancellation of which shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of Commerce and Industry, and implement the rules, regulations, plans and  projects necessary to carry the purpose for which the Board was created, as approved by the Secretary of Commerce and Industry, upon recommendation of the Board.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.