MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 427

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE FOR THE INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT OF THE CAGAYAN VALLEY

WHEREAS, the Cagayan Valley covers a large area that has remained comparatively unresponsive to government efforts at integrated national development;

WHEREAS, this region can not be indefinitely excluded from the collective range of our economic goals in the face of its unexploited natural wealth and other potentials;

WHEREAS, foreign investors willing to participate in local ventures have indicated their readiness to establish their businesses in the Cagayan Valley should adequate government support and participation be provided;

WHEREAS, intermittent armed conflicts between government military forces and Maoist rebels cannot secure peace and order, both indispensable bases for growth.

WHEREAS, in view thereof, the region calls for immediate integrated development operations by a special task force that shall pool all government resources from its economic development, financial welfare and health agencies, as well as its military units;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby create a Presidential Task Force for the Integrated Development of the Cagayan Valley.

The Task Force shall be composed of the following:

The Task Force shall have operational jurisdiction over the provinces of Cagayan, Isabela, Nueva Vizcaya, Kalinga-Apayao and Ifugao, and the sub-province of Quirino.

An implementing staff located and operating in the area that shall assist the Task Force is hereby designated and shall be composed of the following:

Provincial Governors in the area, and

Presidential Regional Officer for Development – Region II

In pursuance of the aforementioned objectives, the Task Force shall undertake the following:

1. Coordinate implementation of existing and on-going development projects.

2. Prepare supplementary project plans for the integrated development of the Valley in the context of the national development program and supervise/coordinate implementation thereof.

3. In the preparation and implementation of said project plans, priority must be given to the following required components:

a. transport, irrigation, flood control, power, forestry

b. health, education credit, agrarian reform program

c. exploitation of mineral resources, livestock and feed grain development

d. tourism

4. Identify and mobilize all sources of funds required for implementation of projects; coordinate processing of foreign loan packages and admission of foreign capital.

5. Adequate military operations, apprehension of rebellions, leaders and followers and the adoption of selective amnesty.

6. Such other action as may be needed for the above objectives.

The Development Management Staff, the National Computer Center and the Infrastructure Operations Center are hereby designated to act as Secretariat to the Task Force, with the Development Management Staff acting as overall coordinator.

The Presidential Task Force, its Secretariat and Implementation Staff are hereby authorized and empowered to call upon all departments, bureaus, agencies or instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations as well as the private sector, to give the necessary cooperation and assistance for the successful prosecution and discharge of its functions.

Finally, the Task Force shall operate and continue to exercise its powers until such time as its designated tasks are completed. A report of its accomplishments shall be submitted to the President within three (3) months from the date hereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1974). [Executive Order Nos. : 366 – 435] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.