MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 570

CREATING A TASK FORCE TO UNDERTAKE LAND ASSEMBLY AND OFFICIAL DEVELOPMENT REGISTRY ACTIVITIES IN DECLARED BAGONG LIPUNAN SITES AND URBAN LAND REFORM ZONES

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 1396 mandates the Ministry of Human Settlements with the management of urban development through the formulation of plans and programs and the implementation of projects for new town development and land assembly and real property management;

WHEREAS, the Ministry is consequently empowered under Presidential Decree No. 1517 to utilize land assembly and other innovative land acquisition techniques and to establish official developmental registries in areas declared as Urban Land Reform Zones and Bagong Lipunan Sites;

WHEREAS, there is a need to initiate the development of such Bagong Lipunan Sites and Urban Land Reform Zones, with the Lungsod Silangan site and its adjacent area being developed as a model;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, by the power vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created a Task Force to undertake land assembly and official development registry activities in declared Bagong Lipunan Sites and Urban Land Reform Zones to be placed under the supervision of the Ministry of Human Settlements with the following primary functions:

a) to undertake land assembly operation in Lungsod Silangan and in the areas peripheral to take Marikina-Infanta Road identified by the Ministry of Human Settlements in its Lungsod Silangan Development Plan and approved by the President of the Philippines as Bagong Lipunan Sites and Urban Land Reform Zones;

b) to initiate the establishment of official development registries in such areas as a basis for land acquisition and disposition;

c) to secure the area from squatting of any kind; and

d) to utilize other innovative land acquisition techniques, other than land assembly in such areas.

SECTION 2. The Task Force shall be composed of: (a) the Deputy Minister, Ministry of Human Settlements as Chairman; (b) the Commanding General, Philippine Constabulary; and (c) the Director, Bureau of Lands as Members. In addition, the Task Force may involve the Land Registration Commission and the local government executives concerned in membership of its various committees as authorized under Section 5 of this Order.

SECTION 3. In undertaking land assembly and official development registry activities in the Lungsod Silangan site and its adjacent area, the Task Force shall exercise the following powers and responsibilities;

a) to set up temporary field offices to secure the area and promulgate and implement rules and regulations related to the security of the area;

b) to set up temporary field offices of the Land Registration Commission which will process land claims in the area;

c) to designate and develop resettlement sites within or without the area for displaced farmers and tenants;

d) to establish a public information office to liaise with the tenants and farmers of the area and undertake the promotion and publication of information, studies and investigation on all aspects of the area’s development;

e) to cause to implement, supervise and monitor all projects of the Human Settlements Development Corporation and the National Housing Authority and other related projects of government agencies identified in the Lungsod Silangan Development Plan;

f) to identify such other projects and sectoral programs necessary for the development of Lungsod Silangan in the integrative Human Settlements approach;

g) to contract with international and local specialists in planning, academic and authorities and institutions research and consultancy service in specified areas related to human settlements problems as may further the attainment of the objectives of this order;

h) to establish and supervise a working staff which shall keep records, abstracts, collate and synthesize studies of the area’s development;

i) to determine the qualifications and fix the compensation of its members, working staff and other personnel which it is hereby authorized to hire for administrative operations; and to appoint, discipline, and remove its employees; provided , excess as to the technical staff and such other positions as one highly technical policy determining or primarily confidential in nature, all positions in the Task Force shall be subject to the coverage of the plans of the Office of Compensation and Position Classification;

j) to apply for, receive and accept from sources within and without the Philippines, for its own use and not for sale, grants or donations of equipment, materials or services. Such grants or donations shall be exempt from gift taxes and shall be deductible from the net taxable income of the grantor, or donor, and the donee, upon certification of the Task Force; provided , however , that any grant or donation received in accordance with this order shall be disclosed to the President through a report by the Task Force;

k) to adopt rules and procedures for its governance;

l) to undertake and perform such other activities as may be assigned by the President of the Philippines.

SECTION 4. The Chairman of the Task Force shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

a) preside over meetings of the Task Force;

b) hire and maintain such working group staff or personnel as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and objectives of the Task Force;

c) administer, obligate, and disburse appropriations, gifts or donations upon approval by a majority of the members of the Task Force;

d) constitute continuing ad hoc committees consisting of the members of the Task Force and such other experts as are necessary to assist the Task Force in the discharge of its functions;

e) call upon the Land Registration Commission and the Bureau of Lands to complete all data requirements, the operational expenses for such activity of which shall be charged against existing current appropriations of the two agencies;

f) receive gifts or donations in whatever form and from whatever source;

SECTION 5. As may be necessary in its Operations, the Task Force shall create committees to assist it in its tasks and functions. Such committees shall have the membership of concerned and affected local governments and local government entities.

SECTION 6. In order to facilitate the implementation of its tasks and execution of its functions, the Task Force shall have the power to call upon any ministry, bureau, office agency or instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may require.

SECTION 7. The Amount of TEN MILLION PESOS (P10,000,000) is hereby appropriated for the operations of the Task Force for calendar year 1979 and shall be released to the Task Force through the Ministry of Human Settlements out of any available funds from the National Treasury not other appropriated. The amount of P2,000,000 shall be utilized for current operating expenditures and P8,000,000 for the capital outlay needs of the development of the area. For the succeeding calendar year, and until the termination of the Task Force, the budgetary requirements shall be provided for in the General Appropriations Act of the government in such amounts as shall be adequate for the purpose.

SECTION 8. Operating expenses and capital expenditures to be incurred by national government agencies for implementation of projects and programs in the area shall be charged to the budgetary appropriations of the implementing agencies or other applicable appropriations subject to the provisions of Section 21 of Presidential Decree No. 1177.

SECTION 9. The Task Force shall submit to the President of the Philippines a report of its accomplishments within sixty (60) days upon approval of this Order and quarterly thereafter.

SECTION 10. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Baguio, this 29th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1979). [Executive Order Nos. : 531-605]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.