MALACANANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 113

PRESCRIBING THE RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CITY AND MUNICIPAL POLICE AGENCIES THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES

By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the Philippines and upon recommendation of the Police Commission, I FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby promulgate the following rules and regulations for the government of city and municipal police agencies throughout the Philippines which shall be known as Police Manual

RULE I – ORGANIZATION

Section 1. Constitution of Police Force . – In each city or municipality, there shall be a chief of police and such number of policemen as the council shall determine in accordance with law. (Sec. 6, RA 4864)

The organization or constitution of rural or barrio police, provincial police or any other quasi-police bodies or the appointment of special,, deputy or deputized policemen, or agents or any other similar designations without compensation or with pay less than the minimum prescribed by the Police Act of 1966 is prohibited.

Section 2. Power to Appoint . – Appointment to a local police agency shall be made by the mayor from the list of eligibles certified by the Civil Service Commission; Provided , that such appointments shall be on probationary basis for a period of six months with an evaluation and recommendation report for retention or dismissal by the chief of police prior to the expiration thereof; Provided , further , that the dismissal herein mentioned is summary in character; Provided , furthermore , that the evaluation or recommendation of the Chief of Police shall he given due consideration and in case of conflict between the appointing authority and the Chief of Police, the same shall be brought to the attention of the Police Commission whose decision shall be final: Provided , finally , that the power to appoint the chief of police, assistant chief of police or the chief of the secret service of the police department in accordance with the provisions of existing city charters shall continue to be vested in the President until December 31, 1967. (Sec. 8, Id.)

Where no civil service eligible is available, provisional appointment may be made in accordance with Civil Service law and rules; Provided , that the appointee possesses the necessary educational qualification; Provided, further , that in no case shall such appointment extend beyond six months, except for a valid cause, and with the approval of the Civil Service Commission. (Sec. 10. 10, Id.)

In the event of disagreements between the city mayor and the city council in those chartered cities where the council participates in the appointment of members of the police force, and between the municipal mayor and the municipal council in the case of municipalities regarding the appointment of the chief of police and members of the police force, and such disagreements continue for a period of ninety days, the same shall be referred to the Police Commission whose decision shall be final. (Sec. 8, Id.)

After December 31, 1967, disagreements between the city mayor and the city council in those chartered cities where the council participates in the appointment of the chief of police, deputy chief of police or chief of the secret service, or members of the police force thereof, and such disagreements shall continue for a period of ninety days, same shall he referred to the Police Commission whose decision shall be final.

Section 3. Organization of Police Force . – Every police force shall be organized to insure effective, economical and efficient operation for the accomplishment of police objectives and missions.

Section 4. Types of Organization . – The poll force shall be organized into either line, line staff, functional or functional-staff type of organization. The type of organization developed for a force shall be tailored to meet the needs and problems of the city or municipality with emphasis on the prevention of crimes. To give uniformity and proper identification of units in the police department, different bureaus, divisions, branches sections and units may be organized accordingly.

Examples of the different types of organization are shown in Charts 1 to 5.

Section 5. Principles of Organization . – The following principles shall be applied in developing a sound police organization.

a. Whenever practicable, every function of the police force shall be assigned to a unit.

b. The responsibilities assigned to each unit shall be well-defined.

c. The responsibility for function shall carry with it commensurate authority and the person to whom the authority is delegated shall be held accountable therefor.

d. The authority and responsibility for action shall, to the greatest extent possible, be decentralized to those actually performing the operation.

e. Unnecessary duplication and overlapping of functions shall be avoided.

f. The span of control of a superior over-personnel or units shall not be more than what he can effectively direct and coordinate.

g. Each individual, unit, or situation, shall be under the immediate control of only one superior.

h. The organization shall not be so elaborate as to hinder accomplishment.

i. The number of levels of authority shall be kept to a minimum.

j. Uniform methods, policies and procedures in clear, simple and understandable language shall be employed.

Section 6. Police Ranks and Positions . – For purposes of efficient administration, uniformity and discipline, the ranks, and positions in the city or municipal police force shall remain as they have heretofore been in use in the police service as follows (Sec. 18, Id.)

Authorized Ranks and/or Positions

Chief of Police Deputy Chief of Police Police Lt. Colonel Police Mayor Police Captain Police Lieutenant Police Sergeant Police Corporal Patrolman, First Class or Detective Patrolman

Section 7. Police Strength .  – The minimum number of policemen in a city or municipality shall be proportionate to its populations, according to the latest official census, at the rate of at least one policeman for every one thousand inhabitants, (Sec. 19, Id.). Provided , That in every city or municipal police force, there shall be not more than one patrolman first-class for every three patrolmen; one police sergeant for every two police corporals; one police lieutenant for every two police sergeants; one police captain for every two police lieutenants; one police major for every two police captains; one police lieutenant-colonel for every two police majors; as shown in Chart 6; Provided, That in every case there shall be a chief of police whatever be the strength of the police force and a deputy chief of police in every department of more than 50 men; Provided, further , that in a police department of 50 men or less, a deputy chief of police shall be designated by the chief of police, whose rank shall be equivalent to the highest rank in this arithmetical ratio; Provided, furthermore , that in case of excess members over the prescribed minimum in this arithmetical ratio, the same shall be distributed proportionately from the lowest rank; Provided , finally, that the minimum number of policemen in a municipality shall in no case be less than that prescribed hereunder;

For first-class municipalities, at least fifty members; for second-class municipalities, at least forty members; for third-class municipalities, at least twenty members; for fourth-class municipalities, at least fifteen members; for fifth-class municipalities, at least ten members, for sixth and seventh-class municipalities, at least eight members; Provided, That in municipal districts of lower category, there must at least be one patrolman. (Sec. 19, Id.)

[Chart 1 – Administration and Department Services]

[Chart 2 ]

[Chart 3 ]

[Chart 4 ]

[Chart 5 ]

[Chart 6 – Authorized Ratio of Ranks in a Police Force]

RULE II – ADMINISTRATION

Section 1. Duties of Peace Officers . – All members of the local police agency shall be peace officers. It shall be their duty to preserve peace and order, prevent the commission of crimes, protect life, liberty and property and arrest all violators of laws and ordinances within their jurisdiction. They shall exercise the general powers to make arras searches and seizures in accordance with law. They shall detain arrested persons only within the period prescribed by law. (Sec 7 ,Id.)

Section 2. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities of the Chief of Police. – The Chief of Police shall have the following powers, duties and responsibilities:

a. He shall have immediate direction, supervision, coordination and control over the police force and all its members as well as civilian employees thereof and shall be responsible for their efficiency and general conduct.

b. He shall have the power and authority to improve at any time the organization, administration and operation of the police force in order to make it more responsive and effective in accomplishing the police objectives and missions.

c. He shall have the power to make designations and assignments as to who among his officers and personnel shall head and constitute the various divisions and units of the police department and to make such disposition of the police force and re-assignments of personnel to existing or new divisions or units as may be required by the exigencies of service.

d. He shall establish a comprehensive and understandable system of directives which will include policy statements, general and special orders, training bulletins, standard operating procedures, and rules and regulations.

e. He shall establish an efficient and accurate reporting and recording system and medium for departmental reporting; for the public; for the police themselves; and for other law enforcement, agencies.

f. He shall prepare and submit to the mayor the department’s annual report and annual budget properly supported by documents and statistics.

g. He shall develop an effective public relations program which will promote and maintain public understanding, confidence and support.

h. He shall exercise disciplinary jurisdiction over all members of his police force for offenses involving suspension of not more than ten days or forfeiture of not more than fifteen days’ pay (Sec. 15, Id.) and such minor disciplinary punishment or reprimand, forfeiture of days of not exceeding 15 days, and the rendition of extra duty not exceeding the equivalent of 15 days or 120 hours.

i. He shall render an evaluation and recommendation report to the mayor for the retention or dismissal of appointees under probation before the expiration of the probationary period and shall advise and recommend to the mayor the promotion of deserving members of the police force. (Secs. 8 and 12, Id.)

j. He shall promptly and faithfully execute all lawful orders of the mayor and writs and processes of any court when placed in his hands for that purpose and shall insure the prompt execution and return of orders of arrests, subpoenas, and summonses of the court within a reasonable time but ‘shall not be more than 30 days from receipt thereof

k. He shall exercise police supervision over all land and water within the police jurisdiction of the city or municipality.

l. He shall pro serve the public peace and enforce all laws and ordinances of the city or municipality or whenever any violation thereof shall come to his knowledge, and shall cause the necessary complaint to he made and produce the evidence for the successful prosecution of the offender or offenders.

m. He shall protect the rights of persons and property wherever found within the jurisdiction of the city or municipality, and shall arrest when necessary to prevent the escape of the offender, violators of any law or ordinance, and those who unduly interfere or obstruct in the performance of the legitimate functions of law enforcement and of his lawful duty.

n. Unless the law provides otherwise, he shall have charge of the jail or prison in the city or municipality and shall be responsible for the safe keeping of all prisoners until they shall be released from custody, in accordance with law, or delivered to the warden of the proper prison or penitentiary.

o. Unless the law provides otherwise, he shall have charge of the fire-fighting unit of the city or municipality and shall be responsible for its efficiency and general conduct.

p. He shall be the proper custodian of all police equipment and arms not issued to individual policemen for use and shall be responsible therefor. Sec. 6, Id.)

q. He shall be the proper custodian of all physical evidence coming to the police department until they are transmitted to the proper court or fiscal’s office.

r. He shall have the power to prescribe, promulgate and enforce supplementary rules and regulations for the government and discipline of the members and employees of his force, provided that they are not in conflict with law, ordinance or this Police Manual.

s. He shall have such other powers and perform such other duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by law, ordinance or rules and regulations prescribed by the appropriate authority.

Section 3. In case of absence on leave,sickness, or temporary incapacity of the Chief of Police, the Deputy Chief of Police shall act in his place and perform the duties and exercise the powers of the Chief of Police, except the power of reorganization and designation or reassignment, and recommendation on appointments and promotions. He shall also perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the Chief of Police or as may be prescribed by law, ordinance, or rules and regulations.

Section 4. Duties and Responsibilities of Superior Officers . – A superior officer in the police force shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

a. He shall familiarize himself with all the laws, ordinances, police rules and regulations, as well as all the policies of the police department and shall strictly enforce and implement them accordingly.

b. He shall perform administrative duties which shall include planning, organizing, and directing the activities of assigned personnel and the maintenance of harmonious relations with the other divisions or units of the police department.

c. He shall be responsible for all matters pertaining to the operation of all the units under his command and shall exercise authority commensurate with his responsibility and be accountable for its use.

d. He shall supervise and control, subject to the orders of the chief of police or immediate superior officer, all members assigned to his command and he shall be responsible for the efficiency and effectiveness of his men and units.

e. He shall maintain the desired standard of discipline and morale of all members of his unite He shall take prompt and appropriate action on the discovery of any failure, error, violation, misconduct or neglect of duty by a subordinate. In case the dereliction is committed by a member of the force not within his command, he shall take immediate corrective and/or appropriate action a may be necessary and a report thereof shall be forwarded to the proper commanding officer.

f. He shall take necessary stops to insure the proper care, economical use and serviceability of supplies and equipment issued to his command.

g. He shall, at irregular and unannounced times, visit all units under his command inspecting them for condition, efficiency of operations, and for conformity with regulations and orders, initiating corrective action or disciplinary measures as may be necessary and proper.

h. He shall promptly obey and transmit all lawful orders of his superiors, insuring uniform interpretation and full compliance.

i. He shall observe duty hours in accordance with the assignments published and the needs of the department and the units under him. In case of special need or emergency he shall be available for duty at all times.

j. He shall make daily examination of assignment sheets, attendance records and all miscellaneous reports governing personnel under his command to insure proper utilization and control.

k. He shall submit to his superior officer, in prescribed form, such reports as may be required to accurately reflect the problems, services and activities of the various units under him.

l. He shall report immediately any emergency, serious crime, or unusual occurrence to his superior He shall respond person to any emergency or occurrence of a serious or unusual nature which arises within his jurisdiction unless his presence at his station cannot be dispensed with.

m. He shall strictly account for the condition of personnel assigned under him including their appearance and personal equipment. He shall give particular attention to the morale of his subordinates.

n. He shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, all members under his command at the beginning of their respective tours of duty in addition to a general inspection which shall be conducted at least once a week.

o. He shall, at all times, keep himself informed of the affairs of his unit and be assured that the duties of his subordinates are properly discharged.

p. He shall analyze crime and incident report,using facilities of the records division to determine trends as a basis for practical development of resources and direction of operations.

q. He shall examine reports for conformity with the procedure for complete investigation and reporting, returning improper or incomplete reports through proper channels for and explanation of failure.

r. He shall act promptly on all official notices, summonses or subpoenas which may be sent to him by proper authority.

s. He shall exercise authority with firmness kindness and justice.

t. He shall perform such other duties that may be assigned to him by his superior officer or higher authority.

Section 5. Duties and Responsibilities of a Patrolman . – A patrolman in the police force shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

a. He shall be ready at all times to perform his duties and obey the lawful orders of his superior officers or higher authority.

b. He shall be responsible for the efficient performance of his duties and adequate coverage of his beat or post.

c. He shall cooperate and coordinate with the other members of his relief, district or other division segments so that their teamwork may insure continuity of purpose and maximum achievement of the objectives of the department.

d. He shall be available for duty at all times in case of special needs or emergencies.

e. He shall respond readily and report punctually to all his assignments.

f. He shall familiarize himself with administrative and operational policies of the department.

g. He shall execute the service program within his area of responsibility providing for prevention of crime, protection of life’ and property, apprehension and prosecution of offenders, preservation of peace, and enforcement of regulatory measures.

h. He shall be in the prescribed attire and have the required equipment when he reports for duty.

i. He shall be attentive to instruction and record information given during the briefing or roll call training and shall likewise record his activities during his tour of duty in the prescribed manner.

j. He shall unless otherwise ordered, report to his superior for inspection and instruction at the conclusion of his tour of duty.

k. He shall supervise and inspect all public and licensed places within his area of responsibility.

l. When on patrol, he shall be constantly alert, observing everything that takes place within his sight or hearing. He shall not hold long conversations with anyone except in the discharge of his duty.

m. At night time, he shall exercise close vigilance by watching and frequently examining and trying accessible doors or entrances and windows of commercial or public buildings, including vacant or unoccupied houses on his beat. He shall promptly investigate all suspicious circumstances he may encounter. In like manner, he shall check all uninhibited building or dwelling places in the day time.

n. As far as practicable, he shall exert efforts to know the identities and other circumstances of permanent residents of the area assigned to him and shall keep track of movements of the newcomers or strangers transferring to or merely loitering in the place. He shall report his findings without delay.

o. He shall take note of vehicles parked by day or staying overnight in the different streets of his beat, recording their plate numbers, make and, whenever possible, the owners thereof and/or drivers or operators.

p. He shall undertake close surveillance over the movements of suspicious persons and vehicles and keep a record of his observations for ready-use when the need arises.

q. He shall take note and report all known suspected places of vice, such as gambling dens, houses of ill-repute, opium dives, hide-outs of persons of doubtful conduct, and places frequented by vagrants.

r. He shall keept himself informed of the-places in his area where violations are known or reputed to exist, and he shall plan and take the necessary action, duly advising his superior officer as to the steps being taken.

s. He shall at all times, whenever in uniform, keep his official badge properly displayed; and courteously give his name and badge number when duly requested to identify himself.

t. He shall, in the event of any disturbance of the peace within his beat or in its immediate vicinity, proceed to the particular spot and exert efforts to restore order. If a crime has been committed and the offender can be placed under custody, he shall take immediate steps to bring him to the police station. He shall endeavor to save life and protect or preserve the crime scene until the arrival of the investigator.

u. He shall not leave his beat until properly relieved, except when required by the exigencies of the service and for unavoidable reasons. He shall keep record of the same in his memorandum book indicating the time he left his beat, the reason for leaving and the time he returned and resumed his patrol duty.

v. He shall take care of lost children by taking them to the residence of their parents, if located within or near the vicinity of his beat and shall promptly notify his station of such action.

If the residence is not known or at some distant location, he shall take such necessary action as may be required by the circumstances. He shall be observant of school children who are not in classes during the proper hours, and after making inquiries as to the reasons therefor shall appropriate action on any case of truancy which may come to his notice.

w. He shall take note of all obstructions in the streets or sidewalks from which accidents may occur, removing them when practicable. He shall also take appropriate action on all nuisances and other matters affecting the safety and convenience of the public or the interest of the city or municipality.

x. He shall exercise vigilance in order to prevent fire or avoid waste of water; take note of all garbage, dead animals or other offensive matters thrown into the streets and shall take appropriate action thereon.

y. He shall in order to summon aid, give three blasts with, the whistle and in extreme emergency, he may discharge his firearm in the air.

z. He shall familiarize himself with the location of street traffic signs and if he sees them misplaced or tampered within any manner, he shall rectify the same. If such signs are missing from their proper location, he shall make proper report of such fact to his superior.

aa. While on patrol duty, he shall not enter any bar, night club, theater or any other place of amusement or business except in the strict discharge of his duty.

bb. He shall have an official note book in which he will enter the names of persons taken into custody by him and such important particulars in each case as may be necessary as well as other pertinent information and matters relative to the discharge of his official duties. Such memorandum book shall be subject to inspection by his superior officers at any time.

cc. He shall endeavor to be familiar with the bus lines, the location of streets, public buildings and offices, hospitals, courts, transportation offices and depots, industrial plants, highways and boundaries thereof and of the national, provincial and municipal officials and such other matters pertaining to the government of the city or municipality, as will enable him to render intelligent and helpful information and assistance when requested.

dd. He shall perform such other duties and responsibilities that may be assigned to him by his superior officer or higher authority.

Section 6. Duties of Patrolman Assigned to Traffic Duty . A patrolman assigned to a traffic post shall have the following duties:

a. He shall enforce all pertinent traffic laws ordinances or regulations and shall take appropriate action for any violation of law that may come to his attention.

b. He shall maintain the orderly movement of all vehicles at his post with due regard for the safety of pedestrians, and exact compliance of the drivers thereof with the laws and regulations pertaining to traffic.

c. He shall, when directing traffic, take station nearest to the center of the street intersection as conditions will permit, and shall execute all movements of hand signals visible to motorists with uniformity and precision.

d. When a whistle is used in the regulation of traffic, it shall be in conjunction with the hand signal. One blast of the whistle shall mean that traffic shall stop and two blasts shall mean that traffic shall proceed.

e. He shall give his whole attention to his duties at all times. He shall not engage in conversation with anyone, except when necessary in line of police duty and such conversation shall be brief.

f. He shall not leave his post during his tours of duty without permission, except when properly relieved by another officer. In case of personal necessity, or when necessary in any police emergency, he shall notify his station, if possible, before leaving.

g. He shall respond immediately to emergency call for police service within a reasonable distance of his post, and if it cannot be done, he shall promptly notify his station accordingly.

h. He must keep calm and control his temper even under trying and provoking circumstances. In warning or correcting a person for a slight infraction of the traffic regulations, he shall do so in a firm but brief and civil manner, and without obstructing the flow of traffic, or creating congestion. When it is necessary to arrest a driver for a violation of the traffic regulations, he shall, if possible order the offender out of the traffic flow to the street curb, and make such arrest without unnecessary loss of time or the obstruction of traffic.

i. He shall, if assigned to mounted vehicles, have charge of the, duty of suppressing speeding and reckless driving.

Section 7. Duties of Patrolman Assigned to Patrol Car . A patrolman assigned to a police car for patrol duty shall have the following duties:

a. He shall operate the patrol car at a moderate rate of speed and in such a manner as will enable him to observe any condition or occurrence in his patrol beat which may require police attention. He shall adhere to the method prescribed for foot patrolmen, except as may be otherwise directed.

b. Unless otherwise directed, he shall report for roll call at his station at the prescribed time. He shall report hourly to the base control operator or at such time as may be designated by his superior officer.

c. He shall patrol his assigned beat regularly paying particular attention to critical area.

d. He shall exercise judgment and care with due regard to the safety of life and property, when responding to an emergency call.

e. He shall be in proper uniform when on duty, unless otherwise directed by the chief of police

f. He shall perform such other duties that may be assigned to him by his superior officers or higher authority.

Section 8. – Duties of Patrolman Assigned to Work . A patrolman assigned to detective work shall have the following duties:

a. He shall acquire a thorough knowledge of the penal laws and ordinances and the elements that constitute criminal acts thereof, and shall acquaint himself with the fundamental rules of evidence.

b. He shall have a thorough knowledge of the functions of the detective force which is charged with the investigation of criminal offenses, the detection and apprehension of criminal offenders, the locating of missing persons, the recovery of lost and stolen property, the proper cooperation with other authorities, and other similar responsibilities.

c. He shall familiarize himself with the various types of criminals, and acquaint himself with their various methods and practices, haunts, and associations.

d. He shall follow up each case assigned to him until there is a final official disposition of such case,

e. He shall render a written report on all assignments given to him.

f. He shall have such regular hours of duty as may be prescribed by the chief of police.

g. He shall use scientific methods and procedures in the investigation of suspects and witnesses and shall not resort to violence or “third degree” in extracting confessions.

h. He shall keep his immediate superior officer regularly informed of the progress and development of cases assigned to him.

i. He shall not leave the city or municipality to conduct any investigation or to perform any act within the purview of his duties, without the express permission of his immediate superior officer or the chief of police, except when in immediate pursuit of a fugitive.

j. He shall have with him an official notebook in which he will enter the names of persons taken into custody by him and such particulars in each case, and also all information and matters relative to the discharge of his official duties.

k. He shall perform such other duties that may be assigned to him by his superior officer or higher authority.

Section 9. Duties of Other Members of the Police Force . – All members and employees of the police force whose duties are not specifically enumerated in these rules and regulations, shall be assigned to such duties and have such hours of work as may be directed by the chief of police.

They shall perform their respective duties thoroughly and efficiently and shall at all times be discreet, courteous, diligent and attentive, and shall call the attention of their immediate superiors to any matter which requires their special consideration.

They shall at all times be as neat and clean in appearance as their work will permit, and keep in good order any desk, book, locker, tool and other equipment and property that may be used by them or entrusted to their care.

RULE III – CODE OF ETHICS AND PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT

Section 1. Code of Ethics . – All members of police forces shall observe” the following Code of Ethics:

“AS A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, my fundamental duty is to serve mankind; to safeguard liven and property; to protect the innocent against deception, the weak against oppression or intimidation, and the peaceful against violence or disorder; and to respect the Constitutional rights of all men to liberty, equality and justice.

I WILL keep my private life unsullied as an example to all; maintain courageous calm in the face of danger, scorn, or ridicule; develop self-sufficient, mindful of the welfare of others. Honest in thought and deed in both my personal and official life, I will be exemplary in obeying the laws of the land and the regulations of my department. Whatever I see or hear of a confidential nature or that is confided to me in my official capacity will be kept ever secret unless revelation is necessary in the performance of my duty.

I WILL never act officiously or permit personal feelings, prejudices, animosities or friendships to influence my decisions, With no compromise for crime and with relent less prosecution of criminals, I will enforce the law courteously and appropriately without fear or favor, malice or ill will, never employing unnecessary force or violence and never accepting gratuities in return.

I RECOGNIZE the badge of my office as a symbol of public faith, and I accept it as a public trust to be held so long as I am true to the ethics of the police service. I will constantly strive to achieve these objectives and ideals dedicating myself before God to my chosen profession—law enforcement.”

Section 2. Faithful Allegiance to the Government and the Constitution and Loyalty to the Police Profession . – All members of the police force shall bear faithful allegiance to the Philippine government and shall “be loyal to the police profession. It shall be their sacred obligation to support and defend the Constitution of the Philippines.

Section 3. Duty to Know . All members of the police force shall familiarize themselves with these rules and regulations and shall conduct themselves in accordance with their precepts.

Section 4. Punctuality to All Calls. Requirements of Duty, etc. – All members of the police force shall be punctual in attendance to all calls, requirements of duty, court appointments and other circumstances where time is specified.

Section 5. Courtesy – All members of local police forces shall render salute to the President and the Vice President of the Philippines, members of Congress, Justices, and Judges, the Chairman and members of the Police Commission as well as the officials of the Commission staff, the provincial governors, the vice governors and the members of the provincial board , the mayors, the vice mayors, the councilors, senior commissioned officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, senior members of other police agencies, and other high officials and dignitaries of the national and foreign governments; and in connection therewith, strictly observe and practice rules of courtesy. They shall address superior officers by their ranks; otherwise, by the simple use of “sir.”

Courtesy and civility toward the public and each other is demanded of all members of the police force. They shall, in their conduct and department be quiet, civil and orderly, and at all times be attentive and zealous in the discharge of their duties controlling their temper and exercising the utmost patience and discretion. They shall refrain from using course, violent, profane or offensive language.

Section 6. Salute to National Colors . – Except when impracticable to do so, members of the police force in proper uniform shall stand at attention and salute the national colors and national anthem when played on all public occasions with the rifle, baton or hand salute as the case may be. All other members and employees of the police force, not in uniform, shall render the colors the honors and courtesies customarily accorded in civilian dress, standing at attention as the colors pass by and, if a male employee, placing his headdress on his left breast with his right hand. During flag ceremony and when the national anthem is played, members of the police force shall call the attention of the public to respect the color and the national anthem.

Section 7. Types of Salutes . – Salutes shall be rendered by members of the police force in uniform and shall be made with the hand, the baton or with the long arm as may be practicable in the following manner;

a. Hand salute – Raise the hand smartly until the tip of the forefinger touches the lower part of the headdress or forehand above the right eye, thumb and fingers extended and joined, palm to the left, forearm inclined at about 45 degrees hand and wrist straight.

b. Baton salute – Grasp handle of baton firmly in right hand, thumb extended along baton; raise baton so that hand will be at the height of the chin, back of hand to the front, baton at an angle of about 30 degrees.

c. Rifle salute – (M1 Rifle; M1903 Rifle, Riotgun to individuals) – Starting at right shoulder arms, move the left hand smartly to the small of the stock, forearm horizontal, palm of the hand down,thumb and fingers extended and joined. The first joint of the forefinger shall touch the rear end of the receiver of the M1 rifle or the end of the cocking piece of the M1903 rifle. Look toward the person saluted. Then drop the left hand smartly to the side; turn the head and eyes to the front.

When at order arms, move the left hand smartly to the right side, palm of the hand down, thumb and fingers extended and joined. The forearm and wrist are held straight with the first joint of the forefinger touching the barrel between the stocking swivel and the muzzle. Look toward the person saluted. Drop the hand smartly to the side; turn the head and eyes to the front.

d. Rifle salute during ceremonies – From order arms, carry the rifle in front of the center of the body with the right hand. The barrel is to the rear and vertical. Then grasp the rifle with the left hand at the balance, the forearm horizontal and resting against the body. Grasp the small of the stock with the right hand.

e. Carbine salute to individuals and during ceremonies – At sling arms, replace the right hand by the left hand. Bring the right hand to the side. Then executive a hand salute.

Section 8. Use of Uniform – a. All members of the police force reporting for duty must be clean shaven, neat and clean in their person and clothing. If in uniform, the same shall be in conformity with the regulations herein prescribed and shall be clean, well-pressed, worn neatly and buttoned.

b. When on the street in uniform and walking in groups of two or more, they shall walk in step.

When proceeding in a body to, or returning from the performance of duty, the members in charge shall march such body in military order when practicable.

c. While in uniform, they shall not road newspapers and the like on a street or sidewalk, or anywhere outside a building, nor hold in their hands such reading materials when engaged in any other police duty.

d. When travelling in uniform, they shall not occupy a seat in a public conveyance to the exclusion of civilian passengers.

e. When attending court sessions in whatever capacity they shall appear in proper attire.

f. Any member of the police force under suspension shall not wear the uniform and he shall immediately surrender his badge, fire arm, identification card, and police vehicle, if any, to the chief of police.

Section 9. Confidential Information – a. All members of the police force shall treat official business as confidential. They shall not impart the same to anyone except those for whom it is intended, or as directed by their superior officer, or as required by law.

b. They shall not make known to any unauthorized person any special order which they may receive or may pass their hands, unless required by the nature of the order.

c. Contents of any criminal record shall not be exhibited or divulged to any person other than duly authorized police officers, or upon approval of the chief of police, or as required by law.

d. The roster, or any portion thereof, of members of the police force shall not be divulged to any individual, firm or corporation, or similar entity, unless prior permission is obtained from the chief of police.

e. Members of the police force shall respect the confidence of persons who seek the aid of the police on information given voluntarily and exclusively by themselves and request that their names and businesses or addresses be not made public; nor shall the name of any person who complains that another has violated the law be revealed, except when required by law, or when it is absolutely necessary in the performance of duty by the investigating officer.

Section 10. Care and Use of Property . a. Members of the police force shall be responsible for the good care, maintenance and use of the property under their care whether fixed or movable, and promptly report to their superior officers the loss of, damage to, or unserviceable condition of such property. All government property shall be properly protected and secured by those concerned.

b. They shall not use or allow any unauthorized person to use any government property or vehicle for personal convenience or gain. The official use of the police vehicles by any member shall be upon permission of propel’ authority.

Section 11. Surrender of Property . – All members of the police force retiring, resigning,suspended or dismissed therefrom, shall immediately surrender their badges, service firearms and identification cards issued, and other insignias of office, and all properties of the police force which may be in their possession.

Section 12. Turn-over of Other Property . All personal property stolen or embezzled, or the proceeds or fruit of a crime, or property used in the commission of a crime or alleged to be so, in the form of evidence, or any property lost and found or surrendered, or any species of property on the person of a prisoner, shall be properly tagged and delivered forthwith to the proper officer of the police force for disposition to be deposited in a secured locker designed for such purpose.

Section 13. Use of Firearms . – No member of the police force shall draw his firearm except for necessary inspection or lawful use. Members firing a gun accidentally or intentionally, shall report the matter immediately to the chief of police. Only duly registered firearms shall be carried and officially used by members of the police force.

Section 14. Cruel Treatment of Persons or Animals . – No member of the police force shall treat any person cruelly nor shall he neglect to render the necessary humane attention to animals.

Section 15. Conduct in Arrests and Towards Prisoners . – All members of the police force shall refrain from using unnecessary force or violence, or uncomplimentary or harsh language in making arrest or investigations, and shall not employ high handed tactics, methods, or violence upon any other person except when necessary in self defense or to overcome actual physical resistance in making an arrest. When it is necessary to use force, a narration of the circumstances shall be included in the arrest report or police blotter on the case.

Section 16. Prohibited Discussion and Speech . – No member of any police agency shall engage directly or indirectly in partisan political activities, or take part in any election, except to vote.

Section 17. Sleeping and Loafing on Duty . No member of the police force shall sleep, remain idle, or loaf while on duty, when performing his beat duty in uniform or otherwise. He shall not lean against a fire hydrant, post, wall, building or structure, nor assume a loafing attitude, and should keep his hands out of his pockets, whether engaged in conversation or otherwise. He shall not loiter in cafes, hotels, restaurants, stores, theaters, prostitution and narcotic dens, and gambling joints except for the purpose of performing his legitimate police duties.

Section 18. – Houses of Ill-repute. – Member of the police force shall not enter any house suspected or reported as being of ill-repute except in the performance of-duty, and if required to enter such place shall report the fact to their superior officer as soon as practicable.

Section 19. Intoxication and Use of Prohibited Drugs . – No member of the police force shall, in the headquarters, precinct, or elsewhere while on duty, drink any intoxicating liquor or take prohibited drugs, except in the legitimate discharge of police duty or for therapeutic purposes or enter any public place dispensing liquors while in uniform, or to report for duty under the influence of liquor or prohibited drugs, or be a habitual drunkard to the prejudice of the service.

Section 20. Disorderly Conduc t. – No member of the police force shall act in a disorderly manner or misbehave specially in public places.

Section 21. Gambling . – No member of the police force shall engage in any form of gambling prohibited by law.

Section 22. Absolute Morality . – A member of the police force shall live a high degree of morality and shall not maintain a common-law wife other than his legitimate spouse.

Section 23. Attorney and Bondsman . – Members of the police force shall not suggest, solicit or recommend to any party or prisoner with a pending case, the employment of any particular bondsman, attorney or counsel for his defense or release at any time and shall not be surety of any person arrested for crime, or release a prisoner from custody, except as provided by law.

Section 24. Non-interference in Civil Case . – Members of the police force shall not interfere in civil cases of which he is not a party, except to prevent a breach of the peace, or to quell a disturbance actually taking place.

Section 25. Untruthfulness . – Members of the police force shall speak the truth at all times and under all circumstances whether under oath or otherwise.

Section 26. Defense Witness in Criminal Cases. – Members of the police force shall, when subpoenaed or summoned as a witness for the defense in a criminal case, promptly notify their chief of police. No member shall be a witness in such capacity without the service of a proper subpoena.

Section 27. Witness in Civil Cases . – No member of the police force shall testify in civil cases unless subpoenaed to do so by proper authority.

Section 28. Notice After Court Attendance . – Members of the police force attending any court under subpoenas, summonses or other processes as witnesses shall, after having been released therefrom for the day, immediately report to the chief of police.

Section 29. Application for Warrant. – No member of the police force shall be permitted to apply for search warrant for any evidence of assault upon himself, without first reporting the case in writing to the chief of police and obtaining from him permission to apply for such warrant. In no case shall the aggrieved member be permitted to serve such warrant.

Section 30. Soliciting Influence . – Members of the police force shall not solicit the influences of politicians, prominent citizens, persons connected with political organizations in any manner for their assignments, transfers, or promotions, or for those of other members of the force, nor shall they initiate any petition to be drawn up, or presented by citizens in their behalf, requesting a transfer, assignment, or promotion.

Section 31. Corrupt Practices . – No member of the police force shall use his position, directly or indirectly for his personal benefit or gain.

Section 32. Use of Smuggled Products . – Members of the police force shall not buy, possess, or use smuggled goods, or in any way be involved in the traffic of the same.

Section 33. Business Beyond Jurisdiction . – No member of the police force shall leave the municipality on police business, except by permission of his chief of police, or other competent authority, unless such permission is not practical, as in hot pursuit of a criminal in which case a report must be made immediately thereafter.

Section 34. Malingering . – No member of the police force shall feign sickness or injury or physical incapacity to avoid performance of duty.

Section 35. Withholding Information .  –  No member of the police force shall delay or withhold any vital information from the chief of police concerning the commission of a serious crime or the presence of a wanted person and/or such important events requiring police action.

Section 36. Communications Outside Department . All official correspondence, letters, communications, etc., relating to the business of the police force shall only be sent out on the signature of the chief of police or other officers acting in his stead.

Section 37. Gossip and Idle Talk . – No member of the police force shall intrigue, gossip, or make a false of unverified statement concerning the personal character or conduct which will discredit another member.

Section 38. Prohibited Debts and Liabilities . Members of the police force shall promptly discharge all debts and legal liabilities incurred by them.

Section 39. Prohibited Compromise . – No member of the police force shall directly or indirectly, compromise any criminal act with the view of permitting the offenders to escape arrest and punish as provided by law. Nothing herein shall, however, be construed as including minor infractions which may justify a warning for first-time offenders.

Section 40. Willful Disobedience or Insubordination . No member of the police force, to whom a lawful order is given by a superior officer, shall willfully disobey that order, and no conduct subversive to the good order or discipline of the force shall be tolerated.

No member of the police force shall use abusive, insulting, or indecent language to a superior officer and no superior officer shall use abusive and insulting language toward a subordinate.

Section 41. Rewards, gifts, fees. – Unless authorized by law, no member of the police force shall accept any fees, rewards, or gifts of any type, for any service rendered in the performance of his duty other than the salary paid by him by the city or municipality, nor shall be use his position for material consideration.

Section 42. Attitude Toward Profession .- A member of the police force shall regard the discharge of his duties as a public trust and recognize his responsibility as a public servant. By diligent study and sincere attention to self improvement, he shall strive to make the best possible application of police science, and, in the field of human relationship, strive for effective leadership and public influence in matters affecting public safety. He shall appreciate the importance and responsibility of his office and regard police work as an honorable profession rendering valuable service to his community, country and God.

RULE IV – SELECTION

Section 1. Standard Selection of Police Personnel – In order to strengthen the police service and lay the groundwork for police professionalization, there shall be a standard policy for the selection of police personnel throughout the country.

Section 2. General Qualifications for Appointment . No person shall be appointed to a local police agency unless he possesses the following qualifications: (Sec. 9, Id.)

a. He must be a citizen of the Philippines.

b. He must be a person of good habits and moral conduct.

c. He must be of sound mind and body.

d. For appointment to patrolman in the municipalities, he must have completed at least high school and for cities, at least two full years of college work.

e. He must have no criminal record.

f. He must not have been dishonorably discharged from military service or dismissed for cause from any civilian position in the government.

g. He must not be less than twenty-three nor more than thirty three years of age.

h. He must be at least five feet, five inches in height in the case of chartered cities, and five feet, four inches in the case of municipalities, and

i. He must not weigh less than one hundred twenty pounds.

Section 3. Qualifications for Permanent Appointment . No person shall be permanently appointed to any position in the local police force or agency unless he has qualified in an appropriate or police service examination. (Sec. 11, Id.) Bar examinations are declared as appropriate civil service examination for purposes of original or promotional appointments.

Section 4. Members with at Least Five Years Service . Persons who have rendered at least five years of satisfactory service on or before September 8, 1966, in a national, city or municipal police agency, or in a provincial guard although they have not qualified in an appropriate civil service examination are considered as civil service eligible for the positions or ranks for which they have been duly appointed. (Sec. 9.Id.)

Section 5. Order of Preference for Initial Appointment . The order of preference for initial appointment to a local police agency, all things being equal, shall be as follows:

a. Applicants who possess appropriate civil service eligibility and who meet the general qualifications provided in Section 2 hereof and are:

(1) Residents of the city or municipality concerned.

(2) Residents of the province concerned.

(3) Residents of the region concerned.

(4) Residents of any other region in the Philippines.

b. Applicants for positions higher than patrolman who do not possess appropriate civil service eligibility but who meet the general qualifications provided in Section 2, except the age requirement, and have completed police training courses abroad sponsored by the NEC-AID or other sponsoring agency, or the police training courses of the PC School or the NBI Police Academy, or any public or private police training school recognized “by the government, or completed military trainee instruction, or are officers or enlisted men who have been honorably discharged from the armed forces; Provided , that in cases of applicants for the position of patrolman, they shall meet the general qualifications provided in Section 2; Provided further , that in cases of applicants for the position of chief of police of a city or municipal police agency, they shall meet the minimum qualifications provided in Section 6 hereof.

c. Applicants who do not possess appropriate civil service eligibility but who meet the general qualifications prescribed in Section 2 hereof and are:

(1) Residents of the city or municipality concerned.

(2) Residents of the province concerned.

(3) Residents of the region concerned.

(4) Residents of any other region in the Philippines.

Section 6. Minimum Qualifications for Appointment as Chief of a Police Agency .  –  No person may be appointed chief of police of a city police agency unless he holds a bachelor’s degree from a college or university of recognized standing and has served either in the Armed Forces of the Philippines or the National Bureau of Investigation, or has served as chief of police of a city or municipal police agency with exemplary record, or has served in the police department of any city with the rank of captain or its equivalent therein for at least three years, or is at least a high school graduate who has served as officer in the Armed Forces of the Philippines for at least eight years with the rank of captain or higher. (Sec. 10, Id.)

No person may be appointed chief of police of a municipal police agency unless he holds a bachelor’s degree from a college or university of recognized standing or any high school graduate who has served the police agency of a city or a municipality in the rank of at least police lieutenant or has served as officer in the Armed Forces of the Philippines from the rank of at least lieutenant, and in either case, must have held such rank for at least five years. (Sec. 10, Id.)

Section 7. Police Screening Committee . In order to determine the merit and fitness of police applicants prior to their appointment, they shall be screened by a Police Screening Committee composed of three members, namely:

a. Chief of Police as Chairman.

b. A duly designated representative of the PC Provincial Command as member. In case of cities where there are no provincial commands, the Chief of Constabulary shall designate his representative.

c. A private citizen of known probity and integrity in the community as member to be designated by the mayor.

Section 8. Procedures in Screening . – The following procedures shall be followed in the screening of police applicants:

a. Preliminary Interview . – The applicant shall be interviewed personally by the personnel officer of the department. If the applicant qualifies under Section 2(a), (d), and (g) of this Rule, he shall be required to present or accomplish the following:

(1) A letter of application if none has been submitted.

(2) An information sheet.

(3) A copy of his picture (passport size).

(4) Birth certificate.

(5) Transcript of scholastic records and/ or diploma.

(6) Fingerprint card, properly accomplish ed.

(7) Clearance papers from the local police department, PC provincial headquarters, city or municipal court and city or provincial fiscal’s office and his hometown police department, NBI, and others that may be required.

b. Physical and Medical Examination . – In order to determine whether or not the applicant is in good health, free from any contagious diseases and physically fit for police service, he shall undergo a thorough physical and medical examination to be conducted by the local health officer after he qualifies under Paragraph (a) of this Section.

c. Character and Background Investigation . -The Screening Committee shall cause a confidential investigation of the character and background of the applicant who qualifies in paragraph (a) and (b) above, to determine his reputation and character from among various sources.

d. Physical Agility Test . – The Screening Committee shall require the applicant to undergo a physical agility test designed to determine whether or not he possesses the required coordination, strength, and speed of movement necessary for police service. The applicant shall pass the following tests;

(1) Pullups – 6

(2) Pushups – 27

(3) Two minutes situps – 43

(4) Squat jumps – 32

(5) Squat thrusts – 20

Additional requirements may be prescribed by the Police Screening Committee if facilities are available.

e. Personal Interview . – The Screening Committee shall interview the qualified applicant for suitability for police work. The interview shall aid in determining appearance, likeableness, affability, attitude toward work, outside interest, forcefulness, conversational ability and disagreeable mannerisms.

f. Psychological and/or Neuro-Psychiatric Test. – In order to exclude applicants who are emotionally or temperamentally unstable, psychotic, or suffering from any mental disorder, the applicant shall take a psychological and/or neuro-psychiatric test to be administered by the NBI, the PC, or any other duly recognized institution offering such test after he has qualified and met all the requirements above.

Section 9. Classes of Appointment . – Any applicant who meets the general qualifications for appointment in Section 2 of this Rule and who passes the tests required in Section 8 of this Rule shall be recommended to the city or municipal mayor for initial appointment as patrolman and shall be classified as follows:

a. Provisional Appointment . – An applicant who does not possess the appropriate civil service eligibility for appointment shall be eligible for provisional appointment for not longer than six months.

b. Probational Appointment . – An applicant possesses the appropriate civil service eligibility for position of patrolman shall serve a probationary period of six months following his original appointment, and shall undergo a thorough character and background investigation in order to acquire a permanent civil service status. The probationary period shall be regarded as an integral part of the examination process and shall be utilized as a means to closely observe the employee’s character, conduct and capacity, to secure the most effective adjustment of a new employee to his position or to drop him from the service in case of unsatisfactory conduct or want of capacity.

c. Temporary Appointment . – In case of temporary vacancy caused by a member who goes on leave without pay or who commutes his accrued leave, a temporary appointment may be extended to an applicant who possesses the necessary qualification during the existence of the vacancy; Provided, that the corresponding funds therefor are appropriated and; Provided, further , that preference should be given to civil service eligibles.

RULE V – TRAINING

Section 1. Objective of Training . – It snail be the objective of police training to bring the city and municipal police forces to the desired standards of discipline and efficiency by making each police officer fully aware of his duties and responsibilities and by providing him with a working knowledge of police procedures and techniques.

Section 2. Responsibility for Training . – The training of police officers shall be the responsibility of the city and municipal police forces subject to the supervision of the Police Commission. All police forces having 100 or more members shall maintain a training unit which shall take care of its training needs, including its civilian employees while those with less than 100 members shall have a competent police officer or lower in rank, as the case may be, whether full-time or in addition to his regular duties, to plan, schedule and conduct training programs.

Section 3. Basic Recruit Training Prerequisite to Permanent Appointment . – No police recruit may be extended a permanent appointment as patrolman unless he has finished the basic recruit training prior to the expiration of the required probationary period. Exempted from be sic recruit training are those who have previously taken up this course or its equivalent in training courses conducted by the Philippine Constabulary or the National Bureau of Investigation, or has completed at least two years in Criminology or Police Administration Course in any duly accredited institution offering the same.

Section 4. Conduct of Basic Recruit Training . To insure uniformity in the standard of instruction and course content, basic recruit training shall be conducted by police forces maintaining training units in accordance with the program of instruction prescribed by the Police Commission subject to modifications to suit local conditions; Provided however , that such modifications shall be subject to the approval by the Police Commission. Prior to conducting this training course, the police force concerned shall submit to the Police Commission a list of instructors together with their individual experiences and qualifications and the subjects they will teach. Qualified local instructors shall be utilized to the maximum.

Pending organization by the Police Commission of regional police academies, and training schools, basic recruit training in police forces without training units or in those which cannot put up a class for its recruits or cannot afford the expenses involved, shall be conducted, under supervision of the Police Commission, by the Philippine Constabulary or the National Bureau of Investigation, whichever agency may be delegated to conduct the training session or portions of the training session in particularly designated areas in conformity with the program of instruction prescribed by the Police Commission. The PC or the NBI, as the case may be, shall similarly submit to the Police Commission for its approval a list of instructors together with their individual experience and qualifications and the subjects they will teach.

Section 5. Length of Basic Recruit Training Course. – A basic recruit training course shall not be less than eight weeks. A training week shall normally consist of forty hours of scheduled instruction. If, for any reason, scheduled instruction cannot reach forty hours a week, instruction shall be extended beyond eight weeks so that it shall not have less than three hundred twenty hours.

Section 6. Course Content of Basic Recruit Training . – A basic recruit training course shall include theoretical and practical instructions. If the length of the course is eight weeks or three hundred twenty hours, the practical instructions shall not be less than two weeks or eighty hours. If the course shall last for more than eight weeks or more than three hundred twenty instructional hours, practical instructions may be more than two weeks or more than eighty hours depending on whether or not the added subjects need practical exercises to make the recruit proficient.

The theoretical instructions shall include, among others, the following origin and nature of police work; general police responsibilities; criminal law and procedure; police laws, rules and regulations; city and municipal ordinances; police methods and procedures; criminal investigation techniques; scientific aids; public relations and civic action subjects; police weapons; self-defense techniques; and ideals and ethics of police service.

Section 7. Full Time Attendance in Training Course . – Attendance in the basic recruit training course shall be on full time basis. However, in case of emergency, recruits may be required to render service upon certification by the chief of police of the necessity for such service and the nature of the emergency for which such services are needed.

Section 8. Report of Completion of Training . – After a basic recruit training course has been completed the chief of police concerned or the head of the unit of the Philippine Constabulary or the National Bureau of Investigation which conducted the training shall submit to the Police Commission a report of completion of training. This report shall contain the following information; (a) police department or unit of the Philippine Constabulary or National Bureau of Investigation which conducted the training, (b) place of training, (c) inclusive dates of training, (d) total number of instructional hours, and (e) alphabetical list of the recruits, including those who failed to complete the course, their ranks and the departments or units to which they individually belong. Those who do not complete the training shall be marked accordingly and the reasons for their non-completion properly noted. Two copies of the report shall be submitted to the Police Commission and one copy shall be furnished the Civil Service Commission.

Section 9. Certificate of Completion . -After the completion of basic recruit training, the chief of police or the head of the unit of the Philippine Constabulary or the National Bureau of Investigation which conducted the training shall certify that the police recruit has completed the training and has satisfied all the requirements for proficiency.

Section 10. On-the-Job-Training – At the end of at least eight weeks or three hundred twenty instructional hours of formal training the recruit shall return to his department or unit, as the case may be, and shall undergo on-the-job-training under qualified and conscientious supervisors assigned by the chief of police. If still under probation, he shall be rated by his supervisor at least once a month during the probationary period. Before the expiration of the probationary period, the supervisor shall make appropriate recommendation to the chief of police as to the retention or dismissal of the recruit. The recommendation by the supervisor shall be given due weight by the chief of police.

Section 11. Department In-Service Training . As often as practicable and as the need arises, all members of the police department shall undergo appropriate departmental in-service training. This training shall include roll call training, which shall be carried out daily for at least thirty minutes every shift of personnel, or formal instruction of several hours a day depending on the activities of the police department and the availability of personnel for training. The police department initiating an in-service training for its personnel shall submit to the Police Commission a monthly report. Upon completion of a course other than roll call training, a report of completion of training, similar to that provided for in Section 8 hereof, shall be submitted to the Police Commission and a copy of which shall be furnished the Civil Service Commission.

Section 12. Supervisory Development, Specialized or Technical Training – A city or municipal police force may conduct supervisory development, specialized or technical training, such as criminal investigation, traffic control, dactylography, questioned documents, forensic ballistics, etc. A program of instruction of the course and a list of the instructors together with their individual experience and qualifications and the subjects they will teach shall be submitted to the Police Commission for approval. Upon completion of the course, a report of completion shall also be submitted to the Police Commission and a copy furnished the Civil Service Commission.

Section 13. Training Conducted by the Philippine Constabulary or the National Bureau of Investigation. – Upon authority of the Police Commission and on the basis of previously approved course curricula, the Philippine Constabulary or the National Bureau of Investigation may conduct in-service training, supervisory development, specialized or technical courses for a police force or a group of police forces. Provincial governors, city or municipal mayors may make the proper request for training to the Police Commission. The agency which will conduct the training shall submit a list of instructors who will be utilized for the course together with their individual experiences and qualifications and the respective subjects they will teach. Upon completion of a course a report of completion of training shall be submitted to the Police Commission, furnishing a copy to the Civil Service Commission.

Section 14. Training Information Sheets . At the start of the training, all trainees or participants shall be required to fill up two copies of training information sheets, duly subscribed and sworn to before any person authorized to administer oaths. One copy shall be submitted to the Police Commission and the other copy retained by the police force or agency conducting the training.

Section 15. Attendance . – A record of attendance of all training courses shall be kept by the head of the training unit of the police force or the officer or employee in charge of the training. No participant shall be considered as having completed a course if he has a record of unexcused absence of ten percent (10%) or more of the total number of instructional hours, in the case of basic recruit training; or twenty percent (20%) in the case of in-service training, supervisory development, specialized or technical training. Absences caused by court duty, compliance with subpoenas, illness or similar justifiable causes may be excused upon presentation of proof, but in no case may the total absences exceed twenty percent (20%) in case of any other training, of the total instructional hours.

Section 16. Size of Classes. – The ideal number of trainees or participants to compose a class shall be forty. However, a class may be opened if there are not less than twenty.

Section 17. Training Facilities . – Every police force shall have an appropriate place where theoretical instructions may be given. It shall have adequate space, lighting and ventilation and shall be provided with a chalkboard and desks or chairs for the participants. The police department shall also provide training aids, equipment and supplies.

Section 18. Diplomas . – To give due recognition to the participants for their efforts, a formal diploma or certificate of completion or attendance, as the case may be, shall be issued to those who have completed a training course.

Section 19. Training, Rules and Regulations . The training unit of a police department, the police officer or lower in rank in charge of training in those department without any training unit, and the training units of the Philippine Constabulary and the National Bureau of Investigation shall issue rules and regulations governing the conduct of trainees or participants. A copy of the same shall be furnished the Police Commission which may notify, amend or delete any provision thereof or insert additional provisions.

Section 20. University Training for Police Officers . – Police Officers who are prepared for college or university work shall avail of the police science and criminology courses being offered in universities and colleges. Whenever practicable, they shall be given preferences to assignments which are not in conflict with their school hours. A yearly report stating the names and ranks of those personnel who have graduated from these courses, the degrees earned, the subjects taken and their corresponding ratings, and the name of the college or university from which they have graduated or enrolled shall be submitted to the Police Commission every end of the school year. A copy of this report shall be furnished the Civil Service Commission.

Section 21. Advanced and Specialized Training Abroad . – Subject to supplementary rules and regulations that may be promulgated by the Police Commission from time to time, police officers who may be sent abroad under the provisions of Republic Act No. 4864, or any government-sponsored training program under the administration of the Police Commission, shall possess the following minimum qualifications.

(a) He must be a police officer;

(b) He must have been extended a permanent appointment;

(c) He must not be less than 25 nor over 50 years of age 5

(d) He must have obtained a degree for a four-year college course, preferably law, criminology or police administration;

(e) He must have attended in-service training or similar courses conducted by his police department, any other police department, the Philippine Constabulary, the National Bureau of Investigation or any law enforcement agency;

(f) He must have at least five years of police service or law enforcement work;

(g) He must be physically fit to undergo training, and free from any defect which will adversely affect his training;

(h) He must “be a person of good moral character and,

(i) He must have been nominated by the city or municipal mayor concerned upon recommendation of the chief of police.

Additional qualifications and requirements may be imposed by the Police Commission in any given year or for any particular training grant and consideration shall be made of regional distribution.

Police officers who are sent abroad shall sign the prescribed contract before departure and, upon their return, shall submit a report of their studies to the Police Commission and may not leave the government service for a period of not less than two years from the date of their arrival.

RULE VI – PROMOTION AND ASSIGNMENT

A. PROMOTION

Section 1. Objectives . – The objectives of promotion are to invest a member of the police force with the degree of authority necessary for the effective execution of his duties; to place him in a position of increased responsibility where he can make full use of his capabilities; and to provide and promote incentives, thus motivating greater efforts of all members of the force and improving the proficiency of the police unite

Section 2. Legal Requirements for Eligibility for Promotion . – A member of the local police agency shall not be eligible for promotion to a higher position unless such member has successfully passed the corresponding promotional examination given by the Civil Service Commission or has successfully passed the bar examination.

Whenever a vacancy occurs in the police force the member next in rank who is competent and qualified to hold the position and who possesses an appropriate civil service eligibility shall be promoted thereto; Provided, That should there be two or more persons with the same merits and qualifications, seniority shall be given preference and provided that should there be any special reason or reasons why such member should not be promoted, such special reason or reasons shall be stated in writing by the promoting authority and the member concerned shall be informed thereof and be given an opportunity to be heard by the Commissioner of Civil Service whose decision in such case shall be final. If the vacancy is not filled by promotion as provided herein then the same shall be filled in the following order of priority; (a) by transfer of qualified members of other police forces, (b ) by reinstatement, (c) by re-employment of members separated through reduction in force, or (d) by certification from appropriate registers of eligibles in accordance with Civil Service Rules and Regulations.

Section 3. Promotional Rules . – Promotions shall be made by the local “chief executive concerned upon consultation or advice of the chief of the local police agency from among those who shall have passed the corresponding promotional examination given by the Civil Service Commission. (Sec. 12, RA 4864).

Section 4. Basic Factors for Selection for Promotion. The chief of police shall consider the following factors in recommending members for promotion to higher ranks and/or positions:

a. Appropriate eligibility – For purposes of promotion the rules on appropriate civil service eligibility shall be strictly followed.

Whenever there are two or more persons who are next in rank, preference shall be given to the member who is the most competent and qualified and who has the appropriate eligibility; Provided, that when their comparative degree of competence and qualification are equal, preference shall be given to the qualified member in the organizational unit where the vacancy occurs, and; Provided, further, that when all the foregoing conditions have been taken into account, and the members next in rank have still the same merit and qualification, preference shall be given to seniority.

b. Requisites for selection – The chief of police shall consider the following requisites in selecting members with appropriate civil service eligibility for promotion:

(1) Efficiency of performance – As an aid to fair appraisal of the candidate’s proficiency, the performance rating reports rendered for him during the last rating period, on duties performed related to the rank and/or position for which he is being considered shall be used as the primary basis thereof; Provided, That in no instance shall a candidate be considered for promotion unless he had obtained a performance rating of at least “satisfactory”.

(2) Education and Training – This shall include educational background, and among others, the successful completion of approved in-service training courses, academic studies, training grants and the like. Provided, That the degree of relevance of such education and training to the  duties of the rank and/or position under consideration shall be taken into account.

(3) Experience and Outstanding Accomplishments – This shall include occupational history, work experience and such accomplishments as are worthy of special commendations.

(4) Physical Characteristics and Personality. These factors refer to the physical fitness and capacity as well as to attitude and personality traits of the member insofar as they bear on the nature of the rank and/or position to be filled. Derogatory records which affect adversely the integrity, morality, norm of conduct and behavior of the candidates who are considered for selection shall be taken into account. The mere filing of administrative charges shall not constitute a disqualification for promotion. Where an officer or employee is administratively charged and is found to be the person next in rank or the person legitimately entitled to promotion as provided by the Civil Service Law and Rules; the position to which he shall have been entitled shall not be filled permanently until after the case against the respondent shall have been finally decided; Provided, That if the exigencies of the service so requires the position may be filled temporarily by designation of the officer or employee next in rank to the respondent or the next best qualified as provided in the Civil Service Law and Rules.

(5) Potential – Capacity and ability to perform the duties required in the new or higher position and good qualities for leadership shall be considered. Low potentiality and lack of fitness to perform efficiently the duties called for by such rank and/or position may preclude the candidate from consideration for selection.

c. Seniority as a Factor to Promotion – Seniority means the status secured by length of service. In determining seniority, length of service in the particular line of work involved shall be considered first. When competitors are equal in this respect, then length of service in the police force concerned shall be reckoned with, and when competitors are still equal under the latter circumstances, length of service in other police forces shall be considered: Provided, That in determining seniority among competitors who have equal length of service in the government, any work experience not relevant to the position to be filled shall be excluded in the computation.

Seniority shall be limited to continuous period of service, and provisional or temporary service shall not be included in the computation of seniority; Provided, That break in the service not exceeding one year due to reduction in force will not affect the continuity of each service.

d. Clearances – The following clearances shall be required;

(1) Physical and mental fitness – This clearance shall be issued by the duly authorized medical officer of the city or municipality. A member wounded in action or confined in hospital for sickness incurred in line of duty short of total disability, shall not be precluded from being considered for selection, subject to the certification of the duly authorized medical officer that such member can effectively discharge the duties of the position to which he is being considered for promotion.

(2) Clearance from the Board of Investigators – This clearance shall be issued in conformity with the provisions of Section 4 (4) of this Rule certifying substantially among others that the member concerned has no case pending against him before the Board.

(3) Clearance from the City Fiscal Office or Court – This clearance shall certify substantially to the effect that the member of the police force concerned has no pending criminal case or record of conviction for a criminal offense.

Section 5. Promotional Board or Committee . -The chief of police concerned may create a promotional board or committee composed of ranking members of the force, which shall assist him in selecting the best qualified members for promotion.

Section 6. List of Promotional Recommendees . – The chief of police shall submit to the mayor a list of promotable members duly selected in accordance with this Rule, together with his recommendation.

B. ASSIGNMENT

Section 7. Scope and Purpose . – Assignment as provided in these Rules primarily refers to the assignment of the members in the police force. This authority falls within the prerogative of the chief of police.

The purpose of assignment is to insure a systematic and effective utilization of all the members of the force. This must be the prime consideration in determining the assignment of any member of the force.

Section 8. Power to Make Designations and Assignments . The chief of police after consultation with the Mayor, shall have the power to make designations and assignments as to who among his police officers shall head and constitute the various offices and units of the police department; Provided, That the deputy or assistant chief of police and chief of the secret service duly appointed as such under existing laws shall serve or continue to serve in such capacity. In the absence of such an appointee, the chief of police may designate from among the officers next in rank the deputy or assistant chief of police or chief of the secret service.

The assignment of a member of a local police agency shall be in conformity with the career development program specially during the probationary period. Thereafter, reassignment to other police duties, consistent with existing laws and regulations shall be guided by the principle of placing the right man to the; right job after proper classification has been made.

Section 9. Criteria in Assignment . – The chief of police shall apply the following criteria in the assignment of members of his forces

a. Those possessing the general qualification for police duties without technical skills, may be assigned to positions whore any personnel can acquire proficiency within a considerably short period of time.

b. Those possessing skill acquired by previous related experience should be assigned to the corresponding positions where a brief indoctrination will be sufficient for the personnel to acquire the desired proficiency. Achievement tests, given to determine the degree of skill possessed by a member of the force, is an effective and valuable aid in ascertaining his suitability for particular job.

c. Those possessing highly technical skills with adequate experience and dully supported by authoritative basis shall be given preferential assignment to the corresponding positions which call for highly technically trained police officers.

Misassignment of personnel falling under this category constitutes a serious neglect on the part of the chief of police in the exercise of his administrative function.

d. Those selected to undergo further studies in specialized courses, whether local or abroad, shall be chosen solely on the basis of ability, professional preparation and aptitude.

e. Qualifications of the members of the force shall be examined annually to ascertain their new acquired skills, specialties and proficiencies.

f. Those with physical limitations incurred while in the performance of duty should be assigned where they can best be used in accordance with the actual requirements of the force.

g. Assignments and reassignments of members of the force from one unit to another shall be the prerogative of the chief of police; however, assignments or reassignments within each unit in the police force shall be the prerogative of the head of such particular unit.

h. To give a well rounded training and experience to police recruits, tours of duty in various assignments during the probationary period shall be as determined by the chief of police.

RULE VII – COMPENSATION

Section 1. Position Classification. – A city or municipal police department shall have an appropriate position classification system.

Positions in the police service shall be classified on the basis of the level of their duties and responsibilities. As far as practicable, the following positions shall exist depending upon the needs and size of the police department:

Chief of Police

Deputy Chief of Police

Police Lietenant Colonel

Police Major

Police Captain

Police Lieutenant

Police Sergeant

Police Corporal

Patrolman, First Class or Detective

Patrolman

Depending upon the need and the size of the police department, civilian positions may be created by the municipal or city council to conform as far as practicable, with the classification of positions in the national government; Provided, That the city or municipality shall not be precluded from raising the salaries involved to a higher rate consistent with its financial capability.

Section 2. Compensation Plan . – A city or municipal police department, as far as practicable, shall have an appropriate compensation plan whereby a salary range, composed of several salary steps or a single fixed salary rate, is assigned to an established position/rank for members of the protective force or class of positions for civilian employees.

Section 3. Salaries of City and Municipal Policemen – The salaries for city and municipal policemen, including the chiefs of police, shall be fixed by the respective city and municipal councils, but in no case shall they be lower than the minimum rates fixed by Republic Act No. 4864 or any other law.

Section 4. Minimum Annual Salary for City Chiefs of Police . – The annual salary of the chief of police in chartered cities shall not be less than the following:

a. First Class,  ₱ 12, 000;

b. Second Class, ₱ 9, 600;

c. Third Class, ₱ 8, 400;

d. Fourth Class, ₱ 7, 800;

e. Fifth Class, ₱ 7, 200;

f. Sixth Class, ₱ 7, 200;

g. Seventh Class,  ₱ 7, 200;

Section 5. Minimum Annual Salary for Chiefs of Police of Municipalities and Municipal Districts . – The annual salary of the chief of police in municipalities shall not be less than the following;

a. First (first—one) class, ₱ 6,000;

b. First (first-two) class,  ₱5,400;

c. First (first-three) class, ₱ 5,100;

d. First (first-four) class, ₱ 4,800;

e. First (first-five) class, ₱ 4,500;

f. Second class, ₱ 4,200;

g. Third class, ₱ 3,600;

h. Fourth class, ₱i 3,000;

i. Fifth class, ₱ 2,400;

j. Sixth class, ₱2,400;

k. Seventh class and/or municipal districts, ₱ 2,400.

Section 6. Minimum Annual Salary for Patrolmen in Chartered Cities. – The annual salary for patrol-men in chartered cities shall not be less than the following;

a. First class, ₱ 3,000;

b. Second class, ₱ 2,640;

c. Third class, ₱ 2,400;

d. Fourth class, ₱ 2,160;

e. Fifth class, ₱ 2,160;

f.  Sixth class, ₱ 2,160; and,

g. Seventh class, ₱ 2,160.

Section 7. Minimum Annual Salary for Patrolmen in Municipalities and Municipal Districts . – The annual salary for patrolmen in municipalities shall not be less than the following;

a. First class, ₱ 2,400;

b. Second class, ₱ 2,228;

c. Third class, ₱ 2,160;

d. Fourth class, ₱ 2,160;

e. Fifth class, ₱ 2,160;

f. Sixth class, ₱ 2,160;

g. Seventh class and/or municipality districts, ₱ 2,160.

Section 8. Difference in Monthly Salary from One Rank to the Next Higher Rank . – In both city and municipal police departments, the difference in monthly salary from one rank to the next higher rank shall not be less than ₱ 20.00.

Section 9. Reduction of Salary Prohibited .  – No neuter of a city or municipal police department shall suffer a reduction in salary by the operation of Republic Act No. 4864.

Section 10. Salary Subsidies . Subject to rules and regulations that the Police Commission may promulgate from tine to tine, salary subsidies shall be given by the National Government to cities and municipalities in the amount of one-half of the total minimum annual salaries for the police force; Provided, That for purposes of subsidy, the basis shall be the arithmetical ratio of ranks and the minimum strength of the police force as provided in Section 7, of Rule 1. The salaries of additional policemen in excess of the prescribed minimum number shall be borne exclusively by the city or municipality concerned.

If the city or municipality employs additional policemen in excess of the prescribed minimum, their salaries shall be the same as those received by other members of the police force holding the same ranks.

RULE VIII – DISCIPLINE

Section 1. Disciplinary Powers of the Chief of Police . – The Chief of Police, or in his absence, the Deputy Chief of Police may, for minor offenses, impose punishments upon members of his police force. The disciplinary punishments that may be imposed include admonition, reprimand, withholding of privileges for not exceeding ten (10) days, restriction to certain specified limits for not exceeding ten (10) days, suspension for nut more than ten (10) days, or forfeiture of not more than fifteen (15) days pay. The decision of the Chief of Police on disciplinary punishments shall be final.

Whether an offense is minor or not depends upon its nature, the time and place of its commission and the rank of the person committing it. Generally speaking, the term includes acts or omissions not involving moral turpitude and those affecting the internal discipline of the police force.

In no case shall the following offenses be considered as minor; disloyalty to the Government, grave misconduct, gross inefficiency or incompetence, oppression, serious irregularities or serious neglect of duty, notoriously disgraceful or immoral conduct, engaging directly or indirectly in partisan political activities, falsification, conviction by a competent court of a crime involving moral turpitude, directly or indirectly obstructing, defeating or violating the civil rights and liberties of an individual, receiving for personal use a fee, gift, or other valuable thing in the course of official duties in connection therewith such fee, gift or other valuable thing is given by any person in the hope or expectation of receiving a favor or better treatment than that accorded other persons.

Minor offenses, if repeatedly committed may eventually constitute the serious offense of habitual dereliction. The question is one where the Chief of Police must use his better judgement taking into account the nature of the offense, its effect upon the organization as a whole, the manner in which such offenses are customarily punished, the circumstances of the particular case, and thy record of the offender.

Section 2. Procedure . – The Chief of Police or in his absence the Deputy Chief of Police shall, motu propio , or upon written or oral complaint of any person, investigate any member of his police force for any minor offense within his disciplinary jurisdiction, in accordance with the following procedure:

The respondent shall be informed of the charges against him either orally or in writing, and he shall answer the same within forty-eight (48) hours either orally or in writing. In his answer, the respondent shall state whether or not he requests for a summary investigation. If not, the Chief of Police shall immediately render his decision on the case. If respondent asks for a summary investigation, the same shall take place within the next twenty-four (24) hours, allowing the respondent to present witnesses and other evidence in his behalf, and to cross-examine witnesses against him. The investigation shall be terminated within forty-eight (48) hours and the Chief of Police shall render his decision within twenty-four (24) hours thereafter.

When an offense committed is not minor, and not therefore under his disciplinary jurisdiction, the Chief of Police shall forward the charges in proper form or file the corresponding charges against the offender with the Board of Investigators.

Section 3. Record of Disciplinary Punishment. – In every case where punishment is imposed under this Rule, the Chief of Police shall cause the recording or entry of such punishment book indicating the offense, the date and place of commission, and other additional information desired. The disciplinary punishment thus imposed shall also be reflected in the offender’s service record. Copies of the disciplinary order shall be furnished the Mayor, the Police Commission and the Civil Service Commission.

Section 4. Effect of Disciplinary Punishment . – The fact that punishment under this Rule has been imposed upon a member of the police force may be taken into account in connection with other matters affecting him in the future. It is a factor in considering fitness for promotion or assignment, subject to the Civil Service Law and Rules. It may also be considered in deciding whether trial by a Board of Investigators should be had for a subsequent offense.

Section 5. As a bar to trial . – The imposition and enforcement of the disciplinary punishment for any act or omission shall not be a bar to trial by a Board of Investigators for a serious crime or offense growing out of the same act or omission, and not properly punishable under this Rule. Thus, punishment of a policeman who, while drunk, struck a fellow policeman will not bar trial by a Board of Investigators for the assault.

The Chief of Police shall have no authority to dispose of a serious offense under this Rule. So, if disciplinary punishment was in fact imposed for a serious offense, such punishment would not prevent trial by a Board of Investigators for the same offense. Thus, if a policeman was punished under this Rule for bribery, he could nevertheless be tried by a Board of Investigators, since the Chief of Police had no power to dispose of so serious a transgression by such a limited punishment.

RULE IX – BOARD OF INVESTIGATORS AND RULES OF PROCEDURE

Section 1. Board Composition . – There shall be a Board of Investigators in every city or municipality to be composed of the city or municipal treasurer, as chairman, a representative of the provincial commander and a councilor elected by a majority of the city or municipal council concerned, as members. In the City of Manila and Quezon City and other cities where there is no Provincial Commander, PC, the representative of the Philippine Constabulary shall be designated by the Chief of Constabulary.

If for any reasons the incumbent or acting city or municipal treasurer is unable to attend a meeting or is disqualified from participating therein, or in case of vacancy in the position and the same has not been filled temporarily by appointment or designation, the duties devolving upon the Chairman shall be performed by the Representative of the Philippine Constabulary.

Section 2. Oath of Office . – Before assuming the duties of their office, the members of the Board of Investigators shall take the following oath or affirmation before the city or municipal judge which shall be filed with the Chairman of the Board:

OATH OF OFFICE

I, __________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as (Member or Chairman) of the Board of Investigators; that I will perform the duties imposed upon me in accordance with the pertinent provisions of law and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto; that having in view the best interest of the police service, I will administer justice without partiality, favor of affection; that I will keep the deliberation of the Board with strictest secrecy and confidence and that I imposed these obligations upon myself voluntarily, without mental reservation or purpose of evasion, SO HELP ME GOD.

Section 3. Duties of the Chairman . – The Chairman shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 1.  To submit to the Police Commission the names of the members of the Board of Investigators within thirty (30) days from the promulgation of these Rules and any change in the composition thereof within ten (10) days from such change;

2. To furnish the respondent a copy of the charges within five days from the date of filing thereof and to require said respondent to file a written answer within five days from the date of receipt thereof.

3. To see to it that the records of investigation including all pleadings submitted by the parties are properly arranged, fastened and consecutively numbered on each page beginning with the pleading first filed in the case as shown by receipt affixed thereon which shows the date and hour of receipt thereof;

4. To keep a book for the recording of administrative cases filed against any member of the police agency concerned and claims relative to benefits provided under Section 21 of Republic Act 4864;

5. To adopt measures that are pertinent, convenient and reasonable in the discharge of their official duties; and,

6. To accomplish and submit other reports which the Police Commission may, from time to tine proscribe.

Section 4. Disqualification of Investigators . – No member of the Board of Investigators shall sit any case in which he is related to either party within the sixth degree of consanguinity or affinity or to counsel within the court civil degree, computed according to the rules of the civil law.

However, any member of the Board of Investigators may, in the interest of justice and equity and in the exercise of his sound discretion, disqualify himself from sitting in a case, for some just or valid reasons other than those previously mentioned above.

In cases where due to the disqualification imposed by this section, there will be no quorum, in the Board of Investigators, the Municipal Council shall elect and/or the Provincial Commander shall appoint a substitute to sit as members of the Board for the particular case.

Section 5. Powers of the Board of Investigators . – The Boar of Investigators shall have the power to issue subpoena and subpoena duces tecum, investigate all charges formally filed with or referred to it against any member of the police force concerned involving disloyalty to the government, dishonesty, oppression, grave misconduct, serious irregularities to include graft and corruption, smuggling, serious neglect of duty and other offenses not minor and shall have the power to recommend penalty therefor such as dishonorable dismissal, demotion in rank, suspension forfeiture of pay, fine, and such other punishment appropriate for the offense committed.

The Board shall also have the power to conduct investigations and decide claims relative to the death, disability and other benefits provided under Republic Act 4864 of the members of the police force and their families, subject to appeal to the Police Commission whose decision shall be final.

Section 6. Investigators Certificate . – The Chairman and the members of the Board of Investigators shall certify on their applications for leave, and upon salary or pay and allowances vouchers presented by them for payment, or upon payrolls upon which their salaries are paid, that all investigations conducted by the Board which have been submitted for their decision, have been determined and decided within the period prescribed by the Police Act of 1966 on or before the date of the certificate, and no leave shall be granted and no salary shall be paid without such certificate.

Section 7. Rules of Procedure . – The following rules of procedure shall be adopted by the Board of Investigators in the investigation of all administrative cases brought before it:

(a) How commenced . – All proceedings must be commenced by a complaint in writing and under oath in the name of the aggrieved party or his duly authorized representative or guardian against any member of a city or municipal police agency who appears to be responsible therefore.

(b) Where to file . – All complaints against any member of a city or municipal police agency shall be filed with the local Board of Investigators concerned. However, if a complaint is unwittingly filed with the Police Commission or any agency of the government, such complaint shall be transmitted immediately by the head of the agency concerned to the proper Board of Investigators.

(c) Formal requirements of complaint . The complaint shall be drawn in clear, simple, brief and concise language and must contain the name of the respondent, his rank and address, the designation of the offense complained of, the place, date and specific tine of the commission of the offense and a brief statement of relevant and material facts. If the complainant has no counsel and cannot, on his own, prepare the complaint, the corresponding municipal attorney shall extend assistance in the preparation of the same without in any manner altering the facts narrated by complainant.

(d) Determination of cases within the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Chief of Police . – Upon receipt of the charges, the local Board of Investigators concerned shall meet immediately to determine whether the offense committed is minor and within the disciplinary jurisdiction of the local chief of police. If found minor, the Board of Investigators shall forward the charges to the Chief of Police concerned in writing for the exercise by the latter of his disciplinary powers under Rule VIII of this Manual. If not minor or where the local Chief of Police concerned is himself the object of the complaint, the Board of Investigators shall proceed with the investigation of the case in accordance with the rules herein provided.

(e) Answer, when and how filed . -The answer shall be in writing and must contain material facts which may either be in specific denial or affirmation of the allegations in the complaint and shall be accompanied by documentary evidence or otherwise, if thereby any, in support of the defense. It shall be filed with the Board of Investigators concerned within five (5) days from the date of receipt of the charges by the respondent end may be filed personally or by registered mail. The answer is deemed filed on the date and hour of receipt stamped on the envelope shall be kept and made an integral part of the record of the case.

No extension of time to file the answer shall be granted the respondent.

(f) Investigation. – The Board of Investigators shall conduct its investigation in public within five (5) days from receipt of the respondent’s answer to the charges or from the expiration of the period within which the respondent should answer, whichever is earlier.

Direct examination of witnesses shall be dispensed with in the investigation to be conducted by the Board. In lieu thereof, the Board shall require the complainant and his witnesses to submit their testimonies in affidavit form duly sworn to, subject to the right of the respondent or his counsel to cross-examine the said complainant and his witnesses. Similarly, the respondent and his witnesses shall be required to submit their testimonies in. affidavit form duly sworn to, subject also to cross-examination by the complainant or his counsel. Cross-examination shall be confined only to material and relevant matters. Prolonged argumentation and other dilatory tactics shall not be entertained.

The investigation shall be finished within thirty (30) days thereafter and the Board shall submit the records of investigations, its findings and recommendations to the Police Commission within thirty (30) days after the termination of the investigation. The decision of the Police Commission on this matter shall be final and must be rendered within seventy-five (75) days from the time of receipt of the findings of the Board.

(g) Report of Investigation . – The Board shall prepare a written “Report of Investigation” which shall include a complete record of its proceedings, a summary of the testimonies, exhibits and other papers on the case. The report and record of investigation shall be prepared in at least five (5) copies; one (1) copy shall be retained by the Board and the original and three (3) carbon copies to the Police Commission. The report of investigation shall be prepared in either English or Pilipino. If any supporting document thereof is in the vernacular, the same shall be translated into English or Pilipino and its translation must be properly certified by the Chairman of the Board of Investigators.

Section 8. Postponement . – Postponement of Investigations shall be discouraged. It may be allowed only in meritorious cases, such as illness of the parties or their counsels and/or other similar causes. Without the approval of the Police Commission, no Board of Investigators shall grant a postponement for more than five (5) days.

Section 9. Rights of respondent . – The respondent shall have the right to appear before the Board of Investigators, personally or by counsel, to confront the witnesses against him, to present facts, arguments or witnesses in his behalf or on any other matter pertinent to his case. He shall be given full opportunity to refute the charges against him and be informed of all the evidence thereto. He also has the right to demand the appearance of his witnesses of the production of evidence in his favor through the issuance of the necessary subpoena or subpoena duces tecum .

Section 10. Evidence . – While the Board is not strictly bound by the rules of evidence prescribed for trials by the Rules of Court, the spirit of the rules laid down by the Rules of Court shall be observed in a suppletory manner in order to insure a fair, speedy, full and impartial investigation of the case. To obtain the objectives of administrative investigation within the prescribed standard and to terminate the same within the prescribed period, all investigators are hereby required:

(1) To limit the scope of investigation to fact finding or ascertaining the truth, without necessarily adhering to technical rules applicable in judicial proceedings;

(2) To prevent respondents and complainants or their counsels or lawyers from discussing questions of law or procedure during the investigation, the Board may require that such arguments involving questions of law or procedure be incorporated instead in the final memorandum of the parties concerned;

(3) To consider questions of law or procedure only in their recommendation to be submitted to the Police Commission together with the records of the case; and,

(4) To see to it that all documentary evidence or exhibits are properly marked by letters “A”, “B”,”C”, etc., if presented by the complainant and by numbers “1”, “2”, “3”, etc., if presented by the respondent which shall be attached to the records of the case.

Section 11. Case docket and numbers . – All records of administrative cases against any member of a city or municipal police agency or all appealed claims relative to benefits as provided under Republic Act No. 4864 shall be received at the Legal Affairs Department, Police Commission and upon receipt thereof, the case shall be entered in the docket book of administrative cases or appealed for benefit, given their corresponding number in the order of their receipt and assigned immediately for decision.

Section 12. Decision, contents . – Decision as used in this Rule is the adjudication by the Police Commission that the respondent is guilty or not guilty of the offense charged, and the imposition of the appropriate penalty on the respondent who is either found guilty thereof or who admits responsibility therefore It shall contain the charge, name of respondent and his rank, his office or police unit, a brief statement of the material and relevant facts, findings, offense committed and the penalty imposed, if found guilty, and a dispositive portion thereof.

Section 13. Service of decision . – Upon promulgation of its decision, the Police Commission shall cause to be transmitted through its Legal Affairs Department, at least, three (3) copies of said decision to the local Board of Investigators concerned. One copy shall be retained by the local Board of Investigators, for record purposes, one copy shall be transmitted by the Chairman to the respondent, and the third copy, to the city or municipal mayor concerned for record, notice, execution and implementation purposes, if the decision is one of conviction, and for record and notice purposes only if one of exoneration.

If the decision is one of conviction, the same shall be executed or implemented immediately by the city or municipal mayor concerned and any unreasonable delay in the execution or implementation of the said decision shall constitute sufficient ground for administrative action against any public official or employee who may appear to be responsible therefore for conduct unbecoming or conduct prejudicial to the best interest of the service.

Section 14. Petition for Reconsideration . – Upon receipt by the respondent of the decision of the Police Commission on the administrative charges filed against him, he may, within fifteen (15) days from receipt thereof, file a petition for reconsideration of said decision; Provided, that the said petition shall be based only on any of the following grounds:

(a) New evidence has been discovered which materially affects the decision rendered; or

(b) Errors of law or irregularities have been committed prejudicial to the substantial rights and interests of the respondent.

Section 15. Forms. – For the speedy disposition of administrative cases of claims for benefits pending before it and as for as practicable, the Board of Investigators may prescribe or adopt the following forms:

[Form No. 1. Subpoena]

[Form No. 2. Subpoena Duces Tecum]

[Form No. 3. Heading]

[Form No. 4. Heading]

[Form No. 5. Answer]

[Form No. 6. Petition for Reconsideration]

[Form No. 7. Report of Investigation]

RULE X – SUSPENSION BY THE MAYOR

Section 1. Suspension when charged administratively . – When an administrative charge is filed under oath against any member of the police force before the Board of Investigators, the City or Municipal Mayor may suspend the respondent provided that the charge involves disloyalty to the government, dishonesty, oppression or grave misconduct, serious irregularities to include graft and corruption and smuggling, or serious neglect of duty, if there are strong reasons to believe that the respondent is probably guilty thereof which would warrant his suspension or removal from the service. The Board shall forward a copy of all such administrative charges and pertinent papers filed with it to the City or Municipal Mayor with an appropriate recommendation for suspension if it deems that there are strong reasons to believe that the respondent is probably guilty of the charges. The preventive suspension shall not be more than sixty (60) days after which the respondent shall be reinstated without prejudice to the continuation of the case until its final disposition, unless the delay in the disposition of the case is due to the fault, negligence or petition of the respondent. (Sec. 16, RA 4864)

Section 2. Suspension when charged in court . – When a member of the city or municipal police force is accused in court of any felony or violation of law by the city of municipal attorney of by the chief of the municipal police or the provincial or assistant provincial fiscal, or city or assistant city fiscal, as the case may be, the city or municipal mayor concerned, shall immediately suspend the accused from office pending the final decision by the court. (Sec. 16, Id.)

It shall be the duty of the chief of police, city or municipal attorney or the provincial or assistant provincial fiscal or city or assistant city fiscal who filed the case to inform the Mayor that the member of the city or municipal police force is accused in court.

Section 3. Priority of action by the court . – Presiding judges, prosecuting fiscals and all other officers of the court concerned shall accord priority in the trial and disposition of cases against members of the city and municipal police forces. (See, 16, Id.)

Section 4. Payment of salary during the period of preventive suspension . – When a member of a city or municipal police force is exonerated by the Police Commission, the respondent member shall be entitled to receive the entire salary he failed to receive during the period of his preventive suspension.

When a member of a city of municipal police force is acquitted in court by final judgment, the accused member shall be entitled to receive the entire salary he failed to receive during the period of his preventive suspension.

Section 5. Resignation Prohibited During the Pendency of Criminal, Administrative and Disciplinary Charges . – No member of a city or municipal police force shall be allowed to resign from the service or go on leave with pay during the pendency of a criminal, administrative or disciplinary charges.

Section 6. Retirement During the Pendency of Criminal or Administrative Charges. – A member of a city or municipal police force may be allowed to retire from the service during the pendency of a criminal or administrative charge subject to the condition that all benefits or privileges to which he may be entitled under existing law shall be withheld until the final disposition of the case.

Section 7. Disposition of Copies of the Suspension Order . – The city or municipal mayor shall furnish the Police Commission, Board of Investigators, the chief of police and the treasurer with copies of the suspension order.

RULE XI – UNIFORMS, INSIGNIA, ARMS, AND EQUIPMENT

Section 1. Authority to Prescribe Standard Uniforms, Arms, Insignia and Equipment . – The Police Commission shall prescribe, minimum standard arms, equipment, police uniform and insignia of ranks for all local police agencies after due consultation with the Philippine Heraldry Commission. (Section 4, R. A. 4364)

Section 2. Appropriation of Funds . – Each municipality or city concerned shall, at its own expense, provide all necessary police equipment, including arms, uniform and insignia in conformity with the specification of the Police Commission as prescribed for in this Manual. (Section 6, Id.)

Section 3. Uniform . – The uniform of all police forces shall consist of headgear, field service shirt, field service trousers, field service belt and footwear described as follows:

a. Headgear – The headgear shall be a cap and a helmet.

(1) Cap – It shall be the eight point style and made of nylon khaki thread. It shall have a maroon braid 1 ½ inches wide around the base and provided with ½ of an inch black leather strap in front, fastened with small regulation buttons at both sides of the visor. The visor shall be made of black leather. (Fig. 1) The caps for the chief of police, the deputy chief of police, police lieutenant colonel and police major, including precinct or station commanders, shall be the Pershing style and shall have non-metallic golden palm decoration on the visor and golden straps. (Fig. 2)

(2) Helmet (crash) – This shall be used by mounted members. On a standard design for crash helmet, there shall be a maroon band 1 1/8 inches wide around the base with chin straps painted white. (Fig. 3)

(3) Rain cover for cap – This shall be any transparent white plastic material. (Fig. 4)

b. Field Service Shirt – The field service shirt shall be worn by dismounted and mounted members as follows:

(1) Material for dismounted members shall be west point khaki, double thread. The shirt shall be open necked and short sleeved. Short sleeves shall not be less than one inch nor more than two inches from the inside cover of the elbows anticubical fossa to the edge of the short sleeves. Shoulder straps shall be provided„ There shall be two breast pockets with cover flaps to be squared off at the corners. The portion of the left breast of the shirt one inch from the top of the cover flap shall be reinforced inside about 1 ½ by 1 ½ inches square of cloth with a hole along the center line of the left pocket to hold the badge of the officer. (Fig. 5)

(2) Material for mounted members – The same as above but white with long sleeves reinforced on the elbow.

c. Field Service Trousers – The field service trousers shall be worn by dismounted and mounted members as follows:

(1) Design for dismounted members – The trousers shall be of west point khaki, double thread without cuffs and open pleats. Trousers shall be provided with two side pockets with openings at 13.5 centimeter. The hip pockets shall be provided with flaps and buttoned down with small bone of plastic buttons. Outer seems of leg shall be lined with maroon strip 1 1/16 inch wide. Low-waist trousers are prohibited. (Fig. 7)

(2) Design for mounted members – Breeches shall be worn by mounted members – Breeches shall be made of black material with reinforced knee caps and seat of breeches and shall be lined with maroon strip one-inch wide. (Fig. 8)

d. Field Service Belt – The field service belt shall be worn by all members regardless of ranks and shall consist of the Army standard black waved service belt, 3.2 centimeters wide with a buckle made of plain brass, 3.4 by 4 centimeters in dimension.

e. Footwear – The footwear of the members of the police force shall consist of shoes, boots and socks.

(1) Field service shoes shall be of plain black leather, low cut and semi-pointed toes. (Fig. 9)

(2) Boots shall be made of black leather without laces. (Fig. 10)

(3) Socks shall be of plain black color.

Section 4. Formal Attire . – This uniform shall be worn only on special occasions by the commissioned officers of the police departments. The formal attire shall consist of the following:

a. Cap – The same specifications for field service shall be used.

b. Blouse – The fabric of the blouse shall be made of local worsted khaki material. It shall have shoulder straps as in the field service uniform with shoulder board as prescribed in Fig. 11. The sleeves shall be long and lined with a strip of maroon lace, measuring about 6 millimeters and sewed about 3 inches above the end of the sleeves. It shall resemble an open coat of the Norfolk design at the back, the unsewed part reaching the wristlines, (Fig. 11)

c. Buttons – There shall be four big brass buttons to close dress with four small buttons for pockets as designed in Fig. 12.

d. Shirt – The shirt shall be white with long sleeves.

e. Neckties – Only plain necktie measuring 5 centimeters wide shall be worn.

f. Trousers – The fabric shall be made of the same material as the blouse. It shall have the same style and design as the field service trousers.

g. Belt – It shall be the same as the field service belt.

h. Socks – Only plain black socks shall be used.

i. Footwear – It shall be the same as the field service shoes.

Section 5. Insignia and Uniform Accessories . – The following shall be the police insignia and uniform accessories;

a. Headgear Ornaments – The cap device shall be made of brass as designed in Fig. 13. The cap device for crash helmets shall be painted with the same design.

b. Collar and Lapel Ornaments – The collar and lapel ornaments shall be of the same design as the cap device illustrated in Fig. 14.

c. Badge – This shall be made of brass and designed as illustrated in Fig. 15-A for commissioned officers and Fig. 15-B for non-commissioned officers and patrolmen. The designated rank shall be engraved on the badge as shown in the illustrations, namely, the word “Chief” for the Chief of Police; “Deputy Chief” for the Deputy Chief of Police; “Lt. Colonel” for the Police Lieutenant Colonel; “Major” for the Police Major; “Captain” for the Police Captain; “Lieutenant” for Police Lieutenants; “Sergeant” for Police Sergeants; “Corporal” for Police Corporals; and for the Patrolman and the Detective badges, the word “Patrolman” or “Detective” and their number shall be engraved. The name of the city or municipality shall be engraved on the badge which shall be equipped, with screw and nut at the beck for attachment so as to hold it firmly without turning or moving.

d. Shoulder Patches – The shoulder patches shall consist of a standard police service patch and a departmental patch, which shall be worn on the right and left shoulder, respectively. The right shoulder patch shall conform to the design shown in Fig. 16 and the left shoulder patch shall be designed in accordance with the desire of the police department concerned.

e. Name Plate – This shall be made of black bakelite or similar material 9 centimeters in length and 1 ½ centimeters in the width, placed immediately above the right pocket of the shirt or blouse. Letterings shall be of white color. (Fig. 17) The family name of the member, viz., “DELA CRUZ” should be in white block lettering one centimeter in height and shall be engraved in the middle of the plate.

f. Chevrons – These shall be worn by members of the police force other than commissioned officers in “V” stripe form as shown in Figure 18 and colored maroon. They shall be placed one half inch below the shoulder patch.

Section 6. Uniform – How Worn – The following shall be followed in the wearing of the proper uniform:

a. The prescribed uniforms shall be worn with complete insignia, ornaments, accessories and patches when on duty, except when on mission requiring anonymity.

b. The coat shall be worn only on formal ceremonial and social occasions or when prescribed by the Chief of Police. The service coat shall be worn with the white shirt and plain black necktie.

c. The badge shall be worn on the left breast centered immediately above the front pocket.

d. Collar ornaments shall be worn on both sides of the collar one inch from the end of the collar midway between the edges.

e. Chevrons shall be worn on the field service shirts, both arms with one stripe for patrolman first class, two stripes for police corporal and three stripes for police sergeant.

f. Rank insignia for officers shall be on silver square block with tapered sides and embossed with golden designs of a citadel and a torch with crimson red flames as shown in Figure 19. One such square block shall be for a police lieutenant; two for police captain; three for police major; four for police lieutenant colonel; a golden citadel and torch with crimson red flames cut out from silver diamond block for deputy chief; and a golden citadel and torch with crimson red flames circumscribed by a golden laurel wreath for the chief of police. All rank insignia from police lieutenant to police lieutenant colonel are superimposed on a maroon shoulder loop with ½ inch golden braids on both sides. The rank insignia for the deputy chief shall be superimposed on a maroon shoulder loop with golden linings around and that of the chief of police on a silver shoulder loop as in figure 19.

g. The headgear ornament or cap device shall be worn on the front of the cap or helmet.

Section 7. Arms and Equipment . – The chief of police or any person occupying his position in an acting capacity shall be the proper custodian of all police equipment and arms not issued to individual members for use and shall be responsible therefor. Individual police personnel shall be responsible for equipment and arms issued to them for use. The Chief of Police shall see to it that the members of the police force to whom arms and equipment are issued arc adequately trained not only in the use but also in the care and maintenance of the arms and equipment, and shall conduct periodic inspection to insure their proper maintenance. A complete and up-to-date record of all the arms and equipment received and of their distribution or disposition shall be maintained o Arms issued for use by the police force shall not be loaned to any authorized person and no member of the police force shall be allowed to exchange arms without the approval of the Chief of Police.

The following shall be the standard arms and equipment for each police force:

a. Individual – The individual equipment shall consist of:

(1) Revolver, Cal. 38, 4-inch barrel; (2) Holster, revolver, Cal. 38 leather black with or without flap; (3) Belt, service leather, black 2 ½ inches with buckle; (4) Police Club (Fig. 20); (5) Night Stick (Fig. 21); (6) Riot Stick (Fig. 22); (7) Whistle; (8) Flashlight, three batteries; (9) Lanyard, black; (10) Investigative Kit (one per investigation team); and, (11) Sunbrown Belt, black (optional)

Organizational: The organizational weapons and equipment for each police force shall consist of the following:

(1) Riot gun – 12 gauge; (2) Handcuffs; (3) leg iron; (4) Motorcycles; (5) Motor Vehicles; (6) Laboratory Equipment; (7) Communications equipment; and (8) Tear gas gun with launcher; (9) Weapons that may be authorized by the Police Commission.

The table of allowance for individual and organizational arms and equipment shall consist of the following:

Ammunition :

Ball, Cal. 38 Revolver=40 rounds per revolver

Shell, 12-gauge No. 00=20 rounds per riot gun or shotgun

Tear gas projectiles=20 rounds per gas gear

Tear gas grenades=20 pieces

Section 8. Disposition of Excess and Unauthorized Firearms . – The excess and unauthorized firearms of the police department shall be disposed as follows:

a. Where there is an excess in a city or municipal-owned firearms issued to police forces, the excess arms shall be deposited with the city or municipal treasurer subject to the inspection by the Police Commission or the Philippine Constabulary or deposited with the provincial command of the PCS subject to requisition upon proper application in case there is a subsequent need thereafter.

b. Military-type firearms owned by the municipality which are not within the prescribed Table of Allowances may be exchanged with the authorized types of firearms with the Philippine Constabulary, as the Chief of Constabulary may prescribe.

c. AFP firearms loaned to police forces shall be recalled by the AZP, unless the municipality concerned has urgent need for them, in which case, appropriate application for the transfer or sale shall be made with the Chief of Constabulary pursuant to Section 641 and 850 Revised Administrative Code. In any case, the total number of firearms shall not exceed the authorized allowance.

d. For firearms owned by the city or municipality which are not prescribed by this Manual and their replacement with the authorized types of firearms are not available in the Philippine Constabulary, police force may continue to use the said firearms. However, cities or municipalities shall endeavor to take positive steps to replace those with the authorized typo of firearms when their financial resources so warrant.

[Fig. 1 – Cap (Eight Point Style)]

[Fig. 2 – Cap (Field Grade Officer)]

[Fig. 3 – Crash Helmet]

[Fig. 4 – Cap w/ Plastic Cover]

[Fig. 5 – Shirt Service (Short Sleeves)]

[Fig. 6 – Shirt, Service (Long Sleeves)]

[Fig. 7 – Trousers, Service]

[ Fig. 8 – BREECHES]

[ Fig. 9 – SHOES, SERVICE]

[ Fig. 10 – BOOTS]

[ Fig. 11 – BLOUSE]

[ Fig. 12 – BIG BRASS BUTTON]

[ Fig. 12 – SMALL BRASS BUTTON]

[ Fig. 13 – CAP DEVICE]

[ Fig. 14 – COLLAR DEVICE]

[ Fig. 15-B –  NON-COMMISSED OFFICERS AND PATROLMAN]

[ Fig. 15-A – COMMISSIONED OFFICERS]

[ Fig. 16 – STANDARD SHOULDER PATCH]

[ Fig. 17 – NAMEPLATE – PATROLMAN FIRST CLASS, POLICE CORPORAL, POLICE SERGEA]

[ Fig. 18 – CHEV]

[ Fig. 19 – RANK INSIGNIA (SHOULDER LOOP) – POLICE LT. COLONEL, DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE, CHIEF OF POLICE]

[ Fig. 19 – RANK INSIGNIA SHOULDER LOOP]

[ Fig. 20 – POLICE BATON]

[ Fig. 21 – NIGHT STICK]

[ Fig. 22 – RIOT STICK]

RULE XII – DECORATIONS, SERVICE MEDALS AND CITATION BADGES

Section 1. Authority – The Police Commission shall prescribe standard awards and medals of honor for all police agencies after due consultation with the Philippine Heraldry Commission. (Sec. 4, RA 4864)

Section 2. Authorized Decorations – The following shall be the authorized decorations with their corresponding ribbons for members of the police force: (a) police medal for valor; (b) police medal of merit; (c) wounded police- medal; (d) police efficiency medal; (e) police service medal; and such other awards or decorations which the Police Commission may hereafter prescribe.

Section 3. Requirements for each decoration -The following are the requirements for each decoration:

a. Police Medal for Valor –

(1) To whom Granted – To any member of the police force.

(2) Requirements – Action of the recipient involving conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty. In order to justify this award, a member of the police force must perform in action, a deed of personal bravery and self-sacrifice above and beyond the call of duty so conspicuously as to distinguish himself clearly above his comrades in the performance of more than ordinary hazardous service.

(3) Description – A gold medal suspended by two medal loops from a ribbon of red silk held in place by a gold bar bearing the word “VALOR”. The gold medal bears a cross with the insignia of the Republic of the Philippines at the center and arc bearing the words “BRAVERY AND COURAGE”. A crown of laurel leaves shall be projected from the lower portion of a base which bears the initials of the police organization to which the recipient belongs or is serving at the time of the deed. (Fig. 26)

b. Police Medal of Merit

(1) To whom awarded – To any member of the police force.

(2) Requirements – For acts of conspicuous courage and gallantry in the face of an armed enemy. To justify this award, the member of the police force must perform a notable act or acts of heroism involving a risk of life so extraordinary as to set him apart from his comrades.

(3) Description – A gold medal suspended by two metal loops from a ribbon of red silk held in place by a gold bar bearing the word “MERIT “. The gold medal shall bear in the center a revolver with a laurel leaf beneath. Above this shall be inscribed the words “FOR EXEMPLARY SERVICE” and the initial in the lower portion of the police organization to which the recipient was serving at the time of the deed. (Fig. 27)

c. Police Efficiency Medal .

(1) To Whom Awarded – To any member of the police force.

(2) Requirements – For eminently meritorious and valuable service rendered in a position of major responsibility. This duty must be of such character that exceptionally meritorious service therein has contributed in a high degree to the success of the command or organization, installation, or project. The performance of duty must be such as to gain recognition through exceptional service. The superior performance of the normal duties called for by the position shall not along justify the award.

(3) Description – A gold medal suspended by two metal loops from a ribbon of violet silk held in place by a gold bar bearing the words “DEVOTION TO DUTY”. At its center shall be the insignia of the Republic of the Philippines with a circular dsc around it where the words “EFFICIENCY AND CONDUCT” are inscribed. At the lower portion of this circular disc is the initial of the police organization to which the recipient was serving at the time of the deed. (Fig.28)

d. Police Service Medal .

(1) To Whom Awarded – To any member of the police force.

(2) Requirements – This shall be awarded to any member who has completed at least twenty (20) years of continuous satisfactory service with one bronze star on the ribbon for every additional five years of service.

(3) Description – A bronze medal suspended by the two (2) metal loops from a ribbon of green silk held in place by a bronze bar bearing the word “SERVICE”. At the center of this medal is a revolver surrounded with a crown of laurel leaves projected from a bronze disc with the initial of the organization to which the tie of the deed. (Fig. 29)

c. Wounded Police Medal .

(1) To Whom Awarded – To any member of the police force actually performing police duties.

(2) Requirements – For having been wounded in action against an enemy or as a direct result of an act of the enemy, provided such woman necessitates treatment by a medical officer. For this purpose, a “wound” is defined as an injury to any part of the body from an outside surface, element, reagent sustained as a result of a hostile act of the enemy or while in action in the face of the enemy.

(3) Description – A silver medal suspended by two (2) metal loops from a ribbon of purple silk held in place by a silver bar bearing the word “WOUNDED”. The silver medal shall studded with the likeness and crown of laurel leaves projected on by the sides from a silver base bearing the initial of the police organization to which the recipient belongs or was wounded.(Fig. 30)

Section 4. Requirement for police unit citation badge . The following are the requirements for police unit citation badge:

a. To Whom Awarded – To any police unit.

b.Requirements – The badge shall be awarded to any police unit as a token of the nation’s gratitude and in recognition for its acts and services or exceptional devotion and fidelity.

c. Description – The badge shall consist of a rectangular frame bordered with gold and embossed with anahaw leaves signifying triumph and glory. The center of the frame shall be blue ribbon. A gold triangle shall be placed on the ribbon to denote additional citation. (Fig. 31)

Section 5. Authorities to award. – The following officials are authorized to grant the appropriate awards:

a. The Police Medal of Valor is awarded by the President of the Philippines upon recommendation of the Police Commission.

b. The Police Medal of Merit is awarded by the Chairman of the Police Commission.

c. The Police Efficiency Medal is awarded by the Provincial Governor or the City Mayor.

d. The wounded Police Medal and Police Service Medal is awarded by the City or Municipal Mayor.

e. The Unit Citation Badge is awarded by the Chairman, of the Police Commission.

Section 6. Presentation of awards . – The appropriate awards shall be presented as follows:

a. Police Medal for Valor – The recipient of a police medal for valor shall be directed to be present at Manila for the presentation which shall be made by the Chairman, Police Commission or personally by the President, if the latter sc desires.

b. Police Medal of Merit – The presentation of the decoration to the person to be awarded shall be made in a formal ceremony attended when practicable, by members of other police organizations. The presentation shall be made by the Chairman of the Police Commission with the assistance of the Chief of Constabulary and/or the Director of the National Bureau of Investigation. As a rule, the presentation to an individual longer in the service or to the next of kin, shall be made in the city or municipality nearest the home of the recipient.

c. Police Efficiency Medal . – The presentation of the decoration shall, likewise, be made in a formal ceremony, by the provincial governor with the assistance of the provincial commander or by the city mayor with the assistance of the chief of police.

d. Wounded Police Medal and Police Service Medal . The presentation, of these decorations shall also be made in a formal ceremony by the city or municipal mayor with the assistance of the chief of police.

e. Police Unit Citation Badge . – The presentation of the citation to the unit to be awarded through the chief of police shall be made in a formal ceremony attended, when practicable, by representatives of other police organizations. The presentation shall be made by the Chairman of the Police Commission with the assistance of the Chief of Constabulary and/ or the Director of the National Bureau of Investigation.

Section 7. Subsequent awards. for succeeding deeds. – No more than one medal for the same deed shall be issued to any person; but for such succeeding deed, act, or achievement sufficient to justify the awarding of sane medal, a bronze star each for the first, second, third and fourth succeeding deeds, and a silver star for every fifth deed in lieu of the five bronze star shall be awarded.

Section 8. Board of Awards . – There shall be a Board of Awards which shall be composed of a least three ranking members of the police force appointed by the Chief of Police and shall continue to hold office at his discretion. The most ranking member shall automatically be the Chairman of the Board. It shall be the duty of the Board to receive, investigate, appraise and pass upon recommendations from various officials and private sources, for any meritorious  and commendable police action, achievement or aceonp1ish-raent and to give such exemplary deed or act due recognition by granting the recommendee the corresponding decoration, medal, ribbon, commendation or letter of appreciation as the case may be; Provided,  That no decoration, medal, ribbon, commendation or letter of appreciation shall be awarded to any member of the police force by reason of his act or deed resulting in apprehension, or solution of a case, until after its final adjudication or determination by a competent court or agency.

Section 9. Conduct of Meetings of the Board .-The Board shall be convened upon call by Chairman. A majority of all members present shall constitute a quorum.  All deliverations shall be passed upon by a majority vote of all members present. Any member of the Board who is related within the fourth civil degree by consanguinity or affinity to the recommendee whose case is under consideration is disqualified to vote in all matters pertaining to his relative.  All recommendations shall be submitted to the chief of police for further action.

Section  10. Recommendation for the Awards .-   The following procedure shall govern in recommending awards and decorations:

a. Decoration shall ordinarily be awarded on the recommendation of the chief of police of the police force to which the recipient belongs. Recommendation may, however, be initiated by any people or municipal official having knowledge of the fact.

b. Recommendations shall be based upon the statement of a responsible person and/or civic organizations who were eyewitnesses to the deed or act of heroism or exemplary performance of duties for which the award is recommended.  The service or act shall be described specifically and in detail, and when the recommendation is made by a person who was not an eye-witness, it must be attested to by a least two eye-witnesses who are proven to have been present in the engagement where the service or act took place in the form of certificates or affidavits.

c. Recommendation for the award or decoration shall indicate, among others, the specific designation of the person who is being recommended at the time of the deed upon which the recommendation is based.

d. Recommendation for award or decoration shall contain a specific statement that the entire service rendered by the recommendee from the time of the deed up to the time that he is being considered for award is honorable.

e. A recommendation based upon service which covers an appreciable period of time shall include the exact period thereof.

f. In every case, specific information related to the following shall be included:

(1) Time, date and place where the act or deed was performed;

(2) Character of the enemy;

(3) Nature of offense committed by the enemy;

(4) Specific acts or deeds performed by the recommendee;

(5) Character of nature of resistance offered by the enemy;

(6) Whether the enemy was armed;

(7) Casualties sustained. If injuries wore sustained, description as to whether fatal or non-fatal;

(8) Whether the recommendee performed the act or deed alone, or in group; and

(9) Effect or result of deeds.

g. When a recommendation is supported by an official record, that fact shall be stated. The recommendation shall include such information as will enable prompt and certain identification of such record.

Section 11. Posthumous Award – In case an individual who distinguished himself dies before the granting of the award, the award may nevertheless be granted to the next of kin of the deceased within the period of one year from the date of the act justifying the award.

Section 12. Exhibition Purposes – Upon approval by the President, samples of decorations for the police forces shall be furnished at cost prices plus transportation and packing charges to museums, libraries, historical, police and military societies or institutions. All sample decorations shall be engraved at the expense of the purchase with the phrase “for exhibition purposes only.”

Section 13. Awards to be noted on record – Awards of decorations shall be noted in the service and other similar records, personal files, efficiency records, and in historical records of individuals and organizations.

Section 14. Ribbons . – Corresponding ribbons for the authorized decorations may be used to indicate possession of said decorations.

Section 15. Wearing of decorations and badges .-Decorations and badges shall be worn on uniform on the following occasions, unless specifically prescribed otherwise:

a. On State occasions at home and abroad.

b. When receiving, calling or acting as escorts to high ranking government officials.

c. For parades, reviews, inspections and funerals.

d. When escorting the color,

e. In all official or ceremonial and social functions of a general or formal nature.

Section 16. Prohibitions in the wearing of medals . Medals shall not be worn “on overcoats or on service uniforms; neither shall they be worn together with their corresponding ribbons„ However, ribbons and badges maybe worn on the service uniform. Badges of societies shall not be worn with decorations and badges authorized herein.

Section 17. How decorations and badges are worn .-

a. Decorations or ribbons – Decorations or ribbons shall be worn on the uniform immediately above the left breast pocket below the police badges, in rows of three. The highest award should be to the right in the upper raw and the lowest award shall be in the lower row to the wearer’s left. Decorations or ribbons when worn shall be in the order of the precedence as enumerated in Section 2 of this Rule.

b. Badges – The police unit citation badge is a part of the uniform and shall always be worn in the service coat or shirt above and at the center of the right pocket.

Section 18. Authority to wear decorations and badges . – The announcement through appropriate orders of the award of any decoration or badge shall be the authority for the recipient to wear such awards pending the actual presentation of the decoration itself.

Section 19. By Whom Furnished – The city or municipality to which the awardee belongs shall shoulder the expenses of the awards and decorations prescribed in this Rule.

[Fig. 26 MEDAL FOR VALOR]

[Fig. 27 POLICE MEDAL OF MERIT]

[Fig. 28 MEDAL]

[Fig. 29 POLICE SERVICE MEDAL]

[Fig. 30. WOUNDED POLICE MEDAL]

[Fig. 31 POLICE UNIT CITATION BADGE]

RULE XIII – BENEFITS

Section 1. Benefits and privileges under Republic Act No. 4864. The benefits and privileges under Act are :

a. Sickness and disability benefits and privileges. A member of the local police force or agency, who is injured or has contracted sickness or disease while in the performance of duty, shall be entitled to the following benefits and privileges:

(1) Lump sum gratuity of from one hundred pesos (P100.00) to two thousand pesos (P2,000.00) depending upon the extent of the disability or sickness. If the disability or sickness rating is less than twenty-five (25) per centum, the lump sum gratuity shall be one hundred pesos (P100.00); if rated twenty-five (25) per centum or more, but less than fifty (50) per centum, the lump sum gratuity shall be five hundred pesos (P500.00); if rated fifty (50) per centum or more, but less than sixty (60) per central, the lump sum gratuity shall be one thousand pesos (P1,000.00); if rated sixty (60) per centum or more, but less than seventy (70) per centum, the lump sum gratuity shall be one thousand two hundred pesos (P1,200.00); if rated seventy (70) per centum or more, but less than eighty (80) per centum, the lump sum gratuity shall be one thousand four hundred P1,400.00); if rated eighty (80) per centum or more, but less than ninety (90) per centum the lump sum gratuity shall be one thousand six hundred (P1,600.00) ; if rated (90) per centum or more, but less than one hundred (100) per centum the lump sum gratuity shall be one thousand eight hundred pesos (P1,800.00); and if the disability is total, the lump sum gratuity shall be two thousand pesos (P2,000.00)

(2) Full pay during the period of absence on account of such disability or sickness.

(3) Payment of reasonable medical attendance, hospital fees, necessary medicine, transportation and subsistence,

(4) Absence during the period of disability or sickness shall not be charged against vacation or sick leaves.

(5) Premiums due for whatever group insurance policy which may be in force shall he paid by the city or municipality concerned in addition to premiums due the Government Service Insurance System.

b.  Compulsory Retirement Due to Permanent Disability. If a member of the local police agency is permanently disabled as a result of injuries suffered or sickness contracted in line of duty, the mayor shall cause the compulsory retirement of such member upon certification by the city or municipal health officer that the extent of the disability or sickness renders such member unfit or unable to further perform the duties of peace officer, in which case, he shall be entitled to a gratuity and benefits provided under this rule:

(1) Gratuity equivalent to one year’s salary which shall in no case be less than four-thousand pesos (P4,000.00).

(2) Life pension equivalent to eighty per cent (80%) of his last salary.

In the event the disabled party believes that he is not totally disabled, he can appeal to the Police Commission whose decision shall be final.

c. Death benefits and privileges . – When any member of the local police force or agency is killed or dies from injuries suffered or sickness contracted in line of duty, his beneficiaries, in addition to the benefits specified in the immediate preceding; paragraph shall be entitled to the following benefits and privileges:

(1) One year’s salary which shall in no case be less than four thousand pesos (4,000.00); and

(2) Burial expenses equivalent to three month’s salary which shall in no case be less than five hundred pesos (P500).

Section 2. Other disability and death benefits . In addition to the above cited benefits, the member of the local police agency concerned or his beneficiary may receive the benefits and privileges hereunder indicated:

Benefits from the Government Service Insurance System :

(1) Insurance covering the face value of the policy of the deceased member; and

(2) Burial benefit in the amount of one hundred fifty pesos (P150.00).

Section 3. Alternative death and disability and disability benefits under the Workmen’s Compensation Law as Administered by the Department of Labor – Any member of the local police agency of his beneficiary may, at his option receive the benefits and privileges under Republic Act No. 4864 or similar benefits under Commonwealth Act No. 3428 as amended by Republic Act No. 4119, otherwise known as the Workmen’s Compensation Law, but not both.

Section 4. Beneficiaries. – The following beneficiaries of a deceased member o£ the local police agency shall be entitled to receive exclusively the death benefits in their order of precedence:

a. Surviving spouse

b. Dependent s

c. Surviving parents

d. Brothers and sisters

Section. 5. Power of the Board of Investigators to adjudicate to claims for benefits under Republic Act No. 4864 . The Board of Investigators shall conduct investigations and decide claims relative to benefits provided under this Act, subject to appeal to the Police Commission whose decision shall be finale (Sec. 15, RA 4864)

Disbursements for all such claims shall, however, be authorized by the Commission upon recommendation of the Board of Investigators. (Sec. 21, Id.)

Section 6. Sickness and disability rating – The city or municipal health officer shall determine the extent of the sickness of disability mentioned in Section 1 of this Rule and shall submit his findings to the corresponding Board of Investigators.

Section 7. Requirements for filing claims .- Claims under Section 1 of this Rule shall be filed with the Board of Investigators with the following supporting papers and documents to be accomplished in at least five (5) copies in addition to what may be required by the Board of Investigators:

a. Letter of application;

b. Statement of service duly certified by the chief of Police or his authorized representive;

c. Death certificate when applicable;

d. Certificate of sickness or disability from the city or municipal health officer, when applicable;

e. Certificate of clearance re money and property accountability, when applicable.

f. Marriage contract and/or birth certificate, when applicable;

g. Proofs of surviving legal heirs;

h. Proofs that the sickness or disability was incurred while in or out of the performance of duty.

Claims under this Rule shall be filed with the corresponding Board of Investigators, or with the Government Service Insurance System, or with the Department of Labor, as the case may be, through the Chief of Police who shall extend all the necessary assistance in the prosecution of the same.

Section 8. Compensations not subject to attachment . All compensations herein granted shall not be subject to attachment, levy, execution or any tax whatsoever, nor affect benefits received or to be received, from the Government Service Insurance System. Claims under this Act shall not prescribe. (Sec. 21, Id.)

RULE XIV – INSPECTION

Section 1. Purpose of Inspection. – Inspection shall be conducted to ascertain the standard policies and procedures, review and analyze the performance, activities and facilities affecting operations, and to look into the morale, needs and general efficiency of the force in maintaining law and order. It shall also be the purpose of inspection to determine the police equipment needed as well as the necessary fund requirements for an effective and efficient police service,

Section 2. Authority to Inspect – Officers of the Philippine Constabulary, officials of the Police Commission and any other qualified police officer designated by the Commission shall inspect local police agencies. The inspecting Officer shall inspect, audit and examine police agencies in accordance with the inspection report proscribed under this Rule. Inspection shall be made by officers of the Philippine Constabulary at least once a month; by officials of the Police Commission and any other official designated by the Commission, at the discretion of the Police Commission.

Section 3. Inspection and Correction . – Inspectors shall inspect local police agencies pursuant to Section 2 above; take note of defects or irregularities discovered during the inspection; effect corrections of minor defects of the spot; bring to the attention of, and recommend to the mayor appropriate actions on defects noted. Defects or irregularities noted by the Constabulary officers which may be corrected only at provincial level shall be brought to the attention of the Provincial Commander who shall refer the matter to the Provincial Governor concerned.

Where the defects or irregularities cannot be corrected or resolved at provincial level, the inspecting official, in the case of officers of the Constabulary shall refer the matter to the Chief of Constabulary who, as an ex-officio member of the Police Commission, shall bring said defects or irregularities before said body, for appropriate action; in case of inspecting official of, or designated by the Police Commission, the matter shall be brought directly to the attention of the Police Commission.

Where the irregularity noted during the inspection is so serious as to warrant administrative charge or charges against a police officer, the inspecting officer shall immediately file the necessary charge or charges before the appropriate Board of Investigators.

Section 4. Inspection within the Police Department . The chief of police shall conduct spot and regular inspection of his department either directly or through his staff. Heads of subordinate units in the department shall likewise conduct spot and regular inspection of their respective units.

Section 5. Types of Inspection Within the Department . Inspection within the department may either be authoritative or staff.

a. Authoritative Inspection . – Authoritative inspection shall be conducted by the chief of police or by the heads of subordinate units.  This type of inspection shall be conducted regularly and continuously.

b. Staff Inspection. – Staff inspection shall be conducted by members of the staff for and in “behalf of the chief of police or superior officers in command of various unite within the department.

Section 6. Nature of Inspection – There shall be a continuing planned inspection both in the internal and external affairs of every police force.

Inspection on internal affairs shall embrace administration, training, operation, intelligence, investigation, morale and discipline of the organization, and financial condition of the police forces. Inspection on external affairs shall embrace the community relationship of the force, the crime and vice situation of the locality and the prevailing public opinion concerning the integrity and reputation of its personnel.

In any of these inspections, the inspecting officer shall make known the purpose of his inspection and shall inform every member of the force that such inspection is for the good of the service rather than a device to find fault or to create friction.

Section 7. Inspection Reports .- Inspection reports shall be prepared by the inspecting officers in eight copies, copy furnished the following: the chief of police, the city or municipal mayor, the provincial commander, the provincial governor, the Zone Commander, the Chief of Constabulary and the Police Commission. One copy shall be retained by the inspecting officer.

[POLICE INSPECTION REPORT]

RULE XV − RECORDS, REPORTS AND UNIFORM CRIME REPORTING

Section 1. The Need for Police Records . – A police department is only as good as its records keeping capabilities. The effictiveness of a police department is directly related to the quality of its records. They are the primary means of communication among the members of the police department and have as their purpose the integration of the various department units into an integrated organization for accomplishing the police task. Records are essential in the efficient performance of routine duties, in the wise direction of the police effort, in supervision and control of personnel, and in the determination of departmental policy.

Section 2. Organization of a Centralized Record System . Depending upon the size and needs of the police force, the chief of police shall maintain an adequate and centralized record system by organizing in his force an efficient records and communication unit capable of providing appropriate services to the line unit. The centralization of records in a police department brings together at one point all information concerning police activities, and it is through such centralization that the various line functions of a police department are coordinated. A centralized records and communication system in small and large police departments is shown in Figures 1 and 1-A.

Section 3. Functions and Uses of Records . A clear understanding of the functions and uses of the fundamental police records is essential to the development of an adequate records system. The police records shall have the following specific functions and uses:

a. measure police efficiency; b. present the community’s crime picture; c. assist in assigning and promoting personnel; d. identity individuals; e. provide a basis for property accountability; f. control investigation; g. make information available to the public h. increase the efficiency of traffic control; i. assist the courts and the prosecutors; j. assist in evaluating control services; k. coordinate custodial activities; l. integrate the department; m. furnish data for the budget; n. establish responsibility; o. reveal unusual problems; p. aid in the apprehension of criminals; q. assist other police agencies; r. provide the basis for compilation of police statistics. s. effective employment of personnel and equipment

Section 4. Incidents to be Recorded . The following incidents shall be recorded in appropriate police records:

a. violations of laws and ordinances reported and discovered;

b. all calls in which any member of the police force is dispatched or takes official action;

c. all legal papers handled such as warrant, subpoena, summonses, citations, and the like;

d. cases of missing and found persons, animals and property;

e. reportable vehicular and other types of accidents which require police action;

f. all personal injuries, bodies found and suicides;

g. damage to property;

h. all cases in which a police member is involved;

i. all arrest made; and

j. miscellaneous cases, general and special orders, violations of rules and regulations and any other reportable incident that the chief of police desires to be recorded.

Section 5. Mechanics of Good Report . – The following are the mechanics of good report writing which shall be adhered to by all concerned:

a. report shall be written to present chronological record of events always beginning with time and date;

b. if possible, it shall be typed; if not, ink shall be used but never in pencil;

c. report shall provide complete name, (first, middle and last) address, as well as aliases, brief biodata (such as age, sex) of victim or suspect:

d. abbreviations shall be avoided except those that are commonly known;

e. it shall not be too brief to sacrifice clarity nor should it contain excess materials that would tend to confuse;

f. every incident shall be written in a separate report;

g. it shall be accurate and shall state facts, not opinions;

h. it shall answer these questions: WHEN, WHERE, WHAT, WHO, HOW and WHY.

Section 6. Installation of a Police Records System . – The standard record procedures of all law-enforcement agencies shall meet the following:

a. a permanent written record shall be made of each crime immediately upon receipt of the complaint;

b. proper control shall be made upon the receipt of a complaint to insure that they are promptly recorded and accurately tabulated;

c. an investigative report shall be rendered in each case showing fully the details of the offense as alleged by the complainant and as disclosed by the police investigation. An effective follow-up system shall be adopted to insure that all reports are promptly submitted in all cases;

d. all reports shall be checked to see that the crime classification conforms to the uniform classification of offenses;

e. the offense or complaint report on crime cleared by arrest shall be noted as cleared;

f. arrest records shall be completed, special care being taken to show the final disposition of all charges;

g. records shall be centralized;

h. records and statistical reports shall be closely supervised by the chief of police;

i. periodic inspections shall be made to see that the rules and regulations of the local agency relative to records creation and maintenance are strictly complied with; and

j. statistical reports shall conform in all respects to the uniform crime reporting standards and regulations.

Section 7. Types of Police Records . – The records of a police force shall be classified into five categories; namely; (a) case records; (b) arrest and booking records; (c) identification records; (d) administrative records; and (e) miscellaneous records. They are described as follows:

a. Case Records . – A case record is composed of two categories:

(1) Complaint/Assignment sheet which reflects all information regarding complaints and reports received by the police from citizens, and other agencies, or actions initiated by the police.

(2) Investigation report which contains the findings and action taken by the investigating officer based on inquiries made and by obtaining the available facts of the incident.

b. Arrest and Booking Records . – This record maintains the arrest and jail booking report which is required for all persons arrested. It is made out in full en each person arrested. It shall bear an arrest number for each arrest made.

c. Identification Record. – Identification record is the third major division of police records. Fingerprint records are the heart of any identification system. It provides positive identification and the police must supplement it with a record of physical characteristics and in some cases a photograph of the criminal. Identification records have their own number series; and identification number is assigned to each criminal to identify records relating to him.

d. Administrative Records . – These are records required in the management of the department’s personnel and designed to aid in assignments, promotions and disciplinary action.

Such records are so essential in administering personnel matters that they must be maintained in a police department.

e. Miscellaneous Records . – These are records which do not relate to recorded complaints and investigation reports but are informational in character.

Section 8. Recording and Filing System . – The nature of police work justifies emphasis on criminal records. To be fully effective, a police records system must:

(1) be comprehensive and include every incident coning to the attention of the police;

(2) be adequately indexed to permit ready reference;

(3) be centralized to provide adequate control and maximum utilization of clerical personnel;

(4) be as simple as possible, consistent with adequacy; and

(5) lend itself to summarization and analysis to permit continuing appraisal of the police services.

Such a system will permit police records, reports and analysis to be used as significant tools of management, supervision, control, policy-making, and operations. A Police Department, large or small, shall maintain a centralized record file under a unified control. The case file is the master record and is supplemented by the arrest and identification records. Each of these records is numbered serially; thus, there are case numbers, arrest numbers, and identification numbers.

a. Case Records . – The case record is the heart of any police records system. It is the basis for an analysis of offenses and the methods by which they are committed. The following are the different types of reports included under the case records which shall be accomplished accordingly by all concerned:

(1) Complaint/Assignment Sheet – (Fig, 2 Polcom Form No. 1) The complaint/assignment sheet is the foundation record of the police department. It is accomplished by the desk officer, or clerk, or telephone operator receiving a call for police assistance. All incidents mentioned in Section 4 of this Rule and reported to the police shall have a complaint/assignment sheet. Each complaint/assignment sheet shall he assigned a different number. There are, therefore, two numbering systems: complaint number and case number. The complaint/assignment sheet becomes the primary document for analysis of crime occurrences while the investigative report becomes the prime document for the continuation of the investigative process. Two smooth copies of the complaint/assignment sheet shall be made for each complaint requiring a ca report.

A separate complaint/assignment sheet is required for each crime or incident reported to the police. It makes no difference whether the complaint is reported by telephone, by letter, in person at the police desk, to an officer on duty, or otherwise. The complaint/ assignment sheet is registered by stamping a serial number on each; when registered, the complaint/assignment sheet becomes a part of the records system. There shall be a consecutive series of complain numbers assigned by the desk officer. The complaint number must not be confused with the case number. All incidents shall receive a complaint number, however, only those incidents requiring a police investigation shall receive a case number.The case number identifies each case and all other papers and reports relating to it and serves as a basis for filing. The desk officer receiving the call need not obtain detailed information from the complaint but should secure the basic information needed to prepare the complaint/ assignment sheet. If the complaint is lodged in the precinct, the desk officer of the precinct shall prepare the complaint/assignment sheet in two copies indicating thereon the complaint number assigned by the Central Records Unit. The original copy shall be forwarded to the Central Records Unit.

(2) Investigative Report. – This type of report is prepared as a written report on the findings of the investigator. The following are the different types of investigative reports:

(a) Case Report – (Fig. 3 Polcom Form No. 2) This report shall be accomplished by the investigator or mentor making preliminary investigation of crimes reported to the police. The investigating officer shall submit this report at the end of his tour of duty. This report shall be prepared in the number of copies required by the department for distribution. For uniformity of crime reporting this shall follow the prescribed classification of offenses indicated in Polcom Form No. 20, Figure 28, while the duplicate copy shall remain in the precinct concerned for the corresponding action. The officer assigned to a case shall make his report at the end of his tour of duty.

(b) Supplement/Progress/Final Report . – (Fig. 4 Polcom Form No. 3) Progress report shall be accomplished by the investigator continuing the investigation if the case is left in a pending status after Polcom Form No. 2 has been submitted pending status after Polcom Form No. 2 has been submitted. It shall be submitted within three (3) days after the submission of the initial report, and monthly thereafter until the case is closed or cleared.

Closing a case shall not be confused with clearing case. A case is “closed”, for administrative purposes, when it is no longer being investigated and is not assigned to an investigator. A closed case can be either solved or unsolved. A case is “Cleared” when one or more persons are arrested, charge with, the commission of the offense and turned over to the fiscal or court for prosecution. Based on this Final Report a complaint nay be filed by the chief of police before the municipal court, if it is in the municipality, using Polcom Form No. 12 (Fig. 13) and if filed before the City Fiscal, Polcom Form No, 12-A (Fig. 13-A) shall be used.

(c) Continuation Report . – (Fig. 5 Polcom form No. 4) This report shall be used as the second and succeeding pages of all kinds of reports.

(d) Technical Report . – Fig. 6 Polcom Form No. 5) This report shall be accomplished by the investigator to cover other angles of the case or the technical staff whose assistance has been requested to conduct laboratory examination of evidence specimen gathered, to supplement the findings and report of the investigating officer.

(e) Accident Report. – (Fig. 7 Polcom Form No. 6) This report shall serve as the investigation report of the officer who investigates the accident. It shall be prepared for each vehicular accident-fatal, non-fatal, injury, or damage to property, in addition to the complaint/assignment sheet.

(f) Wanted Person Report – (Fig. 8 Polcom Form No. 7) Information on persons who are wanted by the police shall be flashed by means of the “Notice” Wanted Person, accomplished in quadruplicate, one copy to be sent to the Provincial Commander, PC, of the province (in case of cities/municipalities not under a Provincial Commander, the copy should be sent to the Chief, Philippine Constabulary, Camp Crame, Q.C.); one copy to be sent to the NBI Headquarters in Manila; the original to be placed in the “Persons Wanted File” of the Police Department concerned; and the fourth copy to be displayed in the rogues gallery. Strict compliance with the instructions at the back of Polcom Form No. 7 is required

(g) Daily Record of Events. – (Fig. 9 Polcom Form No. 8) A daily record of events is needed to keep all members of the force informed concerning police operations, assignment s, and administrative instructions. It shall carry a brief resume of each complaint/assignment sheet, a description of missing persons and persons wanted, and other information of interest to the police force. The officer who prepares the complaint/assignment sheet may reproduce the daily record of events on the typewriter as cases are reported or complaint/assignment sheets executed. In this manner, the daily record of events becomes a chronological cross reference to the complaint file. A number of copies may be made for dissemination to different divisions mid units of the department. In large departments, the daily record of events may be duplicated by mimeograph. In small police forces, a log or police blotter may be used provided it contains all the information in the daily record of events and that each incident shall be assigned a serial number. All investigation reports and other documents dealing with a case assembled in a folder. This accumulation of records is called the case file and is one of the principal features of a satisfactory records system. Case files are always filed according to the case number.

b. Arrest and Blocking Records . – These reports are required for all persons arrested. It shall be made out in full on each person arrested.

(1) Arrest Report .- (Fig 10 Polcom Form No. 9) An arrest report shall be made out in full on each person arrested and should be prepared at the time a prisoner is booked. Information regarding the offender, the charge, and circumstances of arrest is recorded before the prisoner is locked in jail or released on bond. The arresting officer is responsible for the arrest report and its completion. One or more criminal charges may be placed on one arrest report. However, if the arrest is in obedience to a warrant or warrants, separate arrest reports will be made for each warrant. In preparing the arrest record, it is important that the full name, first, middle and last, and other personal circumstances of the prisoner be entered and all questions on the form be answered. It shall bear an arrest number for each arrest made. The number series for arrests shall start from No. 1 on the first day of each year which will be known as calendar year numbering system. For example, the first arrest in 1968 shall No 68-1. This means that it is the first case of the calendar year 1968, and for the next year 69-1 and so forth. This report shall be used in controlling prisoners during the period of investigation. The arrest report shall be filed by the arrest number and cross-indexed by name and all known aliases of the prisoner. It shall carry the serial number of the complaint/assignment sheet and case report as the case may be. In an arrest where there has been no previous complaint/assignment sheet prepared, the desk officer shall make cut one and assign a serial number at the time of the booking. Immediately after accomplishing the arrest report, three things are done:

First – Send to the complaint clerk for the preparation of a complaint/assignment sheet.

Second – Send to the records office for name search against the alphabetical index file in order to determine if the prisoner is wanted on some other cases.

Third – Two sets of fingerprints of the prisoner shall be taken. One set shall be forwarded to the NBI headquarters, Manila and the other shall be searched by fingerprint classification in the fingerprint file, if the department is maintaining one. If the department does not maintain a fingerprint file, only oneset shall be taken and forwarded to the NBI head-quart or s, Manila.

Findings should be noted on the arrest report the arrest report shall be prepared in triplicate together with one booking sheet as its fourth copy. The original is filed with the arrest record file by number in the Central Records Unit, the duplicate and triplicate copies shall be sent to the Fiscal or to the Clerk of Court as the case may be, together with the criminal complaint or information and its other supporting papers. The lower portion of the arrest report will be later on detached and returned to the police department by the Fiscal or the Clerk of Court concerned after the termination of the case, to be filed with the case record after the disposition of the case has been annotated on the fingerprint of the accused.

(2) Booking Report – (Fig. 11 Polcom Form No. 10) The police department needs a current list of the prisoners in custody which will indicate the status and disposition of each. It provides information to each division as to the person or persons in jail. It facilitates accounting for prisoners at the end of each shift and their control at all times and on which restrictions on privileges are noted. The Booking Sheet shall be the jail file of arrest, arranged alphabetically and serves as a jail register. Information regarding any prisoner in custody is thus immediately available. The file shall be kept at the booking counter or location convenient for examination when inquiries are made. The jail booking report is under the direct supervision of the booking officer. This is done in order that changes in the charge and other entries regarding the control of the prisoner may be made and the file may be cleared when the prisoner is released. After the release of the prisoner, either by the police or by the court, the nail booking sheet is forwarded to the records division where it is filed according to arrest number.

(3) Prisoner’s Property Receipt – (Fig. 12 Polcom Form No. 11) All police departments shall give a receipt to prisoners for property which is taken from them. This receipt is prepared in duplicate. Everything taken from him is still the prisoner’s property until shown to be otherwise. The officer who makes the search and removes the property shall itemize it completely in the presence of another officer and the prisoner and give the prisoner the original receipt. The officer must also see that the property is sealedin an envelope which bears the prisoner’s name, the property receipt number and the date. The booking officer is responsible for the custody of the prisoner’s property until the time of release or transfer. The property shall go with the prisoner if he is transferred to another jail. The department property clerk will not be concerned with the care of prisoner’s property except when it is too bulky for storage in the prisoner’s property cabinet or safe.

The prisoner’s property receipt blank forms should be in book form, with the original perforated for easy removal and with a serial number printed on each pair.

The duplicate should not be removed from the book to eliminate danger of loss and makes possible an easy reference by property receipt number or date.

On the tine of release, the prisoner shall be required to produce the original receipt, where he will sign to acknowledge return of his property. The receipt is then filed with the case file. In the event the receipt has been lost, stolen or destroyed before the return of the property, a certification listing the property as described on the duplicate Prisoner’s Property Receipt shall be signed by the prisoner. This certification shall indicate that the original Prisoner’s Property Receipt was lost or stolen or destroyed.

Prisoner’s property which is clearly identifiable by number or inscription shall be checked against the stolen property files. If an identification is made, an investigation report stating the facts is written in duplicate; the original is sent to the commanding officer, who shall cause the property so identified to be held as evidence, the duplicate shall be sent to the detective division for appropriate action.

c. Identification Records . – The various identification records for the identification of criminals and other individuals now extensively used in police departments shall include the following:

(1) Fingerprint Record – Of the various methods of criminal identification, the fingerprint system is the most reliable. Identifying criminals by name is unsatisfactory because of the frequent use by criminals of aliases. Fingerprint records shall be prepared in at least two copies, the original to remain in the Central Records of the police department concerned and a copy shall be sent to the NBI headquarters in Manila.

(a) Criminal Fingerprint – (Fig. 14) Polcom Form No. 13) All persons arrested for an offense shall be fingerprinted and an identification number shall be assigned to each prisoner to identify records relating to him. A prisoner shall be fingerprinted each time he is arrested, even though his prints are already on file, in order that a copy may be sent to the National Bureau of Investigation. This procedure brings the criminal history file up to date after each arrest. The same ID number shall be used for each subject, regardless of the number of times he may be arrested or fingerprinted.

This is the fourth series of numbers used, the other three being the complaint sheet, case report and arrest report. The identification number shall appear on the fingerprint (Fp) card, the description (portrait sheet) and the photograph. The identification numbers are recorded chronologically in a ledger the entries on which include the name, identification number, the case number, the fingerprint classification and the date fingerprinted.

(b) Civilian Fingerprint – (Fig, 15 Polcom Form No. 14) All persons requesting for clearance certificate or for other personal identification purposes shall be fingerprinted using this Form.

(c) Alien fingerprint – (Fig. 16) Polcom Form No. 15) All aliens requesting for clearance certificate for purposes of petition for naturalization, change of name, oath taking and for other personal identification purposes shall be fingerprinted using this Form.

The fingerprint card is searched in the alphabetical index file. If the search is negative, a search isthen made in the fingerprint file by fingerprint formula. The fingerprint cards arc then indexed and filed. This means that it is a mandatory principle of taking the fingerprints of all persons mentioned above in the three categories, criminal civilian and alien. Secondly, that, although the police department wishes to maintain its fingerprint file, one fingerprint card will be sent to the NBI. In order for fingerprints to serve their maximum usefulness to the local departments and to all other law enforcement agencies, it is imperative that copies be sent to the NBI, Manila wherein a history-sheet (Fig. 17) will be prepared and furnished the contributing agency. Other police agencies which may have arrested the subject in the past are thus informed of his present whereabouts. This history sheet sent by the NBI will give the local department the past criminal record of the subject and also inform them of future arrests reported to the NBI by fingerprints,. It is most important, however, that the fingerprints shall be taken accurately to be classifiable. The Hentry FBI Extension Classification System of fingerprints shall be used by the police agencies. The criminal history sheet shall be filed in the individual criminals file. Each person arrested by a local police department shall have an individual file folder.

(2) Criminal Specialty (MO) File – This consists of photographic records and modus operandi of known criminals. This shall describe the method of operation of a criminal, classified and filed in such a way as to aid in identifying the crime as one committed by a known criminal. This is commonly known as M.O. (Modus Operandi) file. The use of the classification index file is the simplest form of modus operandi. This is a sort of rogues gallery and is helpful in controlling crime and in apprehending criminals. This shall be filed according to certain M.O. characteristics, according to major classes of crimes, and according to identification number. Group photographs of criminals working together are an aid to identification and they shall be filed by type of criminal specialty of the group involved.

d. Administrative Records – A number of different records are required m the management of the department’s personnel. Some of these are of an informational character designed to aid in assignments, promotions, and disciplinary actions; others are of control character such as correspondence files, department memoranda, daily summary of daily attendance record, follow-up and call sheet and monthly reports. In departments of over 100 men, the use of such a file is so essential in administering personnel matters.

(1) Personnel Records . – A file showing the history of each police officer, both prior and subsequent to joining the force is indispensable.

(2) Correspondence Files . –  This shall consist of sets of records of communications classified, arranged and filed alphabetically by the subject to which they pertain.

(3) Memoranda, Orders, Policy Files, etc . – These shall be filed accordingly as they care made available.

(4) Assignment Record . – (Fig 18 Polcom Form No. 16) The detective assignment record is desirable for the effective function of the detective division. Other divisions in the force may devise a system of assigning personnel.

(5) Other Files . – Police departments shall maintain other administrative records responsive to their needs.

e. Miscellaneous Records. – Police departments perform a variety of service which do not relate to recorded complaints. In addition to the general classes of records, there is a miscellaneous group which do not fall under categories of records that a police department maintain and which on occasions create filing problems within a department. The average small department may simply maintain one file folder for each category. Each piece of correspondence, together with a copy of the reply, should he filed in chronological order in an appropriate location file. As a refinement, the names of the authors of the correspondence received be indexed — the index cards referring to the folder in which the correspondence may be located. If correspondence with a particular office is frequent, a separate folder for that office may be maintained. However, another method used is to file miscellaneous correspondence by subject matter such as firearms, speaking engagements, and the like. Another system utilized occasionally is to assign a correspondence number to each piece of incoming correspondence and then is filed by this number and Indexed by the name of the author. In any event, some types of control record should be maintained in order to insure a prompt reply. Every police force shall keep and maintain the following miscellaneous records:

(1) Register of aliens within the city or municipality obtained from the Immigration Commission and/or other sources;

(2) List of firearm holders from the Philippine Constabulary;

(3) List of incumbent city, municipal, and barrio officials and their addresses;

(4) List of labor unions, cooperative associations, civic, professional, social and religious organizations, industrial plants, movie houses, etc;

(5) List and description of all army camps and mobilization centers;

(6) Facts about the locality indicating districts, barrios, sitios, roads, bridges, centers of population, voters, and the like;

(7) Copies of ordinances and penal laws;

(8) Roster of AFP reservists (Obtainable from military sources) showing current addresses;

(9) List of private and security agencies;

(10) List of parolees, pardoned and released criminals and their addresses;

(11) Property and equipment records – A complete inventory shall be kept of police equipment and property as well as the cost of maintenance and operation; and

(12) Such other reports that may be required by proper authorities and those that are necessary in the police force. These shall include a list of police numbers assigned to individual police personnel for identification purposes which shall be carried in the standard identification cards for all members of the police force.

f. Indexing – Police Departments shall prepare and maintain index cards for all names appearing in the case report, and index care for serial number and description of recovered lost or stolen property that has been brought to their attention. The following are the different types of index file:

(1) Master Name Index File – Every police department shall maintain a master name index file for its operation. It shall be in 3 x 5-inches index card stock. Index cards shall be arranged in the general alphabetical name index file in strictly alphabetical order by last name. Index cards shall be made on all names appearing in the case report, including aliases, names of complainant, victim, suspects and wanted persons. Index cards shall be prepared when outside fingerprint cards are received and placed in the local fingerprint collection whether the subject is wanted or not. The department shall also index all names of persons wanted by other police agencies as listed in circulars or wanted notice, persons placed on probation or parole. On the index card the following shall be reflected:

(a) Complaint, Case and/or ID number as the case may be;

(b) Name, aliases, address, sex, race, height, weight, color of eyes and hair, date and place of birth;

(c) Fingerprint classification (if available);

(d) Brief statement of each incident based on the source document with the following data:

1 . Date fingerprint taken, court case, warrant of arrest issued or date of allegedinformation;

2 . Contributor of fingerprint of al number;

3 . Nature of offense and/or purpose and

4. Result or disposition, if known

(e) If subject has used two or more names, he will be known by the name first used in so far as the particular police department is concerned. However, both shall be reflected on the index card underlining the first or original name used (See Fig. 19 and 19-A)

(f) A cross index card shall be prepared for each additional name used without the brief information as described in Figure 19-A. The one in-charge of the Master Name Index File shall go through indexes, card by card, in each of misfiled cards. The frequency of such searches will be influenced by the size and condition of the files.

(2) Stolen Property Index File – One principal objective of the investigation conducted by line-operating units is the identification and recovery of lost or stolen property. The stolen property index is an investigative aid of inestimable value in achieving this objective. There are two means of identifying property; one by serial number placed on the property and the other is the type of property (unnumbered). This shall be indexed in a 3 x 5-inches index card stock, describing the articles which are reported lost or stolen locally or by circulars from other departments. Prior to filing a card, a search shall be made to determine whether the same piece of property has been previously recorded. (See Figure 20)

(a) Numbered Property Index

1 . Police Departments with less than 200 police force may number guide cards from 00 through 99.Numbered property shall be indexed by the last two digits of the serial number. When more than one index card is filed behind one guide card, they may be placed in numerical order according to the third digit from the end as follows:

2 . Police Department with more than 200 members shall number the guide cards from 000 through 999. Numbered property shall be indexed according to the last three digits of the number without regard to the type of article. The index cards are filed behind the guide cards corresponding to the last three digits of the number. (See Figure 21)

(b) Unnumbered Property Index – Property not identifiable by a manufacturer’s serial number is indexed in the unnumbered property index, by description of the article, such as clothing, furniture, footware, jewelry, etc. and should be indicative of the general character of the article indexed. Index cards shall be removed from the files when the property is recovered and files should be overhauled periodically and certain cards removed. For example, cards over six months old describing perishable goods; those over two years old describing non-perishable food-stuffs, tobacco, and liquor; and those over five years old describing wearing apparel, linens and bedclothes, etc., serve no useful purpose after such a period of time. Cards describing articles of greater value, or articles not likely to be worn, consumed, or destroyed should be kept indefinitely. The complete description should be recorded on the index card to eliminate the need for a search to check the investigative report to obtain the complete description.

g. Charging Out Files . – Responsibility for filing each class of records shall be definitely assigned to one or more designated clerks. Accessibility to records cabinets shall be restricted to records division members only. When any record is removed from the file, an appropriate borrowers slip is used and a Charge-Out Card is accomplished. This insures the proper use of the files; prevents the misplacement of records that have been used; and keeps the files personnel informed at all tines of the whereabouts of the records issued out at any given time.

(1) Borrower’s. Slip . – The borrower’s slip is used when asking for files, and is used as a receipt for a case or any number of items from a file which is in a 4 x 6-inches sheet (Fig. 22 Polcom Fern No. 17)A supply of such slips shall be kept in each division or unit. This form is accomplished by the borrower who needs a file and may be brought to the file room either through the regular messenger service or by any person authorized by the borrower. It is presented to the records’ official. It is kept in a file control box when the file stands or remains charge-out. On the return of the record, the borrower’s slip is cancelled in the presence of the borrower and same is attached to the record and remains in the file as a permanent record of the transaction.

(2) Charge-Out Card . – Each time any file is issued, a record should be made on a colored Charge-Out Card (Fig. 23 Polcom Form No. 18) which is often called a “Substitution Card” or an “Out Card” which takes the place of a file that has been removed from the cabinet. These cards may be cut to fit the file drawer and shall stand out prominently among the files. (See Figure 23 Polcom Form No. 18) for record file and Figure 24 Polcom Form No. 19 for fingerprint card of the file drawer. When a file or folder is withdrawn, one of the cards is filled out and inserted in place of the file. It remains there until the borrowed file is returned. When the record is returned, the entry on the card is crossed out and the card is put back in its place in front of the file drawer.

h. Follow-up Procedure . – It is essential that each chief of police has an administrative device which will insure that call cases Drought to the attention of the force shall receive appropriate attention. The mechanics of the follow-up system consist of Raking use of one smooth copy of the complaint/assignment sheet for every complaint, arrest, or other natter which is not completely disposed of at the time of the original report. These sheets are placed in a “tickler” or “follow-up file” according to the date as determined by this Manual on which the investigating officer is to submit a progress or final report. The file has dividers for each day of the month and is separated into twelve months If a report is due on a designated date, the follow-up slip shall be filed on the day following the target date for submission of the report. A reminder slip shall be made and sent to the supervisor of the officer concerned if the report is not submitted on the date due. (See Figure 25)

i. Spot Map . – Spot maps are useful to indicate the traffic accidents and crime location. The location of crime hazards aids in the direction of enforcement effort. It provides supervising officers with evidence of weaknesses in police service and show the individual officer where his attention is especially needed. Spot maps should be placed where they will be readily available for consultation. It shall be placed in the office of the head of the division or in the office housing the specialized activity involved. Spot maps should be kept up-to-date by the records staff. Each map should be limited to not over four different factors if these factors have about equal frequency. In place of the crime index and the location index, a spot map shall be maintained by the police department for its use as follows:

(1) Traffic Spot Map . – Accident spot map for the posting of motor vehicle and pedestrian accidents which occur in the area. (See Figure 26)

(2) Crime Spot Map . – A general crime spot map on which are posted the location of murders, rapes, robberies, hold-up, auto thefts and other major crimes of the locality. (See Figure 26-A)

j. Flow Chart of Crime Records Management – The operation of records shall conform with the flow chart in Figure 27.

Section 9. Uniform Crime Reporting . – A uniform crime reporting shall be established in every police department for monthly and annual reports on cases handled and persons arrested by the department to include cases reported. These reports shall follow the prescribed classification of offenses. The monthly statistical reports shall include the following:

a. Monthly report of cases handled by the police department (Figure 28 Polcom Form No. 20)

b. Supplement on monthly report on cases handled by the police department (Figure 29 Polcom Form No. 21)

c. Report of male persons arrested (Figure 30 Polcom Form No. 22)

d. Report of female persons arrested (Figure 31 Polcom Form No. 23)

The four (4) reports above described shall be submitted to the Police Commission in three copie snot later than the 15th of each month. The Police Commission in return shall each furnish the NBI and the Chief of Constabulary. Accuracy and promptness in the submission of these reports shall be the responsibility of the chief of police.

The annual crime statistica report shall follow the prescribed form of monthly reports. Polcom Form No. 20, Figure 28 shall be used with appropriate modifications. This shall cover the fiscal year from July 1 to July 30 and shall be submitted to the Police Commission not later than July 20 each year.

Section 10. Record Policy and Security Discipline . The chief of police and all members of the force shall observe and strictly implement the following policies and security rules insofar as they pertain to records maintained in the force:

a. Constabulary officers, NBI agents, regular police officers and other public officials in the field of criminal justice shall be entitled to use the records of any law enforcement agency for official purposes covered with proper receipts.

b. The relationship between the police and other departments of the government shall be on an official basis insofar as the use of police records is concerned.

c. The official files of the police department shall be adequately kept and secured from damage by fire, destruction, sabotage or carelessness. Classified natters shall be separated from the unclassified matters.

d. All official files, documents, records, reports and information gathered in connection with the apprehension, prosecution, and punishment of criminals shall be regarded as “CONFIDENTIAL”. Members and employees of the police force shall not permit the disclosure or use of information contained in confidential records for any purpose other than for the performance of official duties.

e. Erasures in the records of a police force shall be avoided. Changes and corrections shall be made by drawing a red ink line through the words or letters to be corrected and inserted in red ink any correction or change. The initials and police serial number, if any, or badge number if the member making the correction shall also be indicated in red ink together with the date and time.

Police reports and records shall not be moved from a station, precinct, bureau or office, except in conformity with the provisions of law, rules and procedures, or upon the order of the court or any competent authority. Copies of said records, however, may be made by a member when necessary in the performance of police duty.

[CENTRALIZED RECORDS & COMMUNICATIONS IN A SMALL AND LARGE DEPT.]

[CENTRAL RECORDING OF COMPLAINTS IN LARGE DEPARTMENTS]

[PolCom F-No. 1 – COMPLAINT/ASSIGNMENT SHEET]

[PolCom F-No. 2 – CASE REPORT]

[PolCom F-No. 3 – SUPPLEMENT/PROGRESS/FINAL REPORT]

[PolCom F-No. 4 – CONTINUATION REPORT]

[PolCom F-No. 5 – TECHNICAL REPORT]

[Form No. 1]

[Form No. 2]

[Form No. 3 – PolCom F-No. 9]

PLEASE READ THIS CAREFULLY BEFORE COMPLETING THE FACE OF THE DOCUMENT

This notice can only be effective if you, the law enforcement official will complete as much of the information on the front of the document as possible.

REQUEST A WANTED NOTICE WHEN – The subject’s apprehension or location is required.

REQUEST AN ESCAPE NOTICE WHEN – The subject has escaped from custody.

REQUEST A FLASH NOTICE WHEN – The subject is on parole and you desire to be advised if he has been arrested while in this status or has failed to report as required by the conditions of parole.

REQUEST A CANCELLATION WHEN – The subject’s custody is secured or you no longer desire information concerning him.

NOTE: The name of the subject, NBI ID Number, and the name of the Police Department or Agency should be exactly the same as they appeared on the fingerpting card furnished the NBI. In all instances when the N3I ID Number is knovm it should be indicated. When the NBI ID Number is furnished, it is not necessary to give the fingerprint classification or description.

In the event the Law Enforcement/Agency is not certain there is a previous Fingerprint Record on file with the NBI, the Agency should, if possible, provide either an original fingerprint card or a photostat of a fingerprint card of the subject wanted. A “Wanted Escape or Flash Notice” is not posted in the files of the NBI unless positive identification can be effected.

DAILY RECORD OF EVENTS

First Relief – Sgt. Jose Cruz, Desk Officer 8:00 AM – 4:00 PM, 19 Dec. ’66

Luisa Gamboa, of age, 126 Rizal St., was robbed of her wrist watch, elgin and cash. Pat. Muralla was dispatched, Car 2. See Case Report 67-208.

Ramon Alarcon, 23 Bonifacio St., complained of a drunk man walking up and down the street in his residence for sometime. Pat Cader was dispatched subject GOA.

An unknown person reported a traffic accident at intersection of 11th and 12th Sts. Pat. Bayona was dispatched, no report required.

Ninety (90) members of the Bacolod Police Force attended the briefing conducted by the Chief of Police at the Police Academy from 2:00 PM to 4:00 today regarding the newly promulgated Police Manual. Other important matters affecting the police department were taken up.

Second Relief – Sgt. Carlos Oroceo, Desk Officer 4:00 PM – 12:00 MN, 19 Dec. ’66

Mrs. Maria Carson, 29 Araneta St., reported that someone destroyed her flower pots beside her house. She said she has no suspect but will notify the police if she sees one loitering in the vicinity. See case report 67-209.

Mrs. Rosario Galang, stated that her husband from whom she is separated is annoying her by calling in the telephone and wants to get the custody of their child. She was advised to see her attorney and have her husband served with a restraining order from the court.

Mr. Juan Cison, 65 San Juan St., reported that he was at the bus terminal of the shopping center waiting for the bus and he lost his traveling bag. See case Report No. 67-210.

Third Relief – Sgt. Luis Varca – Desk Officer 10:00 MN, 19 Dec. – 8:00 AM, 20 Dec. ’66

Carlos Losa, a suspect in this robbery case, was nabbed by Pat. Muralla at the shopping center after he was pointed at by the victim. Recovered from the suspect was an elgin wrist watch. See Case Report 67-211.

Roberto Lacson, 625 San Sebastian St., reported that his 1964 HoIden car, colored black, was stolen in front of his residence by an unknown person. See Report 67-212

[Form No. 4 – Arrest Report]

[Form No. 5 – Jail Booking Report]

[Form No. 6 – Prisoner’s Property Receipt]

[Form No. 7 – Complaints]

[Form No. 8 – Complaint]

[Form No. 9 – PolCom Form No. 13]

[Form No. 10 – PolCom F. No. 14]

[Form No. 11 – PolCom F. No. 15]

[Form No. 12]

[Form No. 13 – PolCom F-No. 17]

[Figure No. 1 – Master Name Index Card]

[Figure No. 2 – Cross Index Card]

[Figure No. 3 – Filing of Stolen Property Index Cards]

[Figure No. 4 – Guides for Three Digit Property Index]

[Form No. 14 – Borrower’s Slip]

[Form No. 15 – Outcard]

[Form No. 16 – Outcard]

[Figure No. 4 – Follow-up File]

[Figure No. 5 – Center City]

[Figure No. 6 – Flow Chart of Crime Records Management]

[Form No. 17 – Monthly Report of Cases Handled by the Police Department]

[Form No. 18 – Monthly Report of Cases Handled by the Police Department]

[Form No. 19 – Report on Male Persons Arrested]

[PolCom Form No. 23 – Report on Female Persons Arrested]

RULE- XVI – POLICE INTELLIGENCE

Section 1. Objectives and Concepts .

a. Intelligence as a process is an activity which treats processed information as a basis for Police Department policy.

b. Intelligence as an organization is an institution composed of persons which pursue special kind of knowledge for the purpose of collecting, evaluating, collating and disseminating information relating to organized crime and vices, integrity of members of the police force, subversive activities, persons and conditions that promote civil disturbances and other major police problems.

Section 2. Forms . – The two general forms of police intelligence are covert and overt . These forms are descriptive of the manner by which raw information is gathered. It is covert , if the information is obtained without the knowledge of person against whom the information or documents may be used, or, if the information is acquired clandestinely. It is overt , if the information or documents are procured openly without regard as to whether the subject of the investigation becomes knowledgeable of the purpose or purposes for which it is being gathered.

Section 3. Purpose . – Covert and overt intelligence may be used to:

a. Check the conditions in the community relating to juvenile delinquency, crime, vice, and public opinion;

b. Check on the integrity of the members of the force;

c. Help in the solution of individual criminal cases;

d. Identify gangsters, hoodlums and racketeers as well as their associates;

e. Assist in the arrest of wanted criminals;

f. Check on the quality and effectiveness of the operation of the force;

g. Check on the conditions of personnel, equipment, and materials;

h. Help in crime control and prevention; and

i. Serve as a tool of management for other purposes.

Section 4. Operation of the Intelligence Unit . – The intelligence unit shall operate covertly and/or overtly depending upon the nature of the police problems involved. Only carefully selected policemen shall be employed for police intelligence work. Adequate funds shall be provided therefor.

Section 5. The Intelligence Unit . – In large police departments, there shall be an intelligence unit which shall, as much as practicable, conform to POLCOM Charts Nos. 4 and 5 of Rule I. In smaller department, intelligence service shall be provided by the chief of police himself with the assistance of the investigation or detective unit. In some cases where the continuous operation of an intelligence unit may not be necessary, a periodic audit of conditions requiring from one to six months and undertaken annually or bi-annually, may be sufficient.

Section 6. Factors for Creating an Intelligence Unit . The following factors shall be considered in creating an Intelligence unit in the police department:

a. the size of the community (area and population);

b. the extent of organized crime in the community);

c. the probable frequency and seriousness of the activities of civil disturbances;

d. the breaches of integrity on the part of the members of the force.

Section 7. Control of Intelligence Operations . – The chief of police shall keep himself fully informed of the activities of his intelligence unit. The delicate nature of a covert investigation makes it imperative that, before its completion, the undercover investigators inform the chief of police from time to time as to the progress of their work. Disbursement procedures shall be established to safeguard misuse of funds.

The intelligence unit shall be primarily concerned with organized crime. It shall not be the task of its member to arrest persons guilty of participating in criminal activities but rather furnish the chief of police or other duly authorized superior officers, with the necessary facts so that, he may place them at the disposition of the other operating units of the department concerned for appropriate action. The chief of police shall not reveal the source of the information when discussing the situation with operating personnel.

If, in the course of investigating persons engaged in organized crimes, the intelligence unit discovers leads incriminating members of the force that will justify intensive investigation, it shall report the matter immediately to the chief of police for appropriate action. The preliminary information that shall be reported orally to the chief of police unless he desires a written report and has a suitable place to file its contents in secret.

RULE XVII – PLANS AND OPERATIONS

Section 1. Significance and Importance of Planning . – The increasing complexity of police operations demands the utmost skill and careful planning in order to insure the accomplishment of police objectives and missions. It shall be done in all police departments regardless of size Planning may mean any of the following: (a) the process of combining all aspects of the department and the realistic anticipation of future problems, the analysis of strategy and the correlation of strategy to detail; (b) the use of rational design or pattern for all departmental undertakings rather than relying on chance; and (c) the act of determining polices and guidelines for police activities and operations and providing controls and safeguards for such activities and operations in the department.

Section 2. Responsibility in Planning . – Police planning shall be done both within and without the department. Board external policy planning is the responsibility of the legislative branches of the government. Laws and ordinances which the police enforce are the results of legislative planning, prescribing control of non-conformist elements of society, and the like. The main concern of the police in this board external policy planning is assisting the legislature or the city or municipal council in their determinations of police guideline through the passage of appropriate laws or ordinances and revolutions for the police to enforce.

On the other hand, the chief of police shall be responsible for establishing internal operational policies to achieve the objectives and missions of the police department. This requires a clear definition of work to be done, who is to do it, and how well it is to be done. He shall be responsible for planning, organizing, directing, staffing, coordinating, controlling, reporting, and budgeting for the police department within existing policies and available resources. For maximum police effectiveness, he shall be responsible for the technical operation of the police department and the management of its personnel.

Section 3. Types of Plans .- To properly ;achieve the administrative planning responsibility within the police department, the chief of police shall develop departmental plans relating to (a) policies or procedure; (b) tactics; (c) operations; d; extra departmental activities; and (e) management.

a. Policy or procedural plan . – Standard operating procedures shall be planned to guide members in routine and field operations and in some special operations in accordance with the following procedures:

(1) Office procedures . – The two principal office procedures which need to be outlined and planned are reporting regulations and records division operation. The large number of forms used in police departments and variations in the number and routing of copies make it desirable that instructions be printed in each form to assist the officers which form is to be used for a particular purpose, the number of copies to be made, and where they are to be routed. On the other hand, the intricate and interrelated nature of records-division operation makes important an assurance that each task is performed in the manner prescribed. Decisions must be made as to the frequency and nature of statistical information that is to be supplied to heads of divisions or district stations.

(2) Field Procedures . – Procedures intended to be used in all situations of all kind shall be outlined as a guide to officers in the field. Procedures that relate to reporting, to dispatching, to raids, arrests, stopping suspicious persons, receiving complaints, touring beat, and the investigation of crimes, and so on are examples. The use of physical force and clubs, restraining devices, firearms, tear gas, and the like shall, in dealing with groups or individuals, also be outlined.

(3) Headquarters procedures . – To be included in these procedures are the duties of the dispatcher, jailer, matron, and other personnel concerned, which may be included in a duty manual, rather than as separate procedures because they pertain to the responsibility of one person or one class of persons. Procedures that involved coordinate action on activity of several offices, however, shall be established separately as in the case of using police telephone for local distance calls, the police radio, teletype, and other similar devices.

(4) Special operating procedure . – Certain special operations also necessitate the preparation of procedures as guides. Included are the organization and operation of the junior police, operation of the special unit charged with the searching and preservation of physical evidence at the crime scenes and accidents, the control of licenses, dissemination of information about wanted persons, the speaker bureau, inspection of police headquarters, and the like.

b. Tactical plans . – These are the procedures for coping with specific situations at known locations. Included in this category are plans for dealing with attacks against buildings with alarm systems and against police headquarters by lawless elements. Plans shall also be made for blockade and jail emergencies and for special community events, such as larger public meetings, athletic contests, parades, religious celebrations, carnival, strikes, demonstrations and other street affairs.

c. Operational plans . – These are plans for the operation of special divisions like the patrol, detective, traffic, vice and juvenile control divisions. Operational plans shall be prepared to accomplish each of the primary police tasks. For example, patrol activities must be planned, the force must be distributed among the shifts and territorially among beats, in proportion to needs of the service, special details must be planned to meet unexpected needs, and so on. Likewise in crime prevention and in traffic, juvenile and vice control, campaigns must be planned and assignments made to assure the accomplishment of the police purpose in meeting both average and irregular needs. Each line division or unit has a primary responsibility to plan operations in its field and also to execute the plans, either by its own personnel or, as a staff agency, by utilizing members of other divisions. Plans for operations of special division consist of two types, namely: (l) those designed to meet everyday, year-round needs, which are the regular operating program of the divisions; and (2) those designed to meet unusual needs, the result of intermittent .and usually enexpected variations in activities that demand their attention.

(1) Regular operating program. – The operating divisions must have specific plans to meet current needs. The manpower of each must be distributed throughout the hours of operation and throughout the area of jurisdiction in proportion to need. Assignment schedules must be prepared that integrate such factors as relief days, lunch periods, and hours, nature, and location of regular work. Plans must also assure suitable supervision which becomes more: difficult when the regular assignment is interrupted to deal with these short-time periodic needs.

Specialized assignment must be worked out for the detective and juvenile divisions to provide approximately equal work loads, taking into consideration variation in the importance of cases and the average time required to investigate them. Assignments of officers to divisions shall be on the needs basis, and within divisions they shall be made on the basis of special ability and interest.

Special programs must be developed to meet particular needs in each field of activity. For example, the traffic division will need programs of enforcement, public education, and engineering. The Juvenile division will need programs designed to make better citizens of delinquent and predelinquent children, and operational plans intended to eliminate certain delinquency-inducing factors in the community. They will also need plans to obtain assistance from all community agencies in the diagnosis and treatment of certain delinquents.

(2) Meeting unusual needs . – The unusual need may arise in any field of police activity and is nearly always met in the detective, vice, and juvenile divisions by temporary readjustment of regular assignments. For example, a sudden upserge of robberies may result in case load beyond the capacity of the detectives assigned. Some of these cases may be assigned to other detectives with less work load.

When the need is precisely met by a previously developed tactical plan, the planning will consist of nothing more than assigning officers to implement it.

d. Extra-departmental plans . – The active interest and participation of individual citizens and group is so vital to the success of most police programs that the police shall deliberately seek to motivate, pro-mote, and maintain an active public concern in their affairs. Plans must be made to organize the community to assist in the accomplishment of police objectives in the fields of traffic control, organized crime, and juvenile delinquency prevention. The organization in-large cities may be called safety councils, crime commissions, and community councils for the delinquency prevention, respectively. They will assist in coordinating community effort, in promoting public support, and in combatting organized crime. Organization and operating plans for civil defense snail also be prepared for use in case of emergency or war in coordination with the Civil Defense Administration.

e. Management plans. – Plans of management shall map out in advance all operations involved in the organization, management of personnel and material and in the procurement and disbursement of money such as the following:

(1) Budget planning .- Present and future money needs for personnel, equipment, and capital investments must be estimated and plans for supporting budget requests must be made if needed appropriations are to be obtained. The ideal budget for a police force is &t least twenty per cent (2050 of the total budget of the city or municipality. In no case however shall it be less than seventeen per cent (17%).

(2) Accounting procedures . – Accounting procedures must be established and expenditure reports provided to assist in making administrative decisions and in holding expenditures within the appropriations.

(3) Specifications and purchasing procedures . – Specifications must be drawn for equipment and supplies, and purchasing procedures established that assure a check of deliveries against specification of orders. Plans and specifications must be drafted for new buildings and for remodelling old ones.

(4) Personnel . – Procedures must be established to assure the carrying out of personnel program described in Rule IV, V, VI, VII, and VIII of this Manual and the allocations of personnel among the component organizational units in proportion to need.

(5) Organization . – A basic organization plan of the department must be made and posted for the guidance of the force. For the organization to be meaningful, it must be accompanied by a departmental duty manual which will define relationships between the component units in terms of specific responsibilities to each. The duty manual shall incorporate department rules and regulations and shall contain the following: definition of terms, organization of rank, general rules and duties, general duties of superior officers, the functional organization, and duties of the various units, and the like, provided the same shall not be in conflict with this Manual.

Section 4. The staff planning unit . – In departments of medium size or larger, there is a need of a planning unit to assist the chief of police in his administrative duty of planning, point out to operating personnel and to the chief the need for plans,and urge their preparations and development. In smaller departments, the responsibility for staff planning may be given to an officer in addition to his duties. Planning must include the experience of the line officers, the facts of the statistician, the opinion of the analyst, the ideas of every member of the force and the counsel and advise of every division that may play a part in the execution of plans.

Section 5. Steps in planning . – The following steps provide an orderly means for the development of plans:

a. Frame of reference . – This shall be based on a careful review of the matters relating to the situation for which plans are being developed, and opinions or ideas of person who nay speak with authority on the subject concerned. Definitive views of the chief of police officers, other government officials, and other professionals shall be considered.

b. Clarifying the problems . – This calls for the identification of the problems, understanding both its record and its possible solution. A situation must exist for which something must and can be done. For example, an area in a city or municipality is victimized by a series of robbers. There is a need for reaching the preliminary decision that robberies may be reduced in the area, and that the pattern of operation, in general, is one by which the department can reduce them.

c. Collecting all pertinent facts . – No attempt shall be made to develop a plan until all facts relating to it have been gathered. In the series of robberies, all cases on files shall be carefully reviewed to determine the modus operandi , suspects, types of victims, and such other information as may be necessary. Facts relating to such matters as availability, deployment, and the use of present personel shall be gathered.

d. Analyzing the facts . – After all data have been gathered, a careful analysis and evaluation shall be made. This provides the basis from which a plan or plans are evolved. Only such facts as may have relevance shall be considered.

e. Developing alternative plans . – In the- initial phases of plan development, several alternative assures will appear to be logically comparable to the needs of a situation. As the alternative solutions are evaluated,one of the proposed plans will usually prove more logical than the others.

f. Selecting the most appropriate alternative . – A careful consideration of all facts usually leads to the selection of a “best” of alternative proposals. In a robbery case, the “best” plan may call for the use of available “on-duty” personnel with maximum use of detectives for “stake huts”.

g. “Selling” the plan . – A plan, to be effectively carried out, must be accepted by persons concerned at the appropriate level of the plan’s development. For example, in a robbery case, the patrol division head may be preparing the plan. At the outset, the detective chief is concerned and shall be consulted. As the planning develops there may be need to involve the heads of personnel, records and communication units, and all patrol officers.

h. Arranging for execution of the plan . – The execution of a plan requires the issuance of orders and directives to units and personnel concerned, the establishment of a schedule, and the provision of manpower and equipment for carrying out the plan. Briefings must be held and assurance must be received that all involved personnel understood when, how, and what is to be done.

i. Evaluating the effectiveness of the plan . The results of the plan shall be determined. This is necessary in order to know whether a correct alternative was chosen, whether the plan was correct, which phase was poorly implemented, and whether additional planning may be necessary. Also, the effects of the executed plan on other operations and on total departmental operations must be determined. Follow-up is the control factor essential for effective departmental management.

Section 6. Characteristics of plans . – Effective plans have certain identifiable characteristics such as the following: (a) clearly defined objectives or goals; (b) simplicity, directness, and clarity; (c) flexibility; (d) possibility of attainment; (e) provision for standards of operation; (f) economy in terms of resources needed for implementation; and (g) anticipated effect or effects on future operations. The effectiveness of planning depends to a degree on the timeliness of plans and on the strategy used for implementation.

Section 7. Execution of plans . – Once plans are made, same shall be put into operation and the result thereof be evaluated accordingly. Operations in the police force shall be directed by the chief of police in order to attain the following police objectives: (a) protection of persons and property; (b) preservation of the peace; (c) prevention of crime; (d) repression or suppression of criminal activities; (e) apprehension of criminals; (f) enforcement of laws mid ordinances and regulations of conduct; (g) safeguarding of public health and morales; (h) prompt execution of criminal writs and processess of the courts; and (i) coordination and cooperation with other law-enforcement agencies.

To achieve the above-cited police objectives, police tasks shall be specifically assigned and that each, member must know his particular duties and responsibilities. Police functions or tasks shall be categorizes into primary, secondary, and administrative,

The primary, line or operation police tasks shall include patrol, investigation, traffic, vice and juvenile control. The accomplishment of these primary tasks should achieve the police objectives.

The secondary, auxiliary or service tasks shall include records, property jail, crime laboratory, transportation, and communication. These tasks shall assist and effectively support the primary tasks in the accomplishment of the police objectives.

The administrative or managerial police tasks shall include personnel, intelligence, inspection, planning budgeting, training; aid public relations. These tasks should assist and effectively support the primary and the secondary police tasks in the attainment of the police objectives.

Section 8. Field Operation . – Operation in the field shall be directed by the chief of police and the subordinate commanders and the same shall be aimed at the accomplishment of the following primary police tasks more effectively and economically:

a. Patorl . – The patrol force shall accomplish the primary responsibility of safeguarding the community through the protection of persons and property, the preservation of the peace, the prevention of crime, the suppression of criminal activities, the apprehension of criminals, the enforcement of laws and ordinances and regulations of conduct, and performing necessary services and inspections.

Policing shall be considered a patrol service with specialized activities developed as aids. A patrol force or unit is the necleus of the department about which the special services are grouped, and therefore, it shall not be subordinated to any other police unit in the department.

The proportional strength of the patrol force and the special units like investigation, traffic, vice and juvenile units, shall depend on the services performed by each. The patrol force being the backbone of the police service, shall be responsible for the accomplishment of the total police job, and in snail police departments having no specialization, it shall perform all the primary, secondary, and administrative police tasks, if a special unit is created, it must be decided which tasks shall be taken from patrol, to be made the exclusive responsibility of said special unit, which tasks shall remain the exclusive responsibility of the patrol, and which tasks shall be assigned as joint responsibility.

Responsibility for the performance of certain police tasks within an area shall be placed on an individual policeman, and the accomplishment of his duty requires his movement from one place to another. A choice of patrol method, whether foot or mobile, must be made and based on the purpose of the patrol and the conditions under which it is to be provided. The method of transportation shall be provided the patrolman not on foot patrol by the City or municipality concerned which will enable the most effective and economical accomplishment of his tasks. Cars, jeeps, wagons, motorcycles, horses, bicycles, and the like are invariably used in police work. However, the choice must be based on an appraisal of the advantages and disadvantages of each of the primary purposes of the patrol and for the conditions in which it is to be effected.

b. Investigation . – The basic purpose of the detective or investigation division or unit shall be to investigate certain designated serious crimes and clear them by the recovery of stolen property and the arrest and conviction of the perpetrators. To this end, the detective division shall supervise the investigation made by patrolmen and undertake additional investigations as may be necessary of all felonies, and all cases of murder, homicide, robbery, theft, and other grave crimes, except those types that are assigned by department regulations to the traffic, vice, and juvenile units. The detective division shall also be responsible for the investigation of felonies and misdemeanors which have not been cleared by arrest or other means and which come within their jurisdiction. It shall be responsible for the investigation of non-criminal activities including missing persons and matters wherein an investigation would be beneficial to the public welfare.

The success of investigation is embraced by active patrol participation. Suitable coordination of the patrol and detective divisions increases the effectiveness of investigation without diminishing the patrol effectiveness. Each patrolmen shall serve as the eyes and ears of the detective division and otherwise assist in the investigation of crimes and suspicious persons.

As a general rule, cases of the sane class shall be investigated by the detective specializing in that type. Specialization of detective assignment fixes responsibility, simplifies training, permits a selection for assignment on a basic special interest and ability, and provided a more accurate measure of the accomplishment of the individual detective. The classes of crimes that are assigned to individual detectives shall be influenced by the proportional incidence by the various crimes, by the seriousness of the offenses, by the average length of time required in their investigation, and by the ability of the investigator. The smaller the numbers of crimes in same classes make necessary the assignment of more than one class to a detective. For this reason, classes of crimes assigned to one man shall be similar or related in the same manner.

Planning detective operations shall include meeting relatively stable changes in crime frequency by permanent changes in assignments and by meeting temporary changes in the regular assignments. Operation plans which are designed to uncover information concerning crimes or to effect the discovery, arrest and seizures of suspects, of persons wanted, of operating criminals, of automobiles used for criminal transportation, of tools used for criminal purposes, mid of stolen property or other evidences, shall include tasks to be performed by the members and other divisions, principally the patrol division, and consequently these plans must be prepared in cooperation with other units. Such plans shall include special details in areas where criminals are operating, the canvass of areas of certain types of places of business, spot jobs and surveillance.

c. Traffic control . – Police control of streets of highways, vehicles, and people shall facilitate the safe and rapid movements of vehicles and pedestrians.

To this end, the inconveniences, dangers, and economic losses that arise from the movement, congestions, delay stopping, and parking of vehicles must be lessened. Control of traffic shall be accomplished in three steps:

(1) Causes of accidents and congestion must be discovered, facts gathered and analyzed for this purpose;

(2) Causes must be remedied, changes must be made in the physical conditions that create hazards and legislation must be enacted to regulate drivers and pedestrians; and

(3) The public must be educated in the provisions of traffic and ordinances, motorists and pedestrians must be trained in satisfactory movement habits, and compliance with regulations must be obtained if need be, by enforcement. The police shall initiate action and coordinate the efforts of other agencies that are also concerned in these activities.

The police have three tools to aid then in traffic control, viz., engineering, education and enforcement.

The purpose of traffic engineering shall be to design roadway facilities with involvement of government engineers so as to lessen the frequency of accidents and the amount of congestion, and thus facilitate safe, rapid movement. The traffic engineering tasks of the police are divided into general traffic engineering, and police traffic engineering. The primary purpose of both shall be to effect the safe and easy movement of vehicles and pedestrian traffic. Their goals, however, are accomplished by different methods. General traffic engineering which is the responsibility of the engineering office of the government shall provide safety and facility measures in the highways system. Police traffic engineering, on the other hand, shall primarily concern with the discovery and remedy of accident and congestion hazards. Surveys, studies and accident enforcement facts provide data relating to accidents, traffic flow and volume, and parking and driving practices. These data must be analyzed to reveal physical conditions that contribute to accidents and congestions. Unsatisfactory conditions shall be remedied by the use of signs, signals, markings, islands, median strips, intersection redesign, loading and parking facilities, and street illumination, The use of these facilities should be authorized by legislation.

Some violations that cause accidents and congestions result from ignorance of the regulation, some from lack of driver skill, but many are the direct result of a selfish attitude that causes the motorists to disregard the safety and convenience of others. Therefore, it is necessary to direct police effort towards the correction of the undesirable attitude of drivers. This shall be accomplished by persuading motorist and pedestrians to comply with traffic regulations through education. The police shall win compliance, first, by informing the public of the best practices of driving and walking, and of the nature and purpose of the regulation and its effectiveness in reducing accidents and congestions; second; by the use of warnings and instructions but not as rebukes; and third, by punishment in the form of recommendation for the revocations of licenses, and charges in court if the first two fail to accomplish the purpose. The police shall participate in the coordination of the education efforts in the community and shall participate actively in the organization of a local safety group and in its program of education. Preferably, the police shall conduct regular seminars for erring drivers. Education must precede enforcement.

Enforcement of traffic regulations shall be resorted to upon the failure of engineering and education to prevent violations among the drivers and pedestrians. This means that violators shall be charged in court for repeated, violations and their licenses confiscated accordingly. Other violations shall be dealt with strictly. Enforcement shall not be limited to punitive measures based on arrest and prosecution but shall include non-punitive procedures such as active and conspicuous patrol, warnings, traffic violator’s school and other enforcement techniques. Unreasonable arrest shall be avoided, and warnings and non-punitive enforcement procedures shall be substituted for citations when the driving history and circumstances warrant, especially in the case of individual violations. A number of special operations shall be undertaken by the police or traffic unit to increase their effectiveness, the thorough investigation of traffic accidents, and the use of public address system, junior police traffic patrols, and traffic or driver’s school play important parts in a well-rounded traffic program.

d. Vice Control . – It shall be the determined stand for the police in the control of vices to treat vice offenses as they would do any violation, and exert efforts to eliminate them, as they attempt to eliminate robbery, theft, and public disturbance.

Police control of vices shall be based on law rather than on moral precepts, and operation shall be directed towards their elimination in the community. A primary police interest in vice control results from the close coordination between vice and criminal activities. Constant raids of known vice dens shall be undertaken.

The most effective police control usually results from the prosecution of persons who maintain the vice operations and the persons participating therein.

Patrol participation in vice control shall be made to lessen the force needed in the vice division, increase its efficiency, conserve the time and energy of its members, and to enable it to focus its attention to serious vice violations. The patrolman on the beat shall make frequent but irregular inspection of licensed establishments and other vice hazards, shall discover and eliminate more apparent vice violation, shall investigate and dispose of the less serious vice complaints.

The vice and patrol divisions shall have a joint responsibility for vice conditions and both shall be held accountable. A patrolman shall be responsible for the eradication of vice activities on his beat and shall report conditions which he is unable to cope with.

e. Juvenile delinquency control . – Effective crime control necessitates preventing the development of individual as criminals. The chief of police shall recognize a need for preventing crime by correcting conditions that induce criminality and by rehabilitating the delinquent. In determining the role which the police shall play in this endeavor, the chief of police shall study the cause of delinquency and the means of their elimination or correction, to inventory and evaluate community social-welfare activities directly or indirectly related to the prevention of criminality, and to discover, by analysis, delinquency—prevention tasks that the police is best suited to perform, the Police must develop and promote a program designed to prevent the development in children of intellectual-emotional conditions that nay result in criminal behavior and to correct unsatisfactory conditions when they become deep rooted. In carrying out his pro cram the police shall obtain the support and assistance by harnessing all community resources to the tasks such as the facilities of health and child-guidance clinics, the professional skills or physicians, psychiatrists, and psychologists, and the help of teachers, ministers, and laymen. The police must enlist the aid, focus the attention, and coordinate the activities or every agency and group in the community whose services may assist in the accomplishment of the delinquency-prevention program, and they must follow through to assure that the assistance is effectively and continuously applied to the end.

The nature of the police delinquency-prevention program shall be determined by the field of activity given the greatest emphasis, and this is influenced by the needs of the community. A well-rounded program shall include the following activities:

(1) The eradication, by patrol, inspection, supervision, and investigation, of elements that include criminal tendencies and of conditions that promote criminal activities, especially among children. The police shall discover and correct or repress opportunities, temptations, and other influences that contribute to delinquency and these shall be done by strict enforcement of ordinances and other prohibitions directed at those who may become delinquent.

(2) The discovery of delinquents, near-delinquents, and those exposed to high-risk situations, and the treatment of the poorly adjusted. Some shall be referred to the court if they have committed serious offenses; the maladjusted shall be corrected by utilizing all community resources, A boys home or boys town for orphans, abandoned, neglected children, as well as boys1 reception and rehabilitation center may be established in the community if possible to help rehabilitate the delinquents and potential delinquents.

(3) The planning, promotion, aid direction of recreation, character building, and other group activities that provide wholesome activities. Organization of youth councils or police advisory councils, and membership on community councils and on board of directors of community agencies enable the police to win community cooperation and support and to exert an influence on long range community planning m delinquency prevention.

Police task that must be undertaken to carry out the above-mentioned activities shall be divided into the following:

(1) Patrol and inspection . – The suppression and eradication of unwholesome influences is accomplished by the repressive activities patrol. It is important to have regular and supervision of taverns and other liquor establishments, dance halls, poolrooms, bowling alleys, swimming pools, and other commercial recreation and the control of vacant lots, public gatherings, playgrounds, and other places where youth nay congregate.

(2) Investigation . – Investigation shall ascertain facts essential to successful detection, diagnosis and treatment of individuals. Just as the vice division investigates vice violations and the detective division investigates serious crimes, so the juvenile control division must investigate some incidents, individuals, and conditions for purposes of delinquency prevention.

(3) Coordination and direction of community resources toward the removal of harmful influences, the provisions of wholesome ones, and the correction of the maladjusted individual.

Section 10. Auxiliary and Administrative Tasks . – In order for police operations to succeed, the resources of the department such as manpower, money, materials, methods and machine, shall be properly marshalled, utilized, coordinated and controlled. Field units shall be ably supported by the auxiliary and administrative bureaus in their operation. The secondary, auxiliary or service police tasks such as records, property, oil crime laboratory, transportation and communication must be made to support the line units. In like manner, the managerial police tasks of personnel staffing, budgeting, intelligence, inspection, planning, training, and public relations must likewise support the line units.

Section 11. Evaluation of Operation . – Police operation is a continuing activity, and therefore, it must be based on valid and practical plans that are constantly made current. Every operation completed shall be followed by a critique and rendition of an after-operation report which shall be properly evaluated.

RULE XVIII – PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY CONTROL OVER LOCAL POLICE FORCES

Section 1. Constabulary Control by Direction of the President . – Upon recommendation of the Police Commission en banc , the President of the Philippines may, when his judgement the public interest will be served thereby, place any city or municipal police force under Constabulary control. In such a case, the provincial commander or his representative or any officer designated by the Chief of Constabulary shall control and direct the movements of the local police force.

Section 2. Assistance to Local Police . – When a local police force is unable to preserve peace and order in its jurisdiction for reasons other than those mentioned in Section 3 of this Rule, the chief of police shall report such fact to the city/municipal mayor. Under circumstances, the local executive may request the Chief of Constabulary or provincial commander to render assistance to the local police force in the maintenance of peace and order. When such assistance is sought for, the provincial commander or any officer designated by the Chief of Constabulary, shall temporarily take command of and direct the operation of the local police force until peaceful conditions are restored.

Section 3. Basis for Placing Local Force Under Constabulary Control . – The existence of any of the following conditions shall be ground for recommending the placing of a local police force under Constabulary control:

a. Gross inefficiency and/or inability of the entire police force to maintain peace and order;

b. Loose discipline of the police force;

c. Laxity or partiality in the enforcement of law;

d. Oppression, grave misconduct, abuse of authority or any other serious neglect of duty by the police force;

e. Disloyalty to the duly constituted authorities or doubtful character of the police superiors or a number of policemen as to endanger the public safety and order in the locality; or,

f. Outlawry or lawlessness endangering or threatening the peace of the municipality or neighboring municipalities or cities, thus requiring an effective employment of the police force in the city or municipality or anywhere in the province, in coordination with the constabulary and/or other local police forces.

Section 4. Duties of Members of the Local Police Force Placed Under Constabulary Control . – When a police force is placed under Constabulary control, the power of direction and control of the movements of the local police force shall be vested in the provincial commander or his representative, or in the officer designated by the Chief of Constabulary General supervision over the police department shall, however, be exercised by the city/municipal mayor concerned. Members of the police force shall therefore:

a. Obey the lawful orders of the provincial commander concerned or his representative on matters pertaining to the proper use of uniform, training, discipline and performance of duty;

b. Execute all lawful orders of the provincial governor, or city/municipal mayor and other in authority, not inconsistent with the orders of the provincial commander or his representative; and,

c. Make all lawful arrests for violators of law and local ordinance.

The power to control and direct the movements of the police force shall include such powers as are necessary to render control real and effective. It shall include the power to make designations -and assignments as to who among the police officers shall hold and constitute the various offices and units of the police force.

Section 5. Lifting of PC Control . – Constabulary control over local police forces shall be lifted on orders of the President of the Philippines, upon recommendation of the Police Commission en banc . This recommendation shall be made as soon, as peace and order are restored or the police force has shown itself to be well-organized, properly disciplined and reliably efficient to enforce law and order within its jurisdiction.

RULE XIX – TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATION

Section 1. – Transportation .and Communication Feeds . – The quality of police service and the success of many police operations depend in the majority of cases on the availability, quality and suitability of police equipment. To increase the effectiveness of its manpower, transportation and communication of the police force should be adequate. The city or municipality shall, depending upon its financial capability, provide the police department with suitable transportation and communication equipment.

Section 2. Police Vehicles . – Depending upon the size of the police department, its vehicle requirement shall consist of the following:

a. Police automobiles or cars . – The cars suited for police work are those with shorter base for greater maneuverability, lighter weight for faster acceleration, and lower cost for economy. Cars used for general and traffic patrol shall be conspicuously marked and shall be furnished with the following accessories: (1) two-way radio; (2) siren; (3) red light blinker; (4) a flood light; and (5) spot light for illuminating alleys, backyards, and other places. Police cars shall be equipped with identical ignition, door, trunk-compartment, and gun-rack locks. To eliminate inconvenience of delivering keys to relieving officers, each police vehicle operator shall be given a set of keys. They shall also be provided with facilities for making notes such as a pad with 5″ x 8″ sheets, a series of properly sized puches, and tacked to the inside of the driver’s compartment just to the left and above the pedal, and a small first-aid kit.

b. Motorcycle. – The two or three-wheeled motorcycle may be used in a police department. The 2-wheeled motorcycle is more hazardous than the 3-wheeled motorcycle which has safer maneuverability in dense traffic and can carry more supplies and equipment. However, the 2-wheeled is more suitable for regular traffic patrol.

c. Bicycles. – Bicycles are suited for silent operation especially at night and may be used for patrol, for serving subpoenas and for other purposes.

d. Other Vehicles . – Other vehicles such as wagons, ambulances, services trucks and the like may be used in the police department, if necessary.

Police vehicles shall be properly used, maintained and pooled m the police garage. They may be replaced by considering three factors, namely (1) efficient and satisfactory operation; (2) appearance; and (3) cost of operation. Police vehicles shall be used for official purposes only.

Section 3. Communication equipment . – Rapid communication enables the immediate redeployment of the force to meet changing conditions and promotes the safety of the individual officers. The chief of police shall determine the communication requirements of his force and shall take steps to procure essential equipment. He shall be concerned with communication between his headquarters and the public, other police agencies, his district stations, and other police buildings, and his force in the field, as well as between several offices and other points within his headquarters. In reaching a decision, he shall call upon specialists to help him in meeting the following communication needs in his department especially in cities:

a. Radio Communication . – The most important equipment for the policeman especially if he is mounted is the radio, and therefore, efforts shall be exerted for its procurement .and installation especially for large communities. The two-way radio installed in cars is prescribed for it increases officer’s safety, permits immediate acknowledgement of broadcasts, and enables the headquarters to receive promptly information needed in directing field operations. The walkie-talkie likewise has advantages in some field operations.

The location of the radio control transmitter shall, as much as possible, be at the police headquarters or purposes of effective operation control and supervision. Procedures for calling cars shall be developed by the chief of police to guide the dispatcher in sending officers on calls.

b. Telephone Communication . – Depending upon the financial capability, conditions and needs of a locality, the installation of street call boxes is encourage because they are great aids in operation, supervision of street force, and detecting and correcting improper practices. Call boxes shall be installed at points selected on the basis of providing maximum use, such as location on a beat boundary where it may be used by two or perhaps more officers and of assuring greater attention to a high-hazard area by placing them on a main thoroughfare or within the vicinity where many complaints originate.

It shall be convenient to have a switchboard installed for inter-office communication and for call boxes in the police headquarters. Each important police office or unit shall be connected with a telephone.

c. Other Communication Equipment . – Other communication equipment such as teletype receivers and transmitters nay be installed in large police departments which shall be located in or adjacent to the records bureau like the radio or telephone communications. For any type of communication equipment, the police must be extra careful for their use, care and maintenance.

RULE XX – JAIL MANAGEMENT

Section 1. Purpose of City and Municipal Jails . – Every city and municipality shall establish and maintain a secured, clean and healthful jail for the custody and safekeeping of city or municipal prisoners, of any fugitive from justice, and of persons detained awaiting investigation or trial and/or transfer to the provincial jail or national penitentiary. Unless the law or ordinance provides otherwise, the city or municipal jail shall be under the direct supervision and control of the police department.

Local jail management shall provide custody of convicted persons aimed at their rehabilitation.

It shall be the obligation of the city and municipal governments to appropriate the necessary funds for the establishment, maintenance and upkeep of city or municipal jails and for the adequate subsistence of the inmates therein.

Section 2. Responsibility for Local Jails . – The chief of shall be responsible for the security and maintenance of the jail. He may take direct charge or assign an officer of non-commissioned officer as jailer or warden in which case he shall inspect the jail at least once a month of oftener to see for himself the conditions obtaining therein. He shall provide adequate training to personnel assigned to jail duties.

Section 3. Security of Jails . – City or municipal jails shall be constructed as to provide adequate security, deter prisoners from escaping, and prevent the surreptitious entry of weapons, narcotics, liquor and other contraband. Proper observation shall be made concerning the control of firearms, keys and tools, the periodic inspection of security facilities, the counting of inmates at least once every shift, and the regulation of visitors.

Section 4. Assignment of Personnel to Jails . – As far as practicable, only personnel who have an aptitude for custodial and security work of those who have undergone the appropriate jail training shall be assigned to duty in city or municipal jails. In no case shall a police officer be assigned to jail duty as a form of punishment or of disciplinary action.

Section 5. Jail Rules and Regulations . – The chief of police shall prepare rules and regulations for the governance of the jail. The rules shall contain provisions relative to the duties of jail personnel, the conduct of prisoners, their security and disposition, the relationship between jail personnel .and prisoners, and other relevant natters. Said rules and regulations shall particularly prohibit any writings or drawings on the walls, floor or ceiling of the jail, or on any furniture or equipment, which are indecent, immoral, or those which enhance or excite criminal leanings and tendencies. A copy of the rules and regulations, and any subsequent amendment thereof, shall be furnished the Police Commission for its information.

Section 6. Receiving Prisoners . – A prisoner committed to any city or municipal jail shall be searched thoroughly for any hidden weapon or contraband. He shall be fingerprinted and properly photographed, with whatever civilian clothes he may have on at the time of admission and in his prison uniform, if any. A copy of his fingerprint card and picture shall be furnished the National Bureau of Investigation for file. A list of all articles taken from him shall be entered in his record and receipted by the jailer taking charge thereof. These articles shall be returned to him upon release or when permission is granted to have them with bin inside the jail, unless they have been disposed of upon his written request or are confiscated by order of proper authorities.

Section 7. Treatment of Prisoners . – Convicted or detention prisoners shall be given humane and considerate, but firm, treatment. Punishment for infractions of jail rules and regulations may be meted out only in accordance with existing laws and rules. Corporal punishment, confinement in dark cell, or any cruel, unusual, inhuman or degrading punishment are absolutely prohibited. In no case shall the use of “third degree” as a means of extracting confessions from prisoners be allowed.

Section 8. Segregation of Prisoners . – The proper segregation of male and female prisoners shall be maintained in all city and municipal jails. If a jail does not have the facilities for the accommodation of female prisoners, arrangements shall be made for their custody by welfare agencies or institutions. As much as possible, segregation shall also be made of the following: (a) sentenced prisoners, (b) detention prisoners, (c) juvenile prisoners, (d) habitual delinquents and recidivists, (e) sexual deviates, (f)physically handicapped prisoners, and (g) those who are mentally abnormal or insane.

Section 9. Accomodation for Prisoners . – All accommodation provided for the use of prisoners, particularly, sleeping accommodations, shall meet all requirements of health, sanitation and safety, due regard being paid to minimum floor space, lighting and ventilation. Sanitary installations shall be adequate to enable every prisoner to comply with the needs of nature when necessary and in a clean and decent manner.

Section 10. Work for Prisoners . – Convicted able-bodied prisoners shall be required to work at least eight hours a day, except on Sunday and legal holidays, provided, however, that in the interest of the service, they may be required to work on expected days. A detention prisoner shall not be required to work but ho may be made to police his cell or the jail area and perform such other labor as nay be deemed necessary for hygienic or sanitary reasons. A female prisoner shall be assigned to work on jobs suitable to her age, sex and physical condition, Any prisoner over sixty (60) years of age may be excused from hard labor. No special treatment that would defeat the objectives of imprisonment shall be accorded to any prisoner.

Section 11. Authority of Prisoner Over Another Prohibited . No prisoner shall be allowed to exercise authority over another. However, technically-skilled prisoners may assist in the vocational and general instruction of other prisoners, provided that this relationship shall not carry with it disciplinary authority.

Section 12. Spiritual and Moral Guidance . –  Spiritual and moral guidance shall be given prisoners provided that their preferences for any religion shall be respected. Any priest, minister or pastor shall be allowed to hold religious service inside the jail for the benefit of prisoners belonging to his religion or to give them counsel and guidance.

Section 13. Rehabilitation of Prisoners . – The chief of police shall develop a massive program of rehabilitating prisoners along the following lines:

a. In large departments especially in cities, a protectory or reception and rehabilitation canter shall be set up for youthful offenders with the help of the Social Welfare Administration, the local officials and professional and civil organizations. The programs in the protectory shall include proper screening or intake work, diagnostic service, case work services, occupational therapy, adult education, cultural and recreational activities and placement.

b. In small departments, the protectory programs shall also be followed but with modifications to meet the needs, conditions, and the availability of appropriate resources.

Section 14. Physical and Health Examinations .-Physical examination and medical treatment “being extended by medical associations, civic organizations or welfare agencies shall be encouraged and made available to prisoners.

Section 15. Release of Prisoners . – Prisoners who have served their sentences, or have been properly bonded, or have been released by competent, authority shall be released promptly and without unreasonable delay. However, before the release of a convicted prisoner who is suffering from venereal or other communicable disease, or is mentally deranged, and who cannot defray the expenses for his treatment, the chief of police shall take the necessary steps to assist him in securing accommodation in an appropriate government institution for follow-up treatment.

Section 16. Records of Prisoners . – The chief of police or the duly designated jailer or warden shall maintain a complete record of prisoners, convicted or under detention, committed to the jail. A monthly-report of the prisoners under custody shall be submitted to the Bureau of Prisons, copy furnished the Police Commission.

RULE XXI – THE POLICE BUILDING

Section 1. Location of the Police Headquarters . building shall be situated as much as practicable at or near the civil center of the community and at the working center of all police activities. When lack of space in the city hall of municipal building necessitates the contraction of the police building elsewhere, as site shall be selected with the following specifications:

a. The ground area shall be adequate to provide parking space for all vehicles owned by the department and the public on police business;

b. It shall be located near the geographic center and population served; and

c. It shall be accessible to the courts, jails, public buildings and to the means of transportation facilities.

Section 2. Guidelines for Design and Constructing Police Buildings . – The police building shall be designed to conform as much as possible to the following:

a. It shall be of strong materials to normally resist earthquake, fire and flood, and similar calamities;

b. It shall be designed to withstand attacks from mobs and dissidents;

c. It shall be designed primarily for utility and secondarily for serviceability and maintenance. The construction materials used shall require as little repair, painting and maintenance as possible;

d. Attention shall be given to acoustics, ventilation and illumination. Adequate ventilation shall be provided in areas not supplied with windows like interrogation rooms, prisons corridors connecting the booking room, line-up room, and the like. Sufficient illumination shall be provided in offices where clerks are on duty throughout the twenty-four hour period;

e. The design of the building shall also provide for future expansion. In this connection, special attention shall be given to partitions that may be readily moved to change the office arrangement, and ample conduit space shall be provided for future telephone, power and communication cable requirements;

f. The number of private offices and small rooms shall be kept to the minimum required for effective operation. They shall be constructed if practicable, of clear glass partitions except those that actually require privacy. Space separation may be effected by use of counters; and

g. The police building shall be designed to protect the public from offensive sights and’ sounds and to lessen the hazards of escape from windows or doors in the transportation of prisoners from the street into the booking room.

Section 3. Guidelines for Flow Plan . – Depending on the size of the community and the facilities required, the headquarters shall be planned to serve the department and the public as efficiently as available funds will permit. In order to accomplish this objective, the plans ‘for the building shall be framed with due regards to the following guides:

a. Adequate space for police functions . – In planning an adequate police headquarters layout, factors like differences in size and organization of departments as well as local prevailing conditions shall be taken into consideration. As far as practicable, the building shall allow sufficient space for the performance of every police function and the following nay be provided:

(1) Complaint desk; (2) Space for each division (records, communications, investigation, patrol, traffic juvenile and vice); (3) Offices for commanding officers; (4) Grime and photographic laboratory; (5) Booking and interrogation rooms; (6) Separate cell blocks for man, women and juvenile prisoners to include toilet and bathing facilities; (7) Garage; (8) Lockers and squad rooms; (9) Separate vault for firearms and evidence; and (10) Ample storage space

b. Combining similar activities . – In a very small department, all police activities can be accommodated in four (4) rooms of the city hall or municipal building, namely; a general office room, private office for the chief, a vault and a cell block, (Plan 1,Figure 1). In a medium-sized department, an additional room can be provided back of the complaint desk to accommodate communications, records and identification activities. (Plan 2, Figure 2). In large departments, the headquarters shall require a building of its own, in which special care shall be taken to combine similar activities in the physical layout. (Plan 3, Figure 3);

c. Inter-communication between units . – Units which have the most frequent need for inter-communication shall be located near each other. The investigation unit shall have an easy access to the records. It shall be possible to route prisoners directly through the booking room, fingerprinting desk, questioning and interrogation room, into the jail. The Office of the Chief of Police shall be strategically located so that the Chief of Police shall be accessible to the commanding officers of each division and the public. The chief and his staff shall also be near the records and communication unit. This can be accomplished by having executive offices near the records and communication, or by unit of pneumatic tubes and inte-communication;

d. Location of complaint and information desk . The complaint and information desk shall be accessible to the public at all times. The traffic division, the Chief’s office, and other office where business is transacted with the public shall be located so that they can be reached without passing through the other portions of the building; and

e. Other factors to be considered . – The precise location, specification, size of rooms, and such requirements shall be decided in the light of individual community necessities and available funds. The organization of the police department is a deciding factor in this respect. A centralized type police organization shall require one type of layout while a decentralized police department using supplemental facilities, such as station houses or precinct headquarters shall require another type of layout. There shall always be a logical grouping of activities to facilitate a normal flow of procedure.

Section 4. Planning for the construction of the police building . – There shall be proper and adequate planning for the police building before actual construction is started. Adequate assistance shall be availed of from local architects and engineers at all stages of the planning. Visits to other police departments in municipalities and cities of comparable size shall be encouraged to get new ideas and wider thoughts on both construction and physical layout. Technical assistance from manufacturers of police equipment like office, telephone, radio, teletype, electrical, air conditioning, ventilation, acoustic and lighting equipments to be used in the building shall be availed of.

[Figure – Typical Floor Plan]

[Plan – 2 – For Medium Size Police Department]

[Plan – 3 – For Large & Separate Police Department]

RULE XXII – POLICE PUBLIC RELATIONS

Section 1. The Major Concern of the Police Today . The major concern of the police today is the restoration of public confidence in the organization. To attain this objective, the police should develop and maintain good relations with the public.

Section 2. What police public Relations Mean . – Police public relations shall mean any or all of the following: (1) the sun total of all the contacts, attitudes, impressions, and opinions that constitute the relationships between the public and the police; (2) a carefully compiled analysis of cause and effect used as guide to proper conduct. In a sense, it is the administrative and operating philosophy of the police force to gain public confidence; and (3) an art and science which deals with the difficult problems on how the police can got along satisfactorily with the public.

Section 3. Foundation of Good Police Public Relations – The foundation of good public relation is good performance by the police of their basic tasks coupled with a wide public acknowledgement and appreciation of their performance. The primary requirements of good police public relations are sound police ethics, high standard of operations, and a sincere desire to serve the public. Police public relations begin at home. Consequently, the first step is to place the police force in its proper perspective through a high sense of DUTY, HONOR, COUNTRY.

Section 4. Principles of Police Public Relations. – Every member of the police force shall adhere to the following principles of police public relations.

a. Public Resentment Must be Avoided . – The police officer shall develop and maintain friendship with the public by this good conduct, fairness and reasonableness, and shall avoid embarrassing, humiliating, annoying, and inconveniencing any individual;

b. Public Good Will Must be Developed . – The police officer shall develop, and maintain friendliness, courtesy, fairness, respect and dignity, shall be willing to assist individuals in the solutions of their problems; and

c. The Public Must be Kept Informed of Regulations and Policies . – The police must inform the public with the regulations and policies of the police force and the reason for their adoption.

Section 5. The Police Public Relations Program and its Aim . – There shall be established in every police force an effective public relations program, the objects of which are to restore public confidence in the police and to obtain continued public understanding, support and cooperation. This program shall include and emphasize, among others, the following:

a. Essential Attributes of an Officer . – The quality of “police service depends primarily upon the character and ability that he shall be selected with maximum care. The following attributes are essential for a good police officer:

(1) Open mindedness – He shall guard against forming opinions in advance of the handling of any complaint and situation;

(2) Understanding – He shall be understanding of the attitude, interest, or problems of the subject or complainant;

(3) Fairness – He shall not be biased in regard to any individual group or situation;

(4). Patience – He must learn how to be patient

(5) Compassion – He shall be compassionate and must feel the unhappiness or suffering of another;

(6) Self-assurance – He must know his job and must know that he knows his job. This springs from an inner knowledge of truth, sincerity, and normal development of personality;

(7) Courtesy – This presupposes an attitude of desiring to please or desiring to serve. The police officer shall practice courtesy at all times without being subservient;

(8) Sincerity – He must be interested in his job and believe in what he is doing. He should desire to see justice done in every case, by protecting the innocent and apprehending the guilty;

(9) Honesty – He shall not steal, cheat or defraud. He shall have a careful regard for the rights of others;

(10) Courage – He shall develop this quality of mind which will enable him to meet danger or opposition with calmness and firmness. He should have the moral courage to say “no” to corrupt and subversive individuals who seek to undermine the efficiency and morale of law enforcement by means of graft and corruption, He should not hesitate to apprehend and/or file charges against all violators of law or ordinance, high or low;

(11) Good Health – He shall maintain good health and should avoid occasions or practices that will endanger the same;

(12) Business-like Manner – He shall be businesslike but not officious in his dealings with people.He should avoid situations or actions that create an adverse impression of himself and the department;

(13) Dedication and Zeal to Serve – He shall maintain an attitude of enthusiasm, dedication, zeal and pride in his work; and

(14) Loyalty – He shall owe his loyalty only to his government, the police service to which he belongs and to the people he has sworn to serve.

b. Personal Appearance and Habits of an Officer . – Every police officer shall present a good picture of himself in public and be conscious of his personal appearance and habits. He shall be aware of, and responsible for, the following:

(1) Uniform and Equipment – He shall wear properly the prescribed uniform which shall always be neat and clean. As parts of the uniform, the badges, ornaments, insignias, shoes and buttons shall be well polished and properly placed. If the performance of duty requires him to wear civilian clothing, he should dress conservatively and in good taste. The clothing should be clean, pressed, and in good repair. He shall use only the regulation weapons, handcuffs, whistles, and related items which shall be properly cleaned and maintained;

(2) Personal Hygiene – He shall appear well groomed always. He shall have his hair neatly trimmed and combed, his face clean and shaved ( no mustache nor beard); his teeth clean; his breath free from offensive odors, his hands clean and free from dirt and grime, his fingernail clean and neatly cut, and his “body free from offensive odors;

(3) Positive and Bearing – He shall walk with a purpose, with poise, and with a military bearing, and by so doing, he will create favorable impression, invite confidence, and command respect;

(4) Personal Habits – He shall develop good personal habits Restless habits such as tapping his finger or foot, whistling or other evidence of nervousness shall be avoided. He shall not permit himself to develop habits as howling and spitting, tobacco chewing and smoking while on duty in a public place. He shall also avoid back slapping, poking the forefinger to the chest while talking, leaning on the shoulders of someone in a group, constant handshaking, loud, rough, boisterous talk and conduct, and standing to close to the person to whom he is talking; and

(5) Private Life of a Police Officer . – He shall set an example for others to follow. He shall set an example for other to follow. He shall practice what he preaches and shall give strict attention to his reputation and conduct, lest he becomes known as an immoral man. He must lead an exemplary life, and must not be quarrelsome.

c. Assisting and Informing the Public. – The police officer shall be on the alert to assist the public in every way possible. He shall be prepared to supply information about the geography of the locality, the principal highways, the direction to nearby towns and cities, location of prominent buildings, parks, schools, hotels mid the schedules and routes of the transportation system. When information is requested, the police officer shall ascertain what is wanted and give a suitable reply in a brief and concise manner with a clear tone of voice. Telephone calls to the police headquarters shall deserve prompt and courteous reply from every police officer. Proper telephone greetings shall precede any conversation. Greetings like, “Police Department, Sgt. Cruz speaking” is most satisfactory for desk officers, and calls received by the other offices in the department, shall be greeted by giving the name of the office followed by the name of the receiver such as “Patrol Division, Patrolman Lopez speaking, good morning, sir.” Correspondence shall likewise deserve prompt and courteous replies. The department or officer concerned shall give due consideration to the form, tone, appearance, and diction of letters or replies;

d. Receiving Complaints and Remarks from the Public . When a citizen calls at the police headquarters or post, or approaches an officer on the street to makes a complaint, he shall be accorded a suitable reception. The officer must adopt an attractive manner; his attitude alert, his face and voice pleasant, and he must appear interested in the subject at hand. He shall not ignore a timid citizen. The officer shall use the common expression of courtesy, such as “sir”, “madam” or “ma’am”. The complainant shall be given ample opportunity to toll his or her story, with the officer assisting with intelligent questions, evidences of sympathy, and assurances of aid. On receiving a report or complaint, and police officer concerned shall not fail to thank the complainant for his kindness and cooperation in directing the attention of the department to the matter, even though the report may appear to be trivial or frivolous. This practice shall also be followed in dealing with unreasonable citizens whose complaints may be the product of their imaginations. He shall act on the report with dispatch and refer to officers concerned if it is beyond his authority to do so. The complainant shall be advised accordingly of the action taken on his or her complaint;

e. Receiving Complaints and Criticisms Against the Police Force . – When individuals come to complain regarding department policies and procedures over which the police officer exercises no control, the complainant shall be referred to the proper authorities for audience or, if permitted, the officer may conduct the complainant immediately to his superior officer. When a complaint is offered in the sincere hope of corrective action, the matter shall be reported to proper authorities, and the said complaint shall be accepted in the spirit it is offered, with graciousness and appreciation, even though the subject matter may not be so important.

A police officer who overhears uncomplimentary conversation about the department or himself, which may or may not be intended for his ears, the officer shall hold his counsel. If he is in a group where the conversation turns to criticism of the police department, police policies, individual members of the force or of the police generally, the officer shall attempt to change the subject of the conversation or shall remain silent and take note of constructive criticisms. He shall not be drawn into a heated argument; he is justified in discussing the matter only when the criticism is based on erroneous information that can easily be corrected. Such incidents shall be reported in detail to his superiors.

Superior officers receiving legitimate complaints shall show tact, skill, patience, and sound judgment and he must maintain a friendly attitude towards the complainant who is normally emotionally upset. It is well, therefor, to place him at his case and allow him to “get it off his chest as soon as possible. The relief thus afforded helps the individual to forget the incident, especially when the superior officer is sympathetic and friendly. When the individual is extremely upset or especially unreasonable in his attitude, the superior officer may provide time to cool off by tactfully arranging for him to return the following day. An investigation of the incident reported or complained of serves as a logical excuse for postponing the interview; it also affords the superior officer an opportunity to learn the police side of the story. It is not ordinarily a good practice to confront the individual with the officer complained against;

f. The Police Buildings and Offices . – The appearance of police buildings and offices influences the attitude of both the police and the public. While the police may have little choice in the location and arrangement of their quarters, they do have the opportunity and the responsibility to maintain them in a clean presentable condition. Once the quarters which include the comfort room are made presentable, constant attention is needed to maintain them in good condition.

The offices shall give a businesslike appearance in their furnishings and in their freedom from trash and miscellaneous unsightly articles. There shall be a place for everything, and everything shall be kept in its place when not in actual use. The tops of the tables and filing cabinets shall be kept free of papers and boxes.

The offices shall be numbered, and a conveniently located directory shall be posted near the entrance to assist individuals in finding offices without inquiry. Posting the name of the officer on his desk is another public convenience.

The rest rooms or toilets shall be kept clean and free from odors. There shall be a satisfactory housekeeping and property management plan;

g. Operating Methods and the Public . – A police department shall not only maintain a high standard of efficiency, but it shall also present an appearance of efficiency. This is created by a businesslike attitude and conduct on the part of the personnel at headquarters and the patrolman on the street. The clerical force shall not be idle nor engage in useless activities. Officers shall not crack jokes nor amuse themselves in the public view. They shall no indulge in loud, boisterous talk nor shall they put their foot on desks or other office furniture.

The officer on the street shall give conscientious attention to his duties. When on foot patrol, he shall neither talk unnecessarily to passers-by, nor linger for a long time in one location. When on mobile patrol, he shall not sit on his parked car but shall at and properly by the side of his car, or patrol the immediate vicinity within call of his radio.

In dealing with an offender, the officer shall handle the situation so diplomatically such that the offender is not unduly embarrassed, yet so firmly as to leave no doubt of his meaning in the mind of the violator. He shall understand that he is not at liberty to penalize, embarrass, irritate, lecture, or scold the offender. His duty consists simply of doing any or all of the three things: (1) inform the violator of his offense, (2) give him a traffic violation receipt, and/or (3) place him under arrest;

k. The Police and the Community . – An effective meaningful and successful public relations program is a continuous day to day process. Every police officer shall endeavor to constantly leave an impression upon the citizenry that honesty, courtesy and dedication are by-words of the police existence. To this end, every police officer shall always demonstrate a strong desire to improve the welfare of the community.

There are many ways in which the police department can improve its relationship with the community. One way to bring a sound atmosphere of understanding between the citizens and the police would be to enlighten them about the activities, programs, and problems of law enforcement. Towards this end, there may be a need of conducting community-police relations programs in the different districts of large cities and communication centers under a special unit of the police department.

In smaller localities, a police advisory council be created to assist the chief of police on youth matters especially in the prevention of juvenile delinquency. Persons selected to compose the committee or council should be prestigious and professional men and women who command the respect of the people. Among the programs to be undertaken by the police advisory council are:

(1) Crime Prevention Program . – At least once a year, every police department shall have an active crime prevention week wherein students from public and private schools are given guided tours of the department.

(2) Speaker Bureau Program . – A group of trained police officers and civilian volunteers shall be made available to address civic, religious, educational, parent-teacher, fraternal, business and military organizations, on the various functions of the police department. They may speak over the radio and community assemblies.

(3) Junior Police Organization . – Large police departments shall have junior police organizations among high school and college students. They can be of tremendous help to the police.

(4) Other Programs . – Other useful program, such as boys and girls scouting, summer capping, police athletic league, and allied activities may be organized if practicable. The idea is to involve more children who will consequently involve their parents in supporting police programs.

Section 6. Responsibility of Setting up Police Public Relations Program . This responsibility shall rest in the chief of police regardless of the size of the police department. There are many other public relations program not mentioned in this Rule which the chief of police may adopt, however, he shall be guided by the practicability and usefulness of the program as well as the capability of the department. The program shall be based upon the ability to create an atmosphere for good government and a high degree of cooperation from the citizens not only in obeying laws and ordinances, but also in extending the necessary cooperation to the police department which is so vital and important in the solution of crimes, apprehension of criminals and the reporting of suspicious characters and circumstances.

Section 7. The Police Ideal . In the final analysis,the public expects that all members of the police force shall be the paragon of virtues, imbued with the highest sense of dedication to duty and possessed of courage, integrity, and sound judgment.

RULE XXIII – GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 1. Applicability of the Manual . – This Manual shall apply to all city and municipal police forces throughout the Philippines.

Section 2. Authority of the Police Commission to Issue Implementing Details . – The Police Commission shall have the authority to issue such further implementing details as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Manual. It shall also have the authority to prescribe ferns for reports, records and such other forms as may be required, and the authority to alter, modify or revise existing forms as may have already been prescribed by this Manual.

Section 3. Status of Chiefs of Police and other police officers appointed by the President . – All chiefs of police and other police officers appointed by the President and confirmed by the Commission on Appointments, or those holding office under permanent appointments, shall continue to enjoy their status as presidential appointees and may be suspended or removed only for cause and by order of the President: Provided, however , That they shall be entitled to the benefits and protection of the Police Act of 1966 insofar as applicable to them; Provided , further , That when so authorized the Police Commission or the Board of Investigators created by the said Act shall investigate administrative cases involving such officers in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the said law and this Police Manual.

Section 4. Prohibitions . – No member of the city or municipal police force shall:

a. Act as bodyguard or security guard for any public official or any person who is a candidate for any elective public office or position within two months immediately preceding any election or within one month thereafter, unless authorized by the Commission on Elections. (See. 23, RA 4886);

b. Solicit, collect, or receive money, sift or anything of value, directly or indirectly, for the benefit of any person or persons, or for any committee or association except on the occasion of a public calamity and such solicitation or collection is authorized by the Social Welfare Administration;

c. Serve as escort or security officer, whether on foot or by motor vehicle, for any private individual regardless of his status in social and religious circles on any occasion; provided that reasonable police escort or protection nay be ordered given by the Chief of Police to any person who needs the same, in which case such special assignment shall be duly recorded in the log book in the office of the chief of police and shall be subject to prior approval by the Police Commission whenever such police escort protection extends beyond seven days, consecutively or otherwise;

d. Act as bodyguard or security guard for the person or property of any public official or private person for a period of more than seven (7) days, whether consecutive or otherwise, without the approval of the Police Commission; and

e. Engage in “moonlighting”. For this purpose, the term “moonlighting” means pursuing or following any calling or occupation, or being engaged in any business other than that of the police service and includes all activities, jobs, work and similar functions performed, engaged in or undertaken, by any member of the police force, in or off-duty hours, with or without compensation, which are inconsistent or incompatible with police duties and functions such as, being a “bouncer”, security guard, driver, bodyguard, confidential agent, watchman, and other occupations of similar nature, in any enterprise or establishment, public or private in nature.

Section 5. Penal Clause . – Any person who, in violation of the provisions of Republic Act No, 4864, and/or Civil Service Rules and Regulations, unduly interferes in the performance of the legitimate functions of law enforcement or that of the Board of Investigations, shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three months nor more than one year and a fine not exceeding one thousand pesos (Sec. 24, RA 4864). Any city or municipal official, who shall violate, ignore or disregard any provision of this Manual may be administratively charged therefor in accordance with applicable laws and civil service rules and regulations.

Section 6. Liability of Appointing Authority . – No person employed in any police force in violation of Republic Act No. 4864 and/or the Civil Service Law, Rules and Regulations shall be entitled to receive pay from the Government; but the appointing authority responsible for such unlawful employment shall be personally liable for the pay that would have accrued had the employment been lawful, and the disbursing officer shall make payment to the employee of such amount from the salary of the officers so liable. (Sec. 43, RA 2260)

Section 7. Rescission Clause . – All executive orders, circulars and rules and regulations now applicable to municipal and city police forces inconsistent with the provisions of this Manual are deemed superseded.

Section 8. Effectivity . – This Manual shall take effect immediately provided, however, that compliance by members of city and municipal police forces with the provisions of Rule XI (Uniforms, Insignia, Arms and Equipment) shall not be mandatory until after two years from its promulgation.

Section 9. Saving Clause . – All administrative cases involving members of the police forces pending before the city or municipal boards, or those with the city or municipal mayors, shall be turned over to the Board of Investigators concerned, and those with the Civil Service Board of Appeals, to the Police Commission within one hundred days, after the publication of this Manual.

All Executive Orders, administrative orders, directives and rules and regulations, inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby rescinded.

This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of December, in the Year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library