MALACAÑANG MANILA

Executive Order No. 127

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 67 DATED MAY 28, 1967, ESTABLISHING A UNIFORM CRIME REPORTING SYSTEM

The third paragraph of Executive Order No. 67 dated May 28, 1967, is hereby amended to read us follows:

“NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E, MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, and upon recommendation of the Inter-Department Committee on the Integration and Coordination of Official Statistics on Crime, do hereby order:

1. All chiefs of city, municipal and municipal district police forces; the Chief of Constabulary; the Director, National Bureau of Investigation; the Chairman, Anti-Smuggling Action Center; the Commissioner of Customs; the Commissioner of Immigration; the Commissioner, Land Transportation Commission; and heads of other national law enforcement agencies shall prepare a report of crimes occurring within their respective areas of operation.

2. The crime report shall be prepared in triplicate on the Nation-Wide Uniform Crime Case Report (copy attached), or on such form as the Inter-Departmental Committee on the Integration and Coordination of Official Statistics on Crime may hereafter prescribe, distributed as follows:

Original copy to the Chief of Constabulary Duplicate copy to the Director, National Bureau of Investigation Triplicate copy to be retained as file copy

3. The Chief of Constabulary shall consolidate and tabulate the reports, which shall be submitted on or before the 15th of every month, and forward the results to the Inter-Departmental Committee on the Integration and Coordination of Official Statistics on Crime, c/o Office of Statistical Coordination and Standards, National Economic Council.

4. The National Bureau of Investigation shall be the final depository of all Nation-Wide Uniform Crime Case Reports.”

The attached form supersedes the report forms prescribed in Executive Order No. 67 and Executive Order No. 113, both series of 1967. (POLCOM F-No. 2, F-No. 3, and F-Nb. 4).

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE J. LEIDO, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.