MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 418

CREATING A GREEN REVOLUTION EXPANDED PROGRAM ACTION COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, there is a need for the Green Revolution Program to continue intensively in order to sustain the gains so far attained both in terms of additional vegetable production and in the rekindling in our people the value of labor;

WHEREAS, the most effective means against spiraling of prices would be increasing local production levels of basic food commodities and their substitutes as well as the production and consumption of supplementary crops, such as root crops and tubers in backyard for home consumption;

WHEREAS, the National Green Revolution Committee with its successful program of promoting backyard vegetable production can effectively implement an expanded program to include other supplementary crops with additional assistance;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby create a Green Revolution Expanded Program Action Committee composed of:

The Committee shall endeavor to enlist the maximum participation of all local government units and the student population of the nation in the performance of this task. In the execution of its program of activities, the Committee shall organize action groups at the provincial, city and municipal level.

On the national level, a coordinating center shall be organized which shall act as the clearing house for all the activities to be undertaken, which shall monitor field operations and centralizing the procurement of needed supplies and materials required by the program. For this purpose, the Committee shall designate an Executive Director for the center to be under the direct supervision of the DND Undersecretary for Home Defense and cooperating agencies shall designate their liaison officers as well as provide the necessary technical personnel that may be needed to be detailed to the center.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call on any and all agencies and instrumentalities of the government for assistance in the performance of its formation.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of July in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1973). [Executive Order Nos. : 366 – 435] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.