MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 281

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION TO REVIEW AND REVISE THE REORGANIZATION PLAN

WHEREAS, the President is required under Section 4 of Republic Act 5435 to submit an integrated reorganization plan to Congress within 40 days after the opening of the regular session in 1971;

WHEREAS, the President is authorized to review and make modifications as necessary in the integrated reorganization plan submitted to him by the Commission on Reorganization;

WHEREAS, it is desirable to maintain the direct participation and involvement of the members of the Commission on Reorganization in the review and revision of the integrated reorganization plan; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide adequate staff and technical support in the preparation of the revised reorganization plan;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Presidential Commission to Review the Integrated Reorganization Plan submitted by the Commission on Reorganization, to be composed of the following:

The Commission shall have the following functions:

1. Make changes and refinements in the reorganization plan as may be found necessary after consultations with and subsequent approval of the President.

2. Prepare the final draft of the revised integrated reorganization plan for submission to Congress after approval by the President, including documentation and other materials in support thereof;

3. Provide the Congressional members of the Commission on Reorganization with such assistance as may be necessary in the presentation of the reorganization plan for consideration by Congress.

4. Undertake informational activities to ensure wider understanding and support of the reorganizational proposals.

The Commission shall have a Technical Staff to be headed by an Executive Director. He shall direct the administrative functions of the Commission and exercise overall supervision over the personnel of the Technical Staff.

The Chairman shall act for the Commission in all administrative matters, including the designation/appointment of the Executive Director and other personnel of the Technical Staff.

The Commission is authorized to secure the services of personnel from other government agencies. The Executive Secretary shall issue the necessary directives to effect the detail of such personnel to the Commission.

The Commission is authorized to disburse and defray all expenses for its operations and avail of funds that shall be provided for it under a special budget in the Office of the President, including compensation of all the regular personnel. The Commission is also authorized to grant to the personnel of the Technical Staff who are on detail from other government offices as well as those who may be on consultancy basis from the private sector, including the members of the Commission honorarium and/or allowances in such reasonable amounts as it may determine.

The Commission shall operate for the period January 1 to March 31, 1971.

All property, equipment and balances of supplies and materials of the Commission on Reorganization are transferred without cost to the Office of the President and made available to the Commission herein created for its use.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.