MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 231

FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 56 DATED DECEMBER 29, 1966, ENTITLED “PROHIBITION TO CARRY FIREARMS OUTSIDE RESIDENCE.”

Executive Order No. 56, dated December 29, 1966, entitled “Prohibition to Carry Firearms Outside Residence” as amended by Executive Order No. 57, dated January 12, 1967, Executive Order No. 82, dated August 14, 1967, and Executive Order No. 86, dated September 22, 1967, is hereby amended to read as follows:

NOW, THEREFORE, in the interest of peace, order and safety, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the authority vested in me by law, do hereby prohibit all persons from carrying their firearms outside of their residence, except the following:

1. Peace officers or persons charged with the duty of preserving peace and order;

2. Military personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, guards in the employment of the Bureau of Prisons, provincial governors, lieutenant governors, provincial treasurers, city and municipal mayors, and guards of provincial prisoners and jails when such firearms are in possession of such officials and public servants for use in the performance of their official duties;

3. The Chairman, Commissioners, department heads, legal officers, investigators, inspectors, agents and chiefs of division of the Police Commission;

4. All reserve officers and enlisted men who go on training during weekends under the training program of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; members of the Barrio Self Defense Units while in the performance of their duties within their respective jurisdictions and while in company of PC personnel engaged in hot pursuit of criminal elements outside their jurisdiction;

5. Persons holding license to possess firearms but without specific permits to carry the same outside of residence who are owners or assignees of motor vehicles for personal or official use may keep their firearms inside their respective motor vehicles while travelling but shall not carry the same outside the motor vehicle except when the firearm is to be returned to the place of residence.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Executive Order Nos. : 141-280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.