MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 79

CREATING THE CENTRAL INSTITUTE FOR THE TRAINING AND RELOCATION OF URBAN SQUATTERS

In order to carry out the provisions or Republic Act 4852, establishing in Sapang Palay, San Jose del Monte, Bulacan, a national center to study and devise solutions to the problems of urban squatting and/or for the training, relocation and rehabilitation of urban squatters, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby establish the following Charter of the national Center:

SECTION 1. The National Center shall be known as the Central Institute for the Training and Relocation of Urban Squatters (CITRUS). This Institute will be under the administrative control and supervision the Social Welfare Administrator.

SEC. 2. The Institute shall have the following powers and functions:

(a) Promote the economic sufficiency and social stability of former urban squatters and existing resident families in the Peoples Homesite and Housing Corporation (PHHC) property at Sapang Palay and formulate a program and proposals for line extension of this project on a nation-wide scale.

(b) Undertake carefully organized research and training programs in coordination with other government or private agencies which are involved in improving patterns of human resettlement and planned social and economic adjustment.

(c) Call upon any government office, agency or official for assistance in its programs or projects.

The Social Welfare Administrator through CITRUS will undertake a training program involving the existing residents of Sapang Palay in the development of human resources and in the establishment of an agricultural cooperative and industrial estate therein, with a view to devising techniques for raising the per capita income of individual families.

SEC. 3. The PHHC shall make available to CITRUS approximately 100 hectares of land for the sole use of CITRUS in carrying out the objectives of the Act. For this purpose, CITRUS may assume the bonded indebtedness of the PHHC corresponding to the prescribed area. The PHHC shall construct such buildings thereon as may be necessary upon the request of the Administrator through a memorandum of agreement.

SEC. 4. The Social Welfare Administrator is hereby empowered to:

(a) Perform all such acts as may be necessary to obtain the objectives of the Institute;

(b) Appoint an Executive Officer of CITRUS and delegate to him the promulgation of such rules and regulations as may be necessary or con   for the proper implementation     intents and purposes of this Executive Order;

(c) Organize such technical, research, clerical and other staffs as may be necessary to assist the Executive Officer in the discharge of his duties under the Act; and

(d) Enter into such contracts as may be necessary for the fulfillment of the objectives of the Act.

SEC. 5. The Social Welfare Administrator may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government for such assistance as may be needed in carrying out the objectives of this Order.

All appointments to the CITRUS staff shall be subject to Civil Service Law, rules and regulations.

SEC. 6. There shall be an advisory Council to assist the Administrator in reviewing and assessing the progress of the work of the Institute, composed of the following and such other members as the Chairman may designate from time to time;

The Advisory Council shall meet regularly at least once every three months and in such special meetings, as may be called by the Chairman.

SEC. 7. The Advisory Council shall take advantage of such international aid and assistance as may be available to promote and extend the objectives of the Institute. Appropriations approved by Congress shall be deemed a counterpart fund in support of any contract of assistance which may be negotiated with the United Nations Special Fund, UN Department of Social and Economic Affairs, UK World Food Program, UNESCO, Agency for International Development, or other similar agencies.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-140]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.