MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 474

CREATING THE AGENCY FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND WELFARE OF MUSLIMS IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government has long exerted efforts to uplift the living conditions of Muslim Filipinos as part of the over-all program of national development;

WHEREAS, the Islamic Conference, an organization of Islamic nations throughout the world, has expressed admiration and appreciation for efforts of the Philippine Government and has offered to assist in these efforts;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government welcomes such assistance and believes that maximum benefit can be obtained from it if handled by one agency exclusively changed to do so;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby create the Agency for the Development and Welfare of Muslims in the Philippines to be given primary responsibility for the disposition of any assistance extended by the Islamic Conference for the benefit of Filipino Muslims.

The Agency for the Development and Welfare of Muslims in the Philippines shall be charged with the following duties and responsibilities.

1. Identify priority areas for the application of assistance from the Islamic Conference.

2. Inform Islamic Conference, through the Department of Foreign Affairs, of these priority areas and the type and extent of assistance needed.

3. Coordinate the mobilization of in-country resources needed for the priority areas identified.

4. Utilize the assistance extended by the Islamic Conference in the priority areas identified, including victims of natural calamities.

5. Monitor the progress of work in these priority areas.

6. Inform the Islamic Conference, through the Department of Foreign Affairs, of the status of relief and development efforts in these priority areas.

The Office of Islamic Affairs in the Department of Foreign Affairs shall serve as the secretariat of this Agency.

The Agency may call upon any and all other agencies of the Government for assistance in the implementation of its duties and responsibilities.

Executive Order No. 432 dated August 30, 1974, is hereby repealed and the Filipino Muslim Welfare and Relief Agency abolished, and the records and files transferred to the Agency for the Development and Welfare of Muslims in the Philippines.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1976). [Executive Order Nos. : 436 – 530 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.