MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 135

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL COORDINATING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

WHEREAS, rapid urban development in the Philippines has created serious social problems such as squatting, slums, substandard housing and acute housing shortages;

WHEREAS, present efforts for meeting urban problems and squatting are carried out by many agencies with little coordination and centralized control for more effectiveness; and

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to bring about better coordination and control in the implementation of housing and urban development programs and policies to cope with the acute housing shortage and squatter problem;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Presidential Coordinating Committee on Housing and Urban Development (PCCHUP) to assume the sole power and responsibility of coordinating the implementation of programs and projects on housing and urban development, composed of the following:

These agencies, and all ether agencies that have something to do with housing and urban development are directed to actively participate and cooperate in the implementation of the Government’s housing and urban development program.

There shall be a Technical Staff, headed by an Action Officer, to provide technical support to the Committee.

Executive Order No. 67, s. 1964, Executive Order No. 68, series of 1964, Administrative Order No. 8, series of 1966, and such other executive and administrative orders, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby revoked.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.