MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 242

CREATING A COOPERATIVES COORDINATING COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, the cooperative movement plays an important role in the stabilization of prices of public commodities; and

WHEREAS, there is need for the different sectors thereof to cooperate with and assist each other, coordinate their activities and establish direct business relationships among themselves so that the movement may most effectively serve producers not only in helping solve the nation’s economic problems but also those of consumers;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Cooperatives Coordinating Committee composed of the following:

Monico Yadao President, Filipino Cooperative Wholesale Society

Eliseo Ocampo General Manager, Greater Manila Terminal Food Market

Isidro T. Lopez Director, Cooperatives Administration Office

Amado A. Lansang Assistant Administrator Agricultural Credit Administration

Diosdado Mangahas Manager, Grains Marketing Cooperative of the Philippines

Luciano Lactao Executive Secretary, Agricultural Cooperative League of the Philippines

Salvador Agbayani President, Philippine Cooperative Credit Union League

Ernesto B. Santos Manager, Sugar Producers Cooperative Marketing Association

Bienvenido P. Faustino General Manager, Central Cooperative Exchange

Irlando L. Kapaw-an Manager, Bisayas Deepsea Fish Producers Cooperative Marketing Association

Clemente Torso, Jr. Director, Cooperative Development Task Force, National Food and Agriculture Council

The Committee shall elect from among themselves a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman and such other officers as may be deemed proper and necessary, as well as create sub-committees.

The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. Determine the prime commodity requirements or the different cooperatives and their members, so that necessary measures may be taken to fill up these requirements, to the end that prices of these prime commodities will not unreasonably rise beyond the reach of the consuming members of cooperatives.

2. Determine the essential producers’ items that the different cooperatives and their members require so that measures for their procurement at reasonable cost may be recommended to the President.

3. Devise a system of business relationships between the agricultural and the non-agricultural cooperative sectors; the former supplying the agricultural produce requirements of the latter which shall supply the prime consumers’ items needed by the former, thereby eliminating unnecessary middlemen in the process.

4. Coordinate the implementation of the measures devised to affect the foregoing objectives.

The Rice and Corn Production Coordinating Council (National Food and Agriculture Council) shall provide the Secretariat, to be headed by the Action Officer, to backstaff the Committee.

The Committee shall periodically submit its findings and recommendations to the President of the Philippines and shall appraise the Price Control Council of the same.

The Committee shall meet regularly once a month at the call of the chairman for the purpose of discharging its functions.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for technical assistance, facilities and equipment as it may need in discharging its duties.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) PONCIANO G. A. MATHAY Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Executive Order Nos. : 141-280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.