MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 72

CREATING THE NORTHERN MINDANAO DEVELOPMENT PLANNING BOARD.

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law and with the end in view of accelerating the economic progress of the provinces and chartered cities comprising Northern Mindanao, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby create the Northern Mindanao Development Planning Board which shall conduct scientific and systematic surveys of the assets and potentialities of the Northern Mindanao Region, plan its development, and pool the resources of the provinces and chartered cities thereof for the implementation of programs to enhance the economic, social, industrial and commercial development and the general welfare of the region and its people.

The Board shall have the following powers and functions:

1. To act as the technical arm of the Northern Mindanao Provincial and City Executives on matters concerning regional planning;

2, To receive, screen and study such matters as may be submitted or referred to it by the various governmental agencies concerned with the development of the Northern Mindanao region or by the provincial and city planning boards;

3. To formulate such guidelines, policies, objectives, requirements or conditions for the effective exercise of the Board in regard to the various development programs with the end in view of effecting an integrated and systematic coordination of plans and activities in furtherance of the regional socio-economic development programs;

4. To make recommendations to the President of the Philippines and other entities on any matter concerning the Northern Mindanao planning on affecting the plans and activities thereof;

5. To advise or assist the local planning boards within the region on phases of organization or operation or in any other matter referred to it by such boards;

6. To enlist and accept such technical assistance or financial support an it may deem essential to the proper discharge of its tasks; and

7. To perform such other functions as may be directed by the President of the Philippines.

The Board, in the pursuit of its objectives, shall coordinate with the Mindanao Development Authority created under Republic Act. No. 3034 and the Committee on Regional Planning created under Administrative Order No. 123 dated May 6, 1965. All expenses necessary for the operations and projects of the Northern Mindanao Development Planning Board shall be for the account of the member provinces and chartered cities unless otherwise provided for by law.

The Board shall be composed of the Governors of the Provinces of Agusan, Bukidnon, Camiguin Sub-province, Lanao del Norte, Lanao del Sur, Misamis Occidental, Misamis Oriental, Surigao del Norte, Zamboanga del Norte and the Mayors of the Cities of Butuan, Cagayan de Oro, Dapitan, Gingoog, Iligan, Marawi, and Ozamis. They shall elect a Chairman, two Vice-Chairman, Treasurer, Auditor and Public Relation Officer from among themselves. The Secretary of the Board shall be the Regional Director of the VI CD Region of the Presidential Arm on Community Development.

All departments, offices, bureaus, agencies, and other government entities shall render assistance to and coordinate with the Northern Mindanao Development Planning Board on matters affecting the development of the region. In case of conflict on such matters between the former end the latter, the same shall be submitted to the President of the Philippines for decision.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE J. LEIDO, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.