MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 56

PROHIBITION TO CARRY FIREARMS OUTSIDE RESIDENCE

WHEREAS, it is necessary for the interest of peace and order, that carrying of firearms outside residence be further regulated;

WHEREAS, the only prohibition against the carrying of firearms outside residence is as prescribed by Executive Order No. 290, as extended indefinitely by Executive Order No. 296, both series of 1949; and

WHEREAS, in the interest of a more effective law-enforcement, it becomes necessary to reemphasize the ban on carrying of firearms outside residence;

NOW, THEREFORE, in the interest of peace, public order, and safety, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the authority vested in me by law, do hereby prohibit all persons from carrying their firearms outside of their residence, except the following:

1. Peace officers or persons charged with the duty of preserving peace and order; and

2. Military personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, guards in the employment of the Bureau of Prisons, Provincial governors, lieutenant governors, provincial treasurers, city and municipal mayors, and guards of provincial prisoners and jails, when such firearms are in possession of such officials and public servants for use in the performance of their official duties.

The Chief of Constabulary may, however, upon proper application and valid justification, issue permits to carry firearms outside of residence to the following:

1. Merchants, cashiers, and disbursing officers, incident to their travel with large sums of money in the course of specific duties for every specific periods or travel only;

2. Duly appointed security guards of licensed security agencies, private firms, government bureaus and offices, and/or government-owned or controlled corporations during their travels from office or armory to the place of duty, while guarding and while returning     therefrom;

3. Government employees charged with the enforcement of specific laws while in the actual performance of their duties as such;

4. Military personnel of the U.S. Armed Forces when on duty “Off-Base”; and,

5. Sportsmen with valid hunting-licenses while engaged in such activity or members of gun clubs while on target practice or competition.

6. Any person who for other compelling reasons may be authorized by the Chief of Constabulary to carry firearms outside of residence.

Henceforth, the requirement that no licensed firearms may be carried outside of the owners’ residence is made a condition in the granting of a license to possess firearms. Non-compliance with this requirement shall be a ground fur revocation or cancellation of the license. Firearms carried outside of residence without a special permit shall be taken up for deposit by the apprehending officer and turned over fed to the nearest PC unit and there held until the owner show cause why his license should not be revoked.

All Executive Orders, administrative orders or directive inconsistent with this Executive Or­der are hereby rescinded.

This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.