MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 600

CREATING A MANAGEMENT COORDINATING BOARD TO COORDINATE, OVERSEE AND MONITOR THE THIRD URBAN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government seeks to answer the perennial problems on shelter, infrastructure, livelihood and sanitation besetting the residents of the Metropolitan Manila Area;

WHEREAS, as a solution to these problems, the government had negotiated and recently, concluded with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) a loan package agreement to finance priority development projects known as “The Third Urban Development Project”;

WHEREAS, the Project, consisting of six (6) major program components namely: 1) The Zonal Improvement Program (ZIP); 2) the Metro Manila Infrastructure, Utilities and Engineering Project (MMINUTE); 3) Sites and Services; 4) Solid Waste Improvement Program (SWIP); 5) Livelihood; and 6) Technical Assistance, are to be implemented by various government agencies and instrumentalities;

WHEREAS, there is a need for a central coordinating body which shall oversee, monitor and coordinate the activities of various agencies responsible for the implementation of said programs in order that they may be executed in accordance with the conditions/procedures prescribed in the negotiated loan document and also, aligned with the over-all national development plans and priorities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. – Creation of the Management Coordinating Board . – The Management Coordinating Board hereinafter referred to as the “Board” is hereby created under the auspices of the Metropolitan Manila Commission;

SEC. 2. – Organization . – The Board shall be composed of the following representatives of the participating agencies/instrumentalities:

The Governor of Metropolitan Manila shall act as the Chairman/Over-all Coordinator of the Board. In her absence, the Vice Governor shall act in her stead.

SEC. 3. Functions of the Board . – The Board shall act as the central coordinating body in the implementation of the Third Urban Development Project. As such, it shall assist and coordinate the activities of the various agencies/instrumentalities principally responsible for the formulation and execution of the basic needs, employment, shelter and other related programs.

More specifically, it will undertake a periodic review of the work progress of the programs being implemented by the various involved agencies to ensure that they are executed in a timely and well-synchronized manner; probe forum for the evaluation of policy issues and constraints common to the involved agencies; review and consolidate annual and three-year budgets prepared by the agencies in terms of scale, phasing, funding requirements, compatibility between related programs and consistency with the over-all objectives of the Project and the Capital Investment Folio (CIF) for Metro Manila.

SEC. 4. The Technical Secretariat . – The Technical Secretariat shall be composed of the Assistant for Finance/Planning, Metropolitan Manila Commission, the Head, Central Monitoring Unit, Office of the Vice Governor, MMC; and the heads of the program offices of the different participating lead agencies.

SEC. 5. Functions of the Technical Secretariat . – The Technical Secretariat shall provide administrative and technical support to the Board by providing a forum for discussion and resolution of technical issues arising from the operations of the implementing agencies; prepare reports particularly on such matters as may be required by the Board and/or the agencies.

For purposes of monitoring the financial and physical progress of the project, it shall establish administrative and financial working unit and operate an accounting and monitoring system.

SEC. 6. Powers . – In order to discharge effectively the functions appertaining to the Board and also ensure timely completion of the programs involved, the Governor, or in her absence the Vice-Governor, as Board Chairman/Over-all Coordinator, and the heads of the participating lead agencies such as the Ministry of Human Settlements, National Housing Authority, Ministry of Public Works, Metropolitan Manila Commission and Technology Resource Center shall, insofar as their respective programs are concerned, be authorized to:

a) Hire/appoint/assign necessary staff personnel and consultants on detail/contractual/casual basis. Appointments/Hiring of staff personnel/consultants shall be subject to the requirements and restrictions of the Civil Service Law and the policies, rules and regulations on position classification and salary standardization.

b) Authorized reimbursement of transportation/representation and other expenses and/or honoraria to each staff/detailed personnel but not exceeding P1,000 per month, subject to auditing and accounting requirements.

c) Call on assistance of concerned national and local agencies and units.

d) Secure the cooperation of the Ministries of Economic Planning (NEDA), Budget and Finance in the preparation of the budget program and the provision of necessary funds.

e) Issue the detailed implementing rules, regulations and policies for the effective implementation of the programs.

SEC. 7. Appropriation . – The Board shall have an annual appropriation of Five Million Pesos starting CY 1980 chargeable against the Foreign Assisted Projects Support Fund or from any other funds of the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated. Additional fund requirements shall be obtained from contributions/donations by MMC and other government corporations involved in the project.

SEC. 8. Repealing Clause . – Any provision of existing laws, rules, regulations or issuances that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order, are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SEC. 9. Effectivity . – This Order shall take effect upon approval.

Done in the City of Manila this 14th day of June, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Executive Order Nos. : 531-605]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.