MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 121

CREATING PROVINCIAL DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEES

WHEREAS, there is need to foster the accelerated and balanced development of all provinces within the contest of national plans and policies for social and economic development; and

WHEREAS, to achieve this end, there is necessity to plan, coordinate and integrate national as well as local efforts towards this end;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create PROVINCIAL DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEES which shall conduct scientific and systematic surveys of the assets and potentialities of the province, plan its development, and pool the resources thereof for the implementation of programs to enhance the economic, social, industrial and commercial development and the general welfare of the province and its people.

The Committee shall be composed of the Governor, as Chairman; and the heads of government offices, agencies and entities, including representatives from various organizations in the province having to do with its economic and social development, as members.

The Committee shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

a. Formulate an integrated and realistic development plan for the province in accordance with the approved national development plan;

b. Set targets, establish priorities, formulate programs and develop projects to satisfy the urgent requirements of the province;

c. Formulate guidelines for the systematic and effective coordination of project implementation activities;

d. Coordinate and integrate the diverse efforts of the various public and private entities directly engaged in implementing plans and projects leading to the rapid socio-economic growth of the area;

e. Make such recommendations to the President on any matter concerning provincial planning or affecting the plans or activities thereof;

f. Enlist and accept such technical assistance or financial support as it may deem essential to the proper discharge of its tasks; and

g. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President.

The Committee is hereby authorized to create or designate such sub-committees within the province as may be necessary to assist it in the discharge of its functions.

All expenses necessary for the operations and projects of the Committee shall be for the account of member agencies or offices unless otherwise provided by law.

All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby directed to cooperate with and assist the Committee in the prompt accomplishment of its responsibilities.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library