MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 179

ORGANIZING THE RESERVE AIRLIFT AND TACTICAL SUPPORT SERVICE IN THE PHILIPPINE AIR FORCE AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the promotion of aviation is vital to the national defense and internal security of the country;

WHEREAS, the advancement of aeronautical science and technology will hasten economic development through increased manpower skills and communication services;

WHEREAS, responsible elements of the nation have manifested their willingness to help the government in arousing the air consciousness of the people and have volunteered to assist in the program of aviation education and training to qualified and interested citizens;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Air Force, aside from its primary function in air defense, plays a vital role in the advancement of aviation in the country and in arousing air consciousness among the people, particularly the youth of the land;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Section 32 of the National Defense Act and Section 19 of Executive Order No. 389, dated December 23, 1950, do hereby order the organization of a unit in the Philippine Air Force under the administration, supervision and control of the Commanding General, Philippine Air Force, to be known as the Reserve Airlift and Tactical Support Service which shall have the following functions:

a. To provide a reservoir of qualified airmen, technicians and aviation material and facilities from which the government may readily draw during peace or wartime emergencies;

b. To promote national enthusiasm in aviation, particularly among the youth of the land;

c. To encourage and provide qualified Filipino civilians such resources, incentives, or services for the development of aviation throughout the length and breadth of the archipelago; and

d. To assist and cooperate with or otherwise provide effective assistance to various agencies of the government in the interest of national welfare and security.

The Chief of Staff, AFP, shall, with the approval of the Secretary of National Defense, issue rules and regulations to implement this Order.

All Executive Orders in conflict herewith are hereby revoked or amended accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 179, April 24, 1969