MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 989

FURTHER STRENGTHENING THE EXPORT PROMOTION PROGRAM THROUGH THE INSTITUTIONALIZATION OF PHILIPPINE TRADE EXHIBITION CENTER

WHEREAS, primary considerations in the development of the Philippine economy are the upgrading of the quality and increasing domestic and international trade in Philippine manufactured products; and

WHEREAS, the Ministry of Trade and Industry is implementing programs for the improvement of the quality of locally manufactured products through raw material sourcing, technical assistance rendered by product specialist consultancies, marketing research, as well as generating foreign exchange income by increasing trade in locally made goods in both domestic and international markets; and

WHEREAS, the National Food Authority presently operates the Philippine Trade Exhibits, with facilities especially equipped for the holding of trade exhibitions for Philippine manufactured goods; and

WHEREAS, the close coordination of the activities of the Ministry of Trade and Industry and the National Food Authority in projects designed for research, development and marketing of locally manufactured goods, especially in the exhibition of these products to the general public is best attained through the institutionalization of Philippine trade exhibits; and

WHEREAS, the Development Bank of the Philippines, Central Bank, Land Bank, Philippine National Bank and the Government Service Insurance System have provided valuable contributions to the Philippine Trade Exhibits, the programs implemented for the development of trade in locally manufactured products; and

WHEREAS, the Center for International Trade Expositions and Missions Inc., an agency of the Ministry of Trade and Industry, is charged with the implementation of the Ministry’s programs above-described, more specifically by conducting domestic and international trade expositions, selling missions, market encounters and similar such activities and that said corporation has specially qualified personnel for the implementation of such projects; and

WHEREAS, the use of the corporate vehicle is an efficient and effective mode for the implementation of the government’s broad and extensive policies and projects for the development of locally manufactured goods and the increase in domestic and international trade thereof; and

WHEREAS, the institutionalization of Philippine Trade Exhibits through the formation of a corporation dedicated to the implementation of the foregoing government policies and programs will achieve the expeditious and cost effective implementation of these policies and programs;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created a PHILIPPINE TRADE EXHIBITION CENTER, which shall institutionalize the holding of trade exhibits for the promotion of locally manufactured products and implement projects designed to upgrade the quality of such products to international standards, coordinate raw material sourcing, develop markets therefor and provide assistance to Philippine manufacturers in general.

SEC. 2. Existing facilities of the Philippine Trade Exhibits located at Roxas Boulevard, Pasay City, Metro Manila, are hereby transferred to, and shall be the capital/equity contribution of the National Food Authority; the land-site of the Philippine Trade Center is hereby transferred to, and shall be part of the capital of the PHILIPPINE TRADE EXHIBITION CENTER, in consideration for which the government agencies in whose name the land-site is registered shall receive, as the other capital contributors, corresponding shares of stock.

However, no obligation pertaining to the land-site and facilities transferred by virtue of this provision shall accrue to or become the liability of the PHILIPPINE TRADE EXHIBITION CENTER.

The Ministry of Trade and Industry shall provide the initial operating capital to the PHILIPPINE TRADE EXHIBITION CENTER. For this purpose, the sum of SIXTEEN MILLION PESOS (P16 , 000,000.00) from the Garments and Textile Export Board’s Special Account No. 151 is hereby transferred to the Center as a reimbursable advance fund for construction, facility improvements and acquisition of equipment and the Budget Minister is directed to effect is immediate release.

The capitalization of the Center shall be determined by its Board of Governors.

SEC. 3. The Board of Governors of the PHILIPPINE TRADE EXHIBITION CENTER shall be composed of the following:

1) The Minister of Human Settlements as Chairman,

2) The Minister of Trade and Industry as Vice Chairman,

3) The Administrator of the National Food Authority,

4) The Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines,

5) The President of the Philippine National Bank,

6) The President of the Land Bank of the Philippines,

7) The President and General Manager of the Government Service Insurance System,

8) The Administrator of the Social Security System, and

9) A representative from the Private Sector to be appointed by the President of the Philippines.

SEC. 4. The Board of Governors shall be the central policy-making body of the PHILIPPINE TRADE EXHIBITION CENTER. It shall formulate such rules and regulations to govern its proceedings and those for the management of the Center.

SEC. 5. The PHILIPPINE TRADE EXHIBITION CENTER shall be a corporate entity owned by the Philippine Government, attached to the Ministry of Trade and Industry.

SEC. 6. The Center for International Trade Expositions and Missions, Inc. (CITEM), an agency of the Ministry of Trade and Industry, shall undertake the day-to-day management and operations of the Center.

SEC. 7. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 10th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.