MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 730

CREATING THE BOARD OF GENERALS IN THE ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES

By virtue of the power vested in me by Section 22 (1) of the National Defense Act, as amended, I, Ferdinand E. Marcos, President of the Philippines, do hereby create the Board of Generals of the Armed Forces of the Philippines composed of the following officers:

Based upon the number of promotion vacancies declared by the Minister of National Defense, in the grades of colonel and brigadier general, respectively, or their Navy equivalents, the Board of Generals shall pass upon the recommendation for the promotion to Colonel and Brigadier General of the Major/Technical Services based on the criteria that shall be set forth by the Board covering performance, leadership, and managerial or technical ability desired or every recommendee; provided that, before being eligible for promotion to colonel or brigadier general, or their Navy equivalents, an officer must have completed at least one year in the permanent grade of lieutenant colonel or colonel, or their Navy equivalents, must have no pending case and financial or property accountabilities, must be physically fit for general military service, must be GSG eligible or its equivalent as prescribed by existing regulations, and must satisfy any such other requirement that the Board may prescribe.

The Board of Generals shall assist the Minister of National Defense in the latter’s discharge of his responsibilities under Section 8 of Republic Act No. 291, as amended.

The Board of Generals shall submit the list of “best qualified” officers (as the terms is contemplated in Section 8, RA 291, as amended) to the Minister of National Defense who may recommend to the President such list for appointment.

The Board of Generals may promulgate such rules and procedures, as necessary, to assist in the selection of the “best qualified officer” which may include, but not limited to, the creation of subordinate boards.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of September in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen hundred and eighty one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 706 – 780]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.