MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 321

CREATING A NATIONAL FORESTRY EXTENSION ADVISORY BOARD CHARGED WITH RESPONSIBILITY OF PLANNING AND COORDINATING THE FOREST EXTENSION PROGRAM OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT AND ITS INSTRUMENTALITIES

WHEREAS, the College of Forestry, University of the Philippines, has been designated under Republic Act No. 3523 as the central coordinating agency to develop and implement the forestry extension program in close cooperation with established forestry and information organizations of the government;

WHEREAS, the success of the nationwide forestry extension program envisioned in the said Act depends upon the harmonious and coordinated action of all forestry agencies in the government and other entities and organizations concerned with the protection and conservation of forest resources and wildlife;

WHEREAS, to carry out this forestry extension program on a national scale, the organization of an advisory body for purposes of coordination is necessary;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E, MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby create a national forestry extension advisory board composed of the following:

The Board is empowered to create such subcommittees as maybe necessary and to request the heads of private organizations like the Philippine National Union of Forestry Students, Boy Scouts of the Philippines, the Girl Scouts of the Philippines, the Rotary and Lions Clubs to attend meetings of the Board when, in the opinion of the Chairman, it is proper and necessary.

The National Forestry Extension Advisory Board shall advise the Dean, UP College of Forestry, on policies, plans, programs, etc., concerning public information and education in forestry, and on the manner and extent of cooperation and responsibilities that each respective office and agency will give and assume in the promotion or implementation of specific plans and projects concerning forest extension.

The Board shall convene as frequently as necessary to discharge its responsibilities.

In case a member of the Board is absent, he is empowered to send his representative to act in his stead.

The Board or any subcommittee is hereby authorized to secure data and information directly from all government offices, agencies, corporations and entities and from private organizations and to consult the respective officials and personnel thereof on matters related to its functions.

All government offices, agencies and corporations are hereby enjoined to render full support and cooperation to the Board in the discharge of its functions.

All orders, directive, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

This order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 321, May 31, 1971