MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 129

PROVIDING RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OFFICIAL TRAVEL ABROAD OF OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE GOVERNMENT, BOTH NATIONAL AND LOCAL, INCLUDING GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS, AND PRESCRIBING RATES OF ALLOWANCES AND OTHER EXPENSES THEREFOR

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby promulgate the following rules and regulations governing official travel abroad of officials and employees of the government, both national and local, including government-owned or controlled corporations, and prescribing the rates of allowances and other expenses therefor.

TITLE I – Scholarships, Fellowships, and Training or Study Grants

SECTION 1. Approval by the Special Committee on Scholarships . – Official travel abroad of government officials and employees for the purposes herein below enumerated shall be subject to the approval of the Special Committee on Scholarships created under the Cabinet resolution of June 6, 1956, composed of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, as Chairman, and the Secretary of Education, the Secretary of Finance, the Commissioner of the Budget, the Chairman of the National Economic Council, and the Executive Secretary, as Members, under such rules and guidelines as it may promulgate with the approval of the Office of the President. The chairman and members of the Committee may designate qualified and competent representatives to act in their stead. The said purposes, in the consideration of which the Committee shall be guided by declarations of policies that may be issued from time to time by the Office of the President, are as follows:

(a) To accept in the interest of the public service and in the fields of study or work allied to their official duties —

(1) Scholarships, fellowships, and training or study grants secured, arranged, offered, or sponsored by the Philippine Government or any of its instrumentalities;

(2) Scholarships, fellowships, and training or study grants from outstanding foreign universities or institutions upon recommendation of the department head concerned;

(3) Scholarships, fellowships, training or study grants, and such other offers from outstanding foundations and scholarship programs as the Rockfeller Foundation, the Guggenheim Foundation, the Barbour Scholarship, the Carnegie Foundation, the Ford Foundation, the Asia Foundation, and the Russel Sage Foundation.

(b) To attend and/or undertake student seminars and workshops, on-the-job training, ad hoc studies, or observation trips in connection with scholarships, fellowships, or training or study grants abroad.

SECTION 2. Application for extension . – Applications for extension of scholarships, fellowships, or training or study grants, where recommended by the training officer in the country of training, shall be considered by the Special Committee on Scholarships if also recommended by the Department head concerned and submitted within a reasonable time before the expiration of the period originally authorized.

SECTION 3. Physical examination . – Each applicant selected for scholarship, fellowship, or training or study grant shall be required to undergo a thorough and complete physical examination by the Department of Health or any other government health or medical unit adequately equipped for the purpose. Applicants possessing such symptoms of disease as might affect their usefulness as students or trainees shall be rejected.

SECTION 4. Salary . – All travels abroad under the grants mentioned in sections one and two shall be with salary unless the employment of substitutes is imperative and no savings or other funds are available for the payment of the salaries of the substitutes.

SECTION 5. Living allowance and per diem . – The grantee or trainee, irrespective of his official rank, shall be entitled to a monthly stipend or living allowance for the duration of the training, including travel time as defined under Section 20 hereof, at rates not exceeding the following:

In cases of ad hoc studies or observation trips of not more than thirty (30) days in connection with the training, scholarship, or fellowship, the grantee or trainee shall be entitled to such per diem as may be authorized by the Special Committee on Scholarships, but not exceeding $15.00. Should said ad hoc studies or observations be at the same place for more than thirty (30) days, the grantee or trainee shall receive, instead, the monthly allowance herein provided, effective as of the commencement of said studies or trips.

Where the study or training program itself involves travel from station to station, the grantee or trainee shall be on travel status and shall be entitled to per diems or living allowance, as the case may be, in accordance with the next preceding paragraph, provided that the travel status shall not be more than thirty (30) days within a period of one (1) year. Travel status in excess of thirty (30) days shall be subject to approval by the Special Committee on Scholarships.

SECTION 6. Transportation . – The grantee or trainee shall be entitled to transportation next below the first class: Provided , That in case the host country or sponsoring organization or agency provides a lower class of transportation, the grantee or trainee concerned may avail himself of the class of transportation herein authorized, the additional cost to be borne by the office concerned if funds are available therefor.

SECTION 7. Clothing allowance . – The grantee or trainee shall be entitled to clothing allowance of not more than $200.00, if in the place of study or training abroad normal Philippine clothing is inadequate. In cases where normal Philippine clothing is adequate, the grantee or trainee shall be entitled to a clothing allowance of $100 during the first twelve months, and an additional $50 during the next twelve months or a portion thereof.

SECTION 8. Tuition and matriculation fees, books and supplies . – When the grant does not so provide, the grantee or trainee shall be entitled to tuition and matriculation fees, as well as books and supplies which are certified to by the school authorities as necessary for his studies. The amount to be granted for books and supplies shall not exceed $150.00 per year.

SECTION 9. Medical and dental care . – Where the grant does not so provide, the grantee or trainee shall be entitled, during his stay abroad, to a reasonable allowance for medical care and hospitalization if the illness is contracted in line of duty. If a grantee or trainee becomes seriously ill and his recovery cannot be expected within a reasonable time, he shall be returned home as soon as his physical condition permits. Allowance for dental care shall be only for needed ordinary treatment, but shall not include dentures, bridges, and other such services.

SECTION 10. Submission of transcript of grades and report . – Every grantee of scholarship or fellowship shall at the close of each quarter, term or semester, submit to the head of his office and the Special Committee on Scholarships official transcripts of the grades received by him, or certificates of performance or their equivalent. Upon the termination of the scholarship, fellowship, training, or observation, and within sixty (60) days after the return to duty of the grantee or trainee, he shall submit a report on his studies, training, and/or observations to the head of his office, a copy each thereof to be furnished the department head concerned and the Special Committee on Scholarships. Where a final travel expense voucher is presented, a copy of the report shall also be submitted therewith.

SECTION 11. Cancellation of scholarship, fellowship, or training or study grant . – Failure of a grantee or trainee to keep up with the necessary standards of scholarship or accomplishment, or to live up to the terms and conditions of his grant, shall be sufficient cause for cancelling his scholarship, fellowship, or training or study grant and for his recall. Should failure in any of the cases mentioned in the next preceding sentence be due to his own fault or willful neglect, he shall refund all expenses in accordance with the provisions of Section 12 hereof.

SECTION 12. Obligations of a grantee or trainee . – In consideration of his acceptance of a scholarship, fellowship, or training or study grant pursuant to the provisions of this Order, the grantee or trainee binds himself to the following conditions:

(a) To keep up with the necessary standards of scholarship or accomplishment;

(b) To live up to the terms and conditions of his grant;

(c) To conduct himself in such a manner as not to bring disgrace or dishonor to himself or to his country;

(d) To return immediately upon the termination of his scholarship, fellowship, or training or study grant;

(e) To serve the office which sends him abroad, or any other government office or instrumentality as the exigencies of the service may require, along the field of his specialization or training, for a period of not less than two (2) years for every year of his fellowship or training, or a fraction thereof not less than two (2) months. Where the scholarship, fellowship, or training is for a period of less than two (2) months, the service shall not be less than one (1) year;

(f) To refund in full to the financing agency or office of the Philippine Government such amount or amounts as may have been defrayed for his transportation, salary, allowances and other expenses incident to his scholarship, fellowship, or training or study grant for —

(1) failure to render, in full or in part, the required length of service referred to in subparagraph (e) above on account of voluntary resignation, retirement, separation from the service through his own fault, or other causes within his control; or

(2) his having been recalled following cancellation of his scholarship, fellowship, or training or study grant due to his own fault or willful neglect pursuant to Section 11; or

(3) violation of any provisions of this Order.

The foregoing conditions shall be embodied in a statement, which the grantee or trainee shall be required to sign before departure, acknowledging that he understands and accepts the same, although failure to sign such a statement shall not in any way affect his obligations under this Section.

SECTION 13. Status of grantee or trainee . – Any grantee or trainee under this Title shall be on full time study status to enable him to take full advantage of the opportunity to acquire knowledge and/or skill for the benefit of improved public service. As such he shall not be given nor shall he accept any other assignment or be entitled to any emoluments, allowances or privileges other than those authorized for the scholarship by the Committee.

TITLE II.- Conferences, Special Missions, and Other Non-Study Trips

SECTION 14. Approval of the President . – All official travels abroad other than those embraced in Title I shall be subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines. Heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus, offices and agencies are hereby enjoined to propose or recommend only those trips which are urgent and extremely necessary, will involve the minimum in expenditure, and expected to bring immediate benefit to the country. Travels and assignments under this Title shall include the following purposes:

(a) To attend conferences or seminars sponsored by foreign governments or international government organizations to which the Philippine Government is committed or invited to send representatives or participants;

(b) To attend conferences or seminars sponsored by private organizations, whether international or not, invitations to which have been sent through their respective governments to the Philippine Government;

(c) To conduct examination or investigation of Philippine Government agencies or affairs;

(d) To undertake any other official mission which cannot be assigned to any other Philippine Government official or officials already abroad.

SECTION 15. Transportation . – In case officials and employees authorized to travel abroad under this Title are not provided with transportation by the host country or sponsoring organization or agency, they shall be allowed official transportation which shall be of the economy class unless otherwise specified in the travel authority.

SECTION 16. Clothing allowance and per diem . – Officials and employees authorized to travel abroad under this Title shall be granted clothing allowance and per diems as follows:

Clothing Allowance

Per Diem

The per diem herein provided for shall be granted only for the duration of the official trip, including travel time as defined in Section 20 hereof.

SECTION 17. Representation expenses . – Philippine delegations to international conferences and conventions and special missions may be allowed such representation expenses as shall be absolutely necessary only for purposes essential to the achievement of the objectives of the delegation, and only upon previous authority by the President of the Philippines. To this end, representation expenses may be incurred for necessary entertainment, contributions, flowers, wreaths, and the like, when justified by circumstances and in conformity with the generally accepted customs, usages, and practices, in such amount as is necessary depending on the importance and duration of the conference, convention, or special mission.

Representation expenses shall be non-commutable and shall be accounted for strictly in accordance with applicable accounting and auditing regulations.

SECTION 18. Submission of report . – Every official or employee assigned or authorized to travel abroad under this Title shall, within thirty (30) days after his return to the Philippines, submit a report with his recommendations, if any, on the conference or seminar attended, examination or investigation conducted, or mission undertaken, to the head of his office, furnishing a copy each thereof the department head concerned and the Office of the President of the Philippines. In case of participation in an international conference or convention in which the Philippines is represented by a delegation, a report of the delegation shall be submitted to the President of the Philippines through the Secretary of Foreign Affairs not later than one month after the closing of the conference or convention. Any member of the delegation may also submit a supplementary report.

Violation of the provisions of this Section shall subject the official or employee concerned to disciplinary action.

TITLE III – General Provisions

SECTION 19. Issuance of passport . – No passport shall be issued to any official or employee of the government for official travel abroad unless the approval therefor of the Special Committee on Scholarships or the Office of the President required under this Order shall have been previously submitted to the Department of Foreign Affairs.

SECTION 20. Duration of travel . – Travel time allowed shall be computed according to the most direct air route, which shall include not more than three days before and three days after the training, conference, or mission, unless otherwise specified in the authority for the trip. Any additional time extension caused by taking a diverse route shall not be on government time or expense.

SECTION 21. Travel expenses . – Officials and employees traveling abroad under Titles I and II of this Order shall be allowed the following expenses:

(a) Transportation fares – airline, steamship, taxi, bus and railroad fares, including hire of special conveyances.

(b) Tips (in addition to per diems) — for taxi drivers, bellboys for carrying luggage, but in no case shall a claim for tips be allowed at more than one dollar ($1.00) for each service.

(c) Porterage — porterage expenses at customary rates in the locality but not to exceed one dollar ($1.00) for each service rendered;

(1) upon arrival at and departure from hotel or place of lodging;

(2) upon arrival at and departure from depot or point of embarkation or debarkation;

(3) whenever hire for carrying luggage is demanded by the exigencies of the service.

(d) Incidental expenses — for foreign exchange; passport; visas; photographs; affidavits; certificates of birth, health, or identity; inoculation; taxi fares, bus fares; airport fees; and other similar expenses.

Expenses for valets, room attendants, laundry, pressing, haircut, and similar services furnished by hotels not otherwise authorized herein, are not reimbursable.

SECTION 22. Limitation on clothing allowance . Clothing allowance shall not be granted oftener than once in every twenty-four (24) months, and a certification that no clothing allowance had been received during the next preceding twenty-four months shall be made on the claim voucher: Provided , however , That where the clothing allowance previously received by the official or employee concerned was loss than the clothing allowance to which he is entitled for the subsequent trip, he may be granted the difference.

SECTION 23. Insurance . – Any official or employee travelling under this Order shall be allowed reimbursement of premiums for accident insurance for the duration of his official trip abroad, which insurance shall not exceed fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00). Under no circumstance shall premiums on insurance of personal or household effects belonging to any official or employee on official travel be charged to government funds.

SECTION 24. Payment of allowance and per diem differential . – Where the trainee, grantee, scholar or official traveling abroad is provided by the host government or institution with stipend, per diem, or allowance lower than that prescribed in this Executive Order, he shall be entitled to the difference only.

SECTION 25. Chargeability of expenses . – The expenses for per diems, allowances and other items authorized pursuant to the provisions of this Order shall, unless otherwise specified, be chargeable against the appropriations of the office to which the official or employee concerned belongs, subject to availability of funds.

SECTION 26. Rendition of account of cash advances . – Within sixty (60) days after his return to the Philippines, every official or employee authorized to travel abroad shall render an account of the cash advances received by him in accordance with existing applicable rules and regulations and/or such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Auditor General for the purpose. Payment of the salary of any official or employee who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be suspended until he complies therewith.

SECTION 27. Repealing clause . – All executive orders, administrative orders, circulars, and rules and regulations issued by the Office of the President or by any department, bureau, office, or agency, including government-owned or controlled corporations, or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby modified, amended, or repealed, as the case may be.

SECTION 28. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 6th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Sixty-Eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE J. LEIDO, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.