MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 821

CREATING THE MARKETS INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL VESTING THE SAME WITH POWERS AND FUNCTIONS, PROVIDING APPROPRIATIONS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, markets support enterprises such as public markets, slaughterhouses, warehouses, ice plants and cold storage facilities enhance municipal, provincial and regional economies;

WHEREAS, the operation and development of market support enterprises is fragmented and isolated within local government units, and lacking in guidance from a central planning agency which can coordinate and integrate efforts towards national programs and goals;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to rationalize the operations of markets infrastructure and to integrate them into a network of marketing support centers to increase their developmental contribution to urban and rural economies by providing ready markets for Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran and other livelihood products;

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, the President is empowered to institute and undertake such organizational and related changes as may be dictated by national development efforts;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the following:

Section 1. CREATION OF MARKETS INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL . There is hereby created a Markets Infrastructure Development Council, hereinafter referred to as the “COUNCIL” composed of the following:

The Council shall be attached to the Ministry of Human Settlements (MHS).

The membership of the Council may be increased or decreased upon a decision of the majority of the members. The members of the Council shall receive a reasonable amount of per diem as the Council may provide for every meeting actually attended by them.

Section 2. ALLOCATION OF RESPONSIBILITIES . The following delineation of areas of responsibility shall be observed by the Council:

1. MHS shall, in general, have the primary responsibility of coordinating the participation of the member agencies involved in the programs and projects of the Council. Specifically, the MHS shall: (a) design, formulate, implement and administer a Markets Infrastructure Development Program, consistent with national development goals and strategies; (b) promote or cause the improvement of market support enterprise facilities and operations through construction or upgrading, including the provisions of financial assistance together with government and private institutions, by itself or in conjunction with any other person, association, corporation or entity, whether government or private; and (c) develop standardized prototype designs for markets support enterprises. The MHS through the National Housing Corporation, shall produce and make available such standardized pre-fabricated construction materials necessary for the construction activities;

2. The Ministry of Local Government, through the provincial governors, municipal and city mayors, shall provide, mobilize and coordinate all assistance and resources from various government agencies and the private sector at the regional, provincial, city and municipal levels as may be deemed necessary by the Council;

3. The National Food Authority shall, in coordination with the private sector, provide the necessary support and assistance for the efficient movement of commodities, particularly the supply, distribution or trading of KKK products and services, utilizing market infrastructure facilities and operations;

4. The Bureau of Animal Industry shall, in coordination with the private sector, provide support and assistance in the formulation and implementation of a livestock marketing plan;

5. The Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR) shall, in coordination with the private sector, extended such support and assistance in the area of fish marketing, utilizing for the purpose the manpower, resources and expertise of existing fisheries offices or agencies under the MNR’s jurisdiction;

6. The Ministry of Public Works and Highways shall assist in, coordinate and monitor the construction of, infrastructure in identified project areas.

Section 3. POWERS AND FUNCTIONS . The Council shall exercise the following powers and functions:

1. Coordinate and rationalize all planning and programming of government activities related to markets support infrastructure development;

2. Review, evaluate and approve projects proposals for the construction of markets support enterprises and/or their upgrading against design, economic and financial feasibility criteria for endorsement to funding agencies;

3. Supervise the operation of all public markets and for this purpose establish policies and guidelines on standards of operation of public markets and its support enterprises;

4. Determine and mobilize the organizational support requirements for planning and operation of the MIDP at the regional, provincial and municipal levels for markets infrastructure construction and upgrading, trading, commodity flow and price monitoring;

5. Encourage, conduct and/or promote studies and researches by itself or in conjunction with other government or private agencies on any aspect of markets infrastructure development;

6. Enter into contracts and arrangements and perform all acts and things necessary, for the accomplishment of the abovementioned purposes;

7. Submit regular reports to the President on the status and progress of programs, projects and activities pursued by the Council;

8. Perform such other functions or activities as may be necessary to accomplish its purposes and/or objectives.

Section 4. EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE . There shall be an Executive Committee, composed of the Minister of Human Settlements and two (2) members designated from the Council membership, which shall manage and administer the affairs, functions and activities of the Council.

Section 5. SECRETARIAT . The Executive Committee shall be assisted by a Secretariat under the supervision of the Ministry of Human Settlements composed of such personnel as may be detailed or appointed to the Secretariat under conditions and rates that may be imposed by the Council, to provide all staff and support services as may be necessary in the accomplishment of the Council’s purposes.

The Secretariat shall be headed by an Executive Director to be appointed by the Executive Committee.

Section 6. FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS . A program cost of P2.0 Billion is hereby appropriated in the Approved General Appropriations Act and authorized to be released chargeable against funds in the National Budget not otherwise appropriated. The Council shall submit to the President its annual programming of funds for approval. For CY 1982, the Ministry of Budget shall program and release to the Ministry of Human Settlements from the Capital Investment Program of MPWH the amount of P100 Million.

The Ministry of Human Settlements shall provide the funds for the organization and operations of the Secretariat; in addition, the Secretariat is tasked to prepare the details and properties of the utilization of the above capital investment fund for the Council’s consideration.

Section 7. SUPPORT AND ASSISTANCE . In the performance of its function, the Council or its Secretariat is hereby authorized to call upon any government agency, office and instrumentality for such assistance as it may deem necessary for the effective discharge of its function and responsibilities.

Section 8. REPEALING CLAUSE . All laws, executive orders, administrative orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any provision of this Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 9. EFFECTIVITY . This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of August in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 781-857]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.