MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 528

EXTENDING THE TERM OF THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON REORGANIZATION CREATED UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 281, SERIES OF 1970

WHEREAS, there is need to effect continuing adaptive changes in the administrative structure in order to conform with the changing requirements for effective development administration;

WHEREAS, the establishment of a new political organizational framework during the transition period as occasioned by the advent of a semi-parliamentary system of government will require a continuing assessment of the administrative structure for governance, especially as these pertain to organizational changes, as may be required in the process of political normalization;

WHEREAS, it is desirable to provide the President with adequate staff advice and assistance in determining such needed changes in the organizational framework; and

WHEREAS, it is desirable for the Presidential Commission on Reorganization to continue providing staff assistance and consultative advice to the President, Civil Service Commission, Career Executive Service Board, and other agencies of the government on development administration relative to, among others, reorganization matters, decentralization and regionalization, career executive service, and rationalization of government corporation management;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby extend the term of the Presidential Commission on Reorganization up to December 31, 1979.

The Presidential Executive Assistant shall issue the necessary directives for the detail or the extension of the detail of such technical personnel as may be needed by the Commission, under the same conditions as prescribed in Executive Order No. 281, as amended.

The Commission is authorized to disburse and defray all expenses for its operations from January 1 to December 31, 1979 from funds in the amount of P950,000 as may be made available from the Office of the President, in addition to whatever unexpended balance it may have out of its existing appropriations as of December 31, 1978.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1979). [Executive Order Nos. : 436 – 530]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.