MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 150

INSTITUTING THE PRESIDENTIAL GOLDEN PLOW AWARD IN RECOGNITION OF EXTRAORDINARY AND OUTSTANDING SERVICE OR CONTRIBUTION BY INDIVIDUALS, GROUPS OF INDIVIDUALS AND INSTITUTIONS TO THE CAUSE OF LAND REFORM

WHEREAS, in the pursuit of the objectives of the Land Reform Program in the Philippines men with vision, reason, and courage in personal commitment, are bringing about a society of independent, self-reliant and responsible citizens; and

WHEREAS, it is fitting to recognize these individuals, groups of individuals and institutions who have rendered selfless service or contribution to the cause of land reform;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Presidential Award to be known as “THE PRESIDENTIAL GOLDEN PLOW AWARD,” described and awarded as follows:

SECTION 1. The award shall recognize the vision, reason and courage of those who selflessly render extraordinary and outstanding service or contribution to humanity in the implementation of the lend reform program.

SEC. 2. The service or contribution groups of individuals or institutions with far-reaching consequences and emulative effect to Man and Society, shall be recognized and awarded.

SEC. 3. This system of award seeks to encourage others to emulate those who rendered extraordinary and outstanding service or contribution for the public good and interest; and those who promoted and advanced international amity through mutual help and assistance, brought about by an awareness and recognition of interdependence among peoples and individuals and the changing concept of private property in a christian society.

SEC. 4. The design of the decoration shall be heraldically described as follows:

A symbolic sheaf of golden harvest with a plow superimposed;

Above, a crest of sampaguita garland, and below, a scroll with the inscription, “SAGISAG NG PAGLILINGKOD.”

“THE PRESIDENTIAL GOLDEN PLOW AWARD FOR LAND REFORM” shall be inscribed at the back of the medallion itself.

SEC. 5. The symbolism and significance of the decoration are as follows:

a. The green and gold ribbon from which the medallion hangs represents the colors of Land Reform in the Philippines.

b. The sampaguita garland above the sheaf symbolizes the Philippine National Flower. It stands for purity and oneness of purpose, the flower of one’s oblation to humanity.

c. The sheaf of golden harvest symbolizes the totality of individuals, farmers, landowners, government personnel, and the communities as a whole bound together by mutual understanding and cooperation among themselves for the common weal.

d. The plow symbolizes the basic tool of agriculture; and the values of Filipino tradition, strength of character, unity of purpose, untiring dedication and steadfast devotion to the cause of Man, and effervescent determination to serve Society.

e. The color of gold symbolizes fulfillment.

f. The inscription, “SAGISAG NG PAGLILINGKOD” means that the recipient has rendered extraordinary and outstanding service or contribution beyond the call of duty to humanity; that his sacrifices promoted the aspirations and objectives of land reform; and that the fruits of his toils or significant contributions have brought about the social and economic uplift of the people and the nation, as well as the realization of social justice and understanding among peoples.

g. The term “Land Reform” inscribed on the other side of the medallion represents the revolutionary program of government that effects agrarian tenurial improvement for national progress.

SEC. 6. Scope of the Award . The scope of the award shall include persons in the following fields of endeavor:

a. PUBLIC SERVICE – Extraordinary and outstanding service or contribution for the public good and interest by a private citizen or individual, group of private citizens or individuals or private institutions.

b. INTERNATIONAL UNDERSTANDING – Extraordinary and outstanding service or contribution in the promotion ad advancement of international amity through mutual help and assistance by individuals, groups of individuals or institutions, whether private or governmental, domestic or foreign.

c. GOVERNMENT SERVICE – Extraordinary and outstanding service or contribution for the public good and interest in any field of land reform by any officer or employee of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines.

SEC. 7. There shall be three categories of awards for every field of endeavor, namely: (1) individual, (2) group of individuals , and ( 3 ) institutional.

SEC. 8. There shall be one award for each of the three fields of endeavor. These are: ( a ) one award for Public Service, ( b ) one award for International Understanding, and ( c ) one award for Government Service.

SEC. 9. An award may be joint between individuals, groups of individuals, institutions, or between any two of the three categories or among the three categories which / who are considered by the National Land Reform Council, upon recommendation of the Committee on Awards, to be equally deserving of recognition in a given year.

SEC. 10. Any extraordinary and outstanding work perfromance, accomplishment or achievement and/or contribution by a deceased person or by a group of persons some of whom are deceased may be the subject of an award.

SEC. 11. Screening and Selection . – There is created a Committee on Awards composed of a chairman end four members to be named annually during the month of September by the Chairman of the National Land Reform Council from among prestigious government personnel and/or among prominent private citizens or individuals, Filipinos or foreigners.

The Committee shall screen the nominees for award and shall submit its recommendation to the National Land Reform Council for final selection.

SEC. 12. Standards or criteria for Selection . – No work performance, accomplishment or achievement and/or contribution shall merit an award unless it has been found by experience or expert scrutiny to be extraordinary and outstanding within the scope of the award and is manifestly of the nature that exemplifies the lofty ideals of land reform.

In evaluating candidates for the awards, the Committee on Awards, shall consider the following criteria:

a. Performance of an extraordinary and outstanding service or contribution for the public good and interest, specifically in the furtherance of the objectives of land reform.

b. Evidences of sustained effect of contribution or work performance over and above the normal duty requirements of a given individual, group of individuals, or institutions.

c. Contribution to the cause of land reform or performance of extraordinary and outstanding service is of such far-reaching consequence and emulative effect on Man and his Society.

SEC. 13. Procedure . – The award shall be open to any person, group of persons, regardless of race, creed, sex, or nationality; or institutions, whether private or govern­mental, domestic or fore

The following procedural guidelines shall be observed:

a. To come under consideration for an award, a person, group of persons or an institution shall be recommended in writing by someone with the competence therefor in accordance with the pertinent provisions of this Order.

b. Competence to submit proposals shall be enjoyed by persons, both Filipinos and foreigners, within the particular field of endeavor concerned in conformity with paragraphs (c) , (i) , (j) and (k) of this Section.

c. Every year during the month of September, the Chairman of the National Land Reform Council shall send out invitations to those who are chosen by the Council from the names of competent persons recommended by the Committee on Awards in accordance with the pertinent provisions of paragraphs (i) , (j) and (k) of this Section.

d. Personal applications for an award shall not be considered.

e. The awards shall be made annually starting with the year 1968 End every year thereafter.

If, however, it is considered that none of the proposals that have come under consideration merit recognition, the National Land Reform Council may omit awards in one or more categories in any or all field of endeavor in a given year.

f. Only contribution and/or work performance or accomplishment achieved within the five years immediately preceding the granting of the award shall be considered.

The preceding paragraph notwithstanding, order work performance, accomplishment or achievement and/or contribution may be considered if their significance has not become apparent until recently.

g. Presentation of the awards shall be made in Manila, Republic of the Philippines, on the Anniversary of the signing of the Agricultural Land Reform Cede, Republic Act No. 3844, which is the eighth day of August.

In addition to the decoration, an appropriate certificate shall be presented to each awardee with a citation indicating the basis of selection of the awardee.

h. Each year the National Land Reform Council shall consider proposals submitted pursuant to paragraph (f) hereof end received in the Secretariat to the Council, Quezon City, Republic of the Philippines, during the preceding year up to and including the thirty-first dry of December.

Only proposals supported by adequate evidence and submitted by competent persons invited to nominate shall be considered.

i. Public Service Award . – Competence to submit proposals for the award on extraordinary and outstanding service or contribution by a private citizen or individuals or private institutions may be enjoyed by:

(1) Persons who have received the Presidential Golden Plow Award for Public Service;

(2) Heads of state or private educational institutions;

(3) Leaders of private institutions or organizations, national in scope, whose purposes are: to work for improving the status of farmers and farmhands or laborers, encourage cottage industries, increase and diversify agricultural production, improve rural health and education, promote cooperative movement for rural credit, improve production and marketing of farm products, promote the dissemination as well as free discussion of information and matters of public interest, stimulate and promote rural improvements and proper development of human and natural resources, train rural reconstruction personnel or cooperate with the State in carrying out programs of rural reconstruction, and all other activities related to and connected with land reform; and

(4) Other persons who, because of their work, study or background are in close touch with individuals, groups or associations identified with the purposes above indicated.

j. International Understanding Award . – Competence to submit proposals for the award on extraordinary and outstanding service or contribution in International Understanding may be enjoyed by:

(1) Persons who have received the Presidential Golden Plow Award for International Understanding;

(2) Heads of United Nations Missions and Regional Cooperation Organizations in the Philippines;

(3) Heads of diplomat Philippines;

(4) Leaders of private and governmental institutions or organizations, interna the promotion and advancement of international amity, friendship and understanding through mutual help and assistance between and among peoples of different countries;

(5) Other persons who, because of their work, study or background, are inclose touch with individuals, groups or associations identified with the purposes above stated.

k. Government Service Award – Competence to submit proposals for the award on extraordinary and outstanding service or contribution in any field of land reform may be enjoyed by:

(1) Persons who have received the Presidential Golden Plow Award for Government Services;

(2) Heads of commissions, bureaus or offices for the enhancement of the civil service system;

(3) Heads of institutes or colleges of public administration in state or private universities;

(4) Leaders or private institutions or organizations, national in scope, whose purposes are: to work for the enhancement of the government service; to encourage research and studies of government activities; and to pro­mote employee welfare; and

(5) Other persons, who, because of their work, study or background, are in a position to follow and watch closely the careers of public servants.

SEC. 14. This order shall take effect immediately except as herein otherwise provided.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE. J. LEIDO, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.