MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 324

CONSTITUTING AN INTERIM INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE SANGLEY POINT AREA

WHEREAS, the United States Naval Base at Sangley Point will be officially turned over to the Philippine Government by the first of September this year;

WHEREAS, a development plan for the eventual use and land allocation of the Sangley Point Area has been prepared;

WHEREAS, other preparatory work and pertinent analytical studies pertaining to the eventual transfer of Sangley Point have been conducted and are being performed on a continuing basis; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to coordinate and centralize all activities relating to Sangley Point considering that the official turnover of the area will be effected within three months;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby constitute a Committee composed of the following:

The Governor of Cavite, the Mayor of Cavite City, the Chairman of Cavite Socio-Economic Council, and the President of the Filipino Employees Association of U.S. Bases in the Philippines may seat as ex-officio members in the Committee on an invitational basis.

This Committee shall serve as the interim governmental body charged with the following functions:

1. To review and consequently carry out the accepted recommendations of the Technical Working Group created by Memorandum Order No. 214, dated 3 February 1971;

2. To prescribe policies and provide guidelines in the administration and operations of the Sangley Point complex;

3. To coordinate the activities of all other working groups and participating offices leading to the eventual organization and setting up of the body that will permanently manage the operations in the Sangley Point area;

4. To study and recommend basic measures necessary for the effective implementation of development plans and programs in Sangley Point;

5. To promote industrial projects deemed suitable in the area, and provide investors with the necessary support and implementing guidelines.

In order to effectively implement the plans, and promulgate the policy and decisions of this Committee, a full-time Administrator shall be appointed and shall serve as the executory arm of the Committee.

During the interim period, the Presidential Economic Staff shall act as the Secretariat of the Committee and shall render the necessary staff support and technical assistance.

In order to facilitate the organization and operations of the Sangley Point area, the necessary technical person of any agency of the executive branch may be on a full-time or part-time basis and shall report directly to the Administrator.

The Committee and the Secretariat are hereby authorized to secure data and information directly from all government offices, agencies, corporations, and entities and to consult with officials and personnel thereof, on the matters related to the above functions.

The officers and personnel of all government offices, agencies, corporations, and entities are hereby enjoined to render full support and cooperation to the Committee and the Secretariat in the discharge of their functions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.