MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 283

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL OIL COMMISSION

WHEREAS, there is a growing need to determine, in the most definitive and authoritative way, the true economic prices of gasoline, lubricants, and other products in the petroleum range, as well as the profits of the several oil companies operating in the Philippines.

WHEREAS, the Congress of the Philippines, which has seen fit to discuss, in recent sessions, various means of regulating the oil industry, has yet to be convened in regular session; and

WHEREAS, recent events have impressed upon both the public and the government the urgency of establishing an agency to review these matters, pending the passage of corresponding legislation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Presidential Oil Commission to be composed of the following:

The Commission shall study the economic prices of gasoline, lubricants, and other petroleum products, the profits of the oil companies operating in the country, and complementarily, the income of bus, jeepney and other public transport operators and drivers, as well as retail and wholesale dealers involved with the oil industry, and shall recommend appropriate measures thereupon, to the end that protection shall be provided both the consumers of petroleum products and the oil industry.

The Commission is hereby empowered to call on any department, bureau, office and other instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions.

The Commission shall submit its report within sixty days from the date hereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.