MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 67

ESTABLISHING A UNIFORM CRIME REPORTING SYSTEM.

WHEREAS, an accurate picture of the overall crime situation in the country is necessary to provide guidance to national and local law enforcement agencies in the campaign against crime and the lawmaking bodies in the enactment of legislation on the matter; and

WHEREAS, this is only possible through uniform and integrated crime reports and close coordination among law enforcement agencies;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the, Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, and upon recommendation of the Inter-Departmental Committee on the Integration and Coordination of Official Statistics on Crime, do hereby order:

1. All chiefs of city, municipal and municipal district police forces; the Chief of Constabulary; the Director, National Bureau of Investigation; the Chairman, Anti-Smuggling Action Center; the Commissioner of Customs, the Commissioner of Immigration and heads of other national law enforcement agencies shall prepare a monthly report of crimes occurring within their respective areas of operation indicating whether handled exclusively by them, or jointly with other agencies, or not recorded in any city, municipal or municipal district police blotter, in the case of the PC, ASAC, NBI, Bureau of Customs and Bureau of Immigration and other national law enforcement agencies.

2. The monthly crime report shall be prepared in quadruplicate on NBI Form ST-1 (copy attached) or other crime report forms which may be proscribed hereafter, distributed as follows:

original to the Chief of Constabulary or his representative; duplicate to the Chairman of the Police Commission; triplicate to the Director, National Bureau of Investigation; quadruplicate to be retained as file copy.

3. The Chief of Constabulary shall consolidate and tabulate the reports, which shall be submitted on or before the 15th of every month, and forward the results to the Inter-Departmental Committee on the Coordination of Crime Statistics, c/o Office of Statistical Coordination and Standards, National Economic Council.

4. This order shall take effect immediately; Provided, that the first monthly crime report shall cover the period January 1-31, 1967.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE J. LEIDO, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.