MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 66

CREATING THE RICE AND CORN PRODUCTION COORDINATING COUNCIL (RCPCC) INFORMATION CENTER.

In furtherance of the objectives of the Rice and Corn Production Coordination Council (RCPCC) created under Republic Act No. 2084 and for the purpose of coordinating all information activities involved in, and relative to, the rice and corn program of the government, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby create the RCPCC Information Center, under the Office of the Chairman of the RCPCC with the following functions and duties:

1. Coordinate the information activities of each and all of the agencies, entities and instrumentalities of the government participating in the rice and corn production program under the RCPCC;

2. Assist in the aforesaid information activities particularly in the production and dissemination of information materials in order to avoid duplication, insure wider and more affective dissemination, and observe accuracy of data in facts, figures and statistics, and attain a more systematic allocation of areas of responsibilities;

3. Collect, gather, and evaluate all information materials produced by the aforementioned agencies, entities and/or instrumentalities and recommend ways of improving the accuracy of data contained therein;

4. Disseminate to the public factual information on the rice and corn production program under the RCPCC in general, and on the status, progress and incidents relative to the RCPCC projects in particulars; and

5. Discharge such other functions and duties as may be assigned to it by the Chairman of the Rice and Corn Production Coordinating Council.

The Information Center shall be under a Director to be designated by the Chairman of RCPCC, and shall be assisted by such staff members and other personnel as may hereafter be designated or assigned by the Chairman of the RCPCC.

The Director of the Information Center shall submit a budgeted program of the Center’s operation to implement the above purpose and discharge the aforementioned functions and duties.

All heads of departments, bureaus, agencies and instrumentalities of the government involved in or concerned with, the rice and corn production program under the RCPCC are hereby directed extend full cooperation to the RCPCC Information Center, and the Director of the Information Center may, when the need arises, request for the temporary assignment of such information personnel, equipment or facilities to RCPCC in furtherance of the RCPCC information programs.

The Director of the Information Center shall report, periodically and/or when directed, to the Chairman of the RCPCC on the status of information coverage on the rice and corn production program and on the utilization of the information materials produced by all participating agencies.

Done in the city of Manila, this 28th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.