MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 417

CREATING A JOINT PROJECT FOR PILOT PRODUCTION OF HIGH-PROTEIN DRY COCONUT MILK POWDER

WHEREAS, it is our overriding concern to provide sufficient quality food to our people;

WHEREAS, one of the cheapest and most abundant agricultural products in this country with high potential as a food source is coconut;

WHEREAS, a process has been developed to extract a high-protein food element from coconut, in addition to a premium quality oil and coconut meal;

WHEREAS, the process so developed requires testing on a pilot scale to determine commercial feasibility and consumer acceptance of the product, as well as other means of further increasing process efficiencies and product quality;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, hereby order that:

1. A Joint Project for the production on a pilot scale of high-protein coconut milk powder shall be established under the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, with the University of San Carlos as the implementing agency;

2. The Project shall be under the full and direct supervision and control of a Board of Management to be composed of the following or their representatives:

a. The Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources b. The Chairman, National Science Development Board c. The President of the University of San Cargo

Other entities contributing to the Project shall likewise be represented on the Board as observers.

3. The Project shall be jointly financed through research grants by the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources and the National Science Development Board and shall utilize existing equipment at the University of San Carlos, with full authority to receive and utilize further grants and donations of equipment, commodities and cash, and/or avail of technical assistance from private and public sources.

4. The Board shall designate a Project Director on recommendation of the University of San Carlos, who shall directly manage the Project and accept, administer and utilize all funds and other resources allocated or donated to the Project, in accordance with a program of work and expenditure approved by the Board.

5. The Project Director shall render a periodic report on the progress of the work to the undersigned through the Board of Management.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1973). [Executive Order Nos. : 366 – 435] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.