MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 43

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 22 DATED OCTOBER 1, 1962, ENTITLED “PROVIDING FOR THE IMPLEMENTING DETAILS FOR REPUBLIC ACT NO. 2717, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE ELECTRIFICATION ADMINISTRATION ACT.”

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, the following amendments to the implementing details of Republic Act No. 2717, otherwise known as the Electrification Administration Act, are hereby promulgated to govern the organization, powers, duties and functions of the Electrification Administration, in view of the expansion of activities and the necessity to reflect changes in conditions, organization, definition and distribution of work among the various departments in the Administration.

SECTION 1. Section 2 of Executive Order No. 22 dated October 1, 1962, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 2. The Administration shall function under the Office of the President and shall consist of the Office of the Administrator, a Programming and Planning Department, an Administrative and Fiscal Department, an Accounting Department, a Loans and Investment Department and a Design, Construction and Maintenance Department.”

SEC. 2. Section 3 of said Executive Order is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 3. The Office of the Administrator shall have a Deputy Administrator for Administration and Finance, a Deputy Administrator for Operations, and a Legal Staff.”

SEC. 3. Section 8 of said Executive Order is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 8. (a) The Deputy Administrator for Administration and Finance, shall be delegated such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable him to discharge his functions, duties and responsibilities.

“The Deputy Administrator for Administration and Finance shall have the following functions, among others:

“1. Serve as Deputy to the Administrator in all matters relating to administration and finance;

“2. Administer the Administration’s day-to­-day activities, coordinate its administrative services and fiscal management and be responsible for the efficient and economical operations of the Administration;

“3. Evaluate recommendations made by the various staffs and departments of the Administration, including the Administrative and Fiscal Department, the Accounting Department and Loans and Investment Department, and submit his findings to the Administrator for action;

“4. Advise and assist the Administrator in the formulation, determination and implementation of the Administration policies involving administrative and fiscal management; and

“5. Act as Administrator in the latter’s absence or if the office is vacant upon proper designation.”

“(b) The Deputy Administrator for Operations shall be delegated with powers and authority as may be necessary to enable him to discharge his functions, duties and responsibilities;

“The Deputy Administrator for Operations shall have the following functions, among others:

“1. Serve as Deputy to the Administrator in all matters relating to programming, planning, designing, constructing, maintaining and operating the Administration’s electrification programs and projects;

“2. Coordinate the research, development and implementation of the Administration’s electrification programs and be responsible for the efficient and economical operation of ongoing projects;

“3. Evaluate recommendations made by the various staffs, including the Programming and Planning Department and the Design, Construction and Maintenance Department, and submit his findings to the Administrator for action;

“4. Advise and assist the Administrator in the formulation, determination and implementation of the Administration’s policies; and

“5. Act as Administrator in the latter’s absence or if the office is vacant upon proper designation.”

SEC. 4. Section 10 of said Executive Order is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 10. The Administrative and Fiscal Department shall be responsible for providing services related to property, records, materials; requisition and general office management. It shall also be responsible for the functions of the Administration relating to financial budgeting, control expenditures of budgeted funds and the handling of cash.”

SEC. 5. Section 11 of said Executive Order is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 11. The Legal Staff shall provide legal services and advice required by the Administrator, or the Office, inducing those pertaining to proposed and existing legislations pertinent to the functions of the Administration.”

SEC. 6. Section 14 of said Executive Order is hereby deleted and the functions pertaining to the Fiscal Department are transferred to and incorporated in the newly created Administrative and Fiscal Department, under Section 4 hereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.