MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 149

PROVIDING FOR A LISTING OF BUILDINGS AND DWELLINGS IN CONNECTION WITH THE PROJECTED 1970 CENSUSES OF POPULATION AND HOUSING, AGRICULTURE AND FISHERIES, AND FIXING CENSUS DAYS

WHEREAS, Commonwealth Act No. 591 authorizes the Bureau of the Census and Statistics ” to prepare for and undertake all censuses of popul3.tion, agriculture, industry and commerce” and to conduct, for statistical purposes, investigations and studies of social and economic problems and conditions in the country;

WHEREAS, Congress has set aside the necessary appropriation for the preparation of the 1970 censuses of population, housing, agriculture and fisheries; and

WHEREAS, in order to make the 1970 censuses successful and comprehensive, it is imperative that the Bureau of the Census and Statistics gather beforehand certain basic data;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order that a listing of buildings and dwellings in each poblacion, barrio or district of every chartered city, municipality, or municipal district be undertaken in accordance with the plans drawn by the Bureau of the Census and Statistics, on or before August 31, 1969.

It is also directed that all buildings should be grouped by block, barrio, district or by any other equally convenient arrangement, grouping or subdivision, and caused to be provided with proper numbers conspicuously placed so as to facilitate identification.

The Director of the Bureau of the Census and Statistics is empowered to draft personnel of the Government;·including provincial, city and municipal officials and employees, school teachers, field forces of the different bureaus and offices, city, and municipal police forces and members of the Armed Forces as supervisors, canvassers and similar assignments.

All heads of departments; bureaus, offices, and agencies of the government, including government-owned and controlled corporations, provincial, city and municipal officials, and Philippine Constabulary Provincial Commanders, are hereby enjoined to make available their facilities as well as the services of such personnel as may hereafter be requested or requisitioned by the Bureau of the Census and Statistics.

Sunday, February 15, 1970, is hereby designated as Census Day for Population and Housing and Wednesday, April 15 , 1970, as Census Day for Agriculture and Fisheries, on which dates the enumeration of population, housing, agriculture and fisheries and collection of all pertinent social and economic data about the Philippines shall commence.

The Bureau of the Census and Statistics shall take charge of the implementation of this Executive Order, including the issuance of such rules and regulations as may be necessary to accomplish the aforementioned objective.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE. J. LEIDO, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.