MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 586

CREATING THE SACOBIA DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the government to provide integrated basic economic and social services and facilities in all areas, particularly the underdeveloped or resettlement sites in order to solidify the economic and social structure of our society;

WHEREAS, an integrated rural development, in the form of the Ministry of Human Settlements’ Bagong Lipunan Sites and Services (BLISS) Program has been adopted for the development of the Sacobia area;

WHEREAS, the successful provision of integrated, rationalized, basic services and facilities to the Sacobia community requires that the planning, implementation, and management of the area be comprehensive, decentralized and framed within regional, national plans and overall strategy for the BLISS Program;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to enhance the organizational framework, systems capacity and streamlining of developmental efforts, for planning, implementing, and managing the programs in the Sacobia Development Plan, to maximize benefits not only for Sacobia, but for the nation as a whole;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution in order to ensure the success of the project, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Creation of Sacobia Development Authority . There is hereby created the Sacobia Development Authority, hereinafter referred to as the Authority;

SECTION 2. Declaration of Policy . – The development of Sacobia is hereby declared to be within the implementing strategies of the Bagong Lipunan Sites and Services (BLISS) Program, under the direct supervision of the Board herein created;

SECTION 3. Terms of Reference . The Authority shall adopt the following Terms of Reference:

1. Acquire, purchase, own, hold, develop, lease mortgage, pledge, exchange, sell, transfer or otherwise invest, trade, or deal in, in any manner permitted by law, real and personal property by every kind and description or any interest therein, as may be necessary for the accomplishment of the purposes of the Authority;

2. To borrow money and otherwise, contract indebtedness and to secure payment thereof by mortgage, pledge or deed of trust of, or any encumbrance upon any or all of its then owned or after-acquired real or personal properties and assets;

3. To enter into, make, perform and carry out or cancel and rescind contracts of every kind and for any lawful purpose, within any person, firm, association, corporation, syndicate, domestic or foreign, or other;

4. To cause to implement any other acts and things, and to exercise any other powers which may be necessary to accomplish the purposes for which this Authority is organized.

SECTION 4. Board Membership . The Authority shall be governed by a Board of Directors composed of the following:

SECTION 5. Program Execution Group . – A Program Execution Group acting under the authority of the Board shall administer and provide operational coordination in the affairs of the authority. The Program Execution Group is composed of the:

Deputy Minister of Human Settlements Director of National Food and Agriculture Council Director, Bureau of Animal Industry Deputy Minister of Public Works Deputy Minister of Public Highways Deputy Minister of National Defense Deputy Minister of Agrarian Reform Assistant Minister of Local Government and Community Development Administrator, National Electrification Administration Administrator, Farm Systems Development Corporation Governor, Province of Tarlac MHS Regional Supervisor, Region III The Deputy Minister shall serve as head of the group.

SECTION 6. Powers and Functions of the Board. The Board of Directors shall have the following functions:

1. Oversee the coordination of the planning, implementation and monitoring of the project:

2. Review and Authority’s consolidated plans, budgets and work programs and recommended approval to the Chairman;

3. Arrange and or negotiate with local and foreign financing institutions, subject to the approval of the Ministry of Finance with concurrence by the Ministry of the Budget for funding the development of projects in the area;

4. Appoint the Authority’s Executive Director and Field Office Director and designate them for the on-site or field office;

5. Call upon any Ministry, office, instrumentality or any political subdivision of the government for such assistance that may be necessary in achieving the objectives of the Authority;

6. Exercise such other powers as may be deemed necessary and expedient for the successful development of the area.

SECTION 7. Domicile and Officers of the Sacobia Development Authority . – The Authority, covering the entire 5,612 hectares of Sacobia, shall have a main office in Manila to be headed by an Executive Director duly appointed by the Board who shall maintain a technical and management staff to assist him in the performance of his duties and responsibilities

There shall also be an on-site Field Office headed by the field office director duly designated by the Board and who shall likewise maintain a technical and management staff for effective planning, implementation and monitoring of the area’s programs and projects in coordination with the main office.

SECTION 8. Powers and Functions of the Executive Director, the Field Office and the Field Director . The Executive Director shall be appointed by the Board of the Directors. He shall serve until such time as the Authority is dissolved unless sooner removed from office for cause by the Board of Directors. He shall have the following powers, duties and functions:

1. Execute and administer the policies and decisions of the Board of Directors;

2. Directly coordinate the activities of all agencies and instrumentalities of the government in the planning and implementation of projects on site;

3. Monitor the progress and evaluate the effects of project execution by these agencies and instrumentalities; and submit periodic financial reports relating to the development of the area;

4. Apply for, receive and accept grants and donation of funds, equipment, materials and services needed for the development of the area within and outside the Philippines;

5. Perform such functions as are inherently necessary in the operational management of the area’s development in accordance with the policies and guidelines formulated by the Board of Directors.

The field office Director shall be appointed by the Board of Directors. He shall serve until such time as the Field Office is dissolved unless sooner removed from office for cause by the Board of Directors. The Field Office Director shall have the following powers, functions and duties:

1. Execute and administer the policies and decisions of the Board of Directors and the Executive Directors;

2. Directly coordinate the activities of all implementing government instrumentalities of on-site projects;

3. Submit periodic financial and work accomplishment reports relating to project implementation to the Board of Directors;

4. Organize and manage the Field Office and adopt administrative rules and procedures for its internal management;

5. Call upon any Ministry, office, agency, instrumentalities or any political subdivision of the government to assist in the planning and implementation of the Sacobia Development Plan;

6. Performs such other functions as may be assigned by the Board of Directors or the Executive Director of the Authority.

The Field Office shall have the following functions:

1. Serve as the coordinating center for inter-agency planning and management of Sacobia programs and projects;

2. Identify such development projects in the area for inclusion in the integrated development program as authorized by the Board of Directors;

3. Prepare feasibility studies for identified projects in Sacobia;

4. Maintain a continuous feedback system with national agencies and cooperating government instrumentalities involved in Sacobia’s development;

5. Promote and encourage private enterprises and government agencies and instrumentalities to plan, develop, implement projects necessary of conducive to the acceleration of development in the area;

6. Apply for, receive and accept grants and donations of funds, equipment, materials and services needed for the implementation of the Sacobia Development Plan from services within and outside the Philippines;

7. Call on appropriate Ministry, Office or other government instrumentality for assistance in the discharge of its duties; and

8. Perform such other related functions as may be necessary to attain the objectives of the Sacobia Development Plan.

SECTION 9. Appropriation . For the Sacobia Development Authority, the amount of Five Million Pesos (P5,000,000) is hereby appropriated out of any available funds from the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated. For the succeeding calendar year until its termination, the budgetary requirements shall be provided for in the General Appropriation Act of the government in such amounts as shall be adequate for the purpose.

SECTION 10. Repealing Clause . – All laws, decrees, executive orders, administrative orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any provision of this Order are hereby repealed amended or modified accordingly.

SECTION 11. Effectivity . – The Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Presidential Staff Director

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Executive Order Nos. : 531-605]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.