MALACANANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 411

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE FOR THE RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT OF MINDANAO

WHEREAS, the armed insurrection in Mindanao that is currently being subdued by government military forces has seriously disrupted peace and order in the area;

WHEREAS, as a result of such armed insurrection, substantial damage has been caused to lives and property and business and economic activities have been incondislocated;

WHEREAS, as a consequence, the national goal for the development of Mindanao has been set back and mere government military operations to subdue lawless elements is obviously not adequate for the restoration of peace and order and the promotion of economic development in the area;

WHEREAS, the restoration therein of peace and order and the national goal for the economic development of Mindanao call for immediate reconstruction and rehabilitation operations by a special task force that shall pool all government resources from its economic development, financial, welfare and health agencies as well as its military units;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended do hereby create a Presidential Task Force for the Reconstruction and Development of Mindanao.

The Task Force shall be composed of the following:

An Implementing Staff located and operating in the area that shall assist the Task Force is hereby designated and shall be composed of the following:

In pursuance of the aforementioned objectives, the Task Force shall undertake the following:

1. Immediate assessment of the damage wrought on private property and government facilities, services and establishments,

2. Identify and mobilize all sources of funds and prepare an integrated plan necessary for the full reconstruction and rehabilitation of Mindanao in the context of the national development program,

3. Restoration of peace and order by adequate military operations, apprehension of rebellious leaders and followers and the implementation of a selective amnesty and rehabilitation program, and

4. Such other action that may be needed for the above objectives.

The Development Management Staff, the National Computer Center and the Infrastructure Operations Center are hereby designated to act as Secretariat to the Task Force, with the Development Management Staff acting as overall coordinator.

The Presidential Task Force, its Secretariat and Implementing Staff are hereby authorized and empowered to call upon all departments, bureaus, agencies or instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations as well as the private sector, to give the necessary cooperation and assistance for the successful prosecution and discharge of its functions.

Finally, the Task Force shall operate and continue to exercise its powers until such time as its designated tasks are completed. A report of its accomplishments shall be submitted to the President within three (3) months from the date hereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1973). [Executive Order Nos. : 366 – 435] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.