MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1033

DECLARING THE POLICY OF THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT PROVIDING THE SPECIFIC MEASURES TO ENHANCE OR STRENGTHEN THE EFFORTS TO IMPLEMENT THE RECOVERY PROGRAM AND REMOVING THE OBSTACLES THERETO

WHEREAS, the international economic situation remains fragile as indicated in the slow process of economic recovery even in developed countries, and the existence of serious external debt problems in many developing countries;

WHEREAS, the Philippines is in the process of implementing an economic recovery program while at the same time coping with a global environment of fierce competition, including but not limited to increasing protectionism, reduced flow of development assistance, and low commodity export prices;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to restore and strengthen the international financial community’s confidence on the Philippine economy so that the current economic adjustment program can be carried out with vigor;

WHEREAS, in the course of economic recovery it is paramount to raise productivity and efficiency in the agricultural, industrial and services sectors, and to stem any declines in such productivity and efficiency that may have already occurred;

WHEREAS, the attainment of economic recovery with the least burden to society makes it imperative to invigorate programs addressed to the restructuring of agriculture, industry and services to make them more internationally competitive, export-oriented and effective in creating productive employment;

WHEREAS, any disruption in the production process will hamper government efforts to ensure price stability and restore a financial environment favorable to the generation of investments, creation of livelihood opportunities, and rise in incomes and wages;

WHEREAS, doubts are being expressed by the industrial sector about the capability of present laws and institutions to maintain industrial peace and this has been due to the increase in the percentage of strikes compared to previous years;

WHEREAS, it is now necessary to add to existing provisions of the labor laws the creation of a Presidential Council for solving the problems of both management and labor in relation to the economic recovery program. This should include a study of and the solutions of the causes of strikes, as well as study of the efforts of the tripartite sector by bringing various elements that have to cooperate to bring about the success of the program. This project, however, shall include the other problem that involves infiltration of both management and trade unions by subversives and various elements which have their own objectives adverse to the pursuit of the economic recovery program.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby create a Presidential Council for National Economic Recovery.

SECTION 1. The Council shall be composed of the following:

The Office of Media Affairs, National Economic Development Authority, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture and Food shall serve as support ministries.

SECTION 2. The Council shall have the basic function of developing and implementing policy that will promote industrial peace and productivity upon approval of the President.

The Council shall have the following additional functions:

a) to integrate and harness the efforts of the tripartite sectors – government, workers and employers towards the promotion of industrial and agrarian peace and stability as an essential element of development;

b) to respond to the causes and factors of labor and agrarian unrest through the application of agreed methods, collective bargaining as well as incentive and indigenous approaches in the prevention and settlement of labor disputes;

c) to promote national development through the participation of the tripartite sectors in the formulation and implementation of appropriate plans and programs;

d) to hold regular meetings for the purpose of formulating plans for carrying out the objectives of the Council;

e) to convoke national and regional tripartite conferences and other meetings to gather views and recommendations in identifying the causes of industrial and agrarian unrest and remedial measures that should be taken;

f) to coordinate with all agencies of the government and employers’ and workers’ organizations in the formulation and implementation of measures designed to attain maximum productivity in an environment which assures of peace, stability and justice;

g) to prepare the necessary budget to implement its plans and programs and to provide for its operational expenses to be drawn from the respective appropriations of the six-member ministries;

h) to submit periodic reports to the President, the Cabinet and the Batasang Pambansa on the projects and programs of the Council.

SECTION 3. Upon recommendation of the Cabinet, the Council will determine which areas or sectors shall be accorded special, speedy and full attention in the exercise of its powers;

SECTION 4. The Council can call on any agency of the government, including the military, in the exercise of its functions;

SECTION 5. This Executive Order shall take effect upon its approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030 – 1093]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.