MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 419

CREATING A TASK FORCE ON HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

WHEREAS, all Filipinos have a right to a quality of life that reflects the optimization of wealth and welfare, and to belong to and actively participate in a national community which promotes the realization of their individuals potential;

WHEREAS, the promise and benefits of national progress will be attained only if the accelerating growth of human settlements is directed and ordered towards meeting the requirements of national development that consistently foster improvement of the quality of life;

WHEREAS, an effective solution to the many problems confronting the country requires the focusing of national efforts and resources towards the development of an integrative program on human settlements; and

WHEREAS, one of the objectives of Proclamation No. 1081 is to effect social, economic and political reforms, and thus bring about the creation of a New Society in our country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, and in order to effect desired  changes and reforms in the social, economic and political structure of our society, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. It is hereby declared that, for the purpose of promoting national development and enabling Filipinos to fully utilize benefits generated by national progress, a competent study be conducted on the nature, policy issues and strategies related to a comprehensive and integrative human settlements program in the Philippines.

SEC. 2. It is hereby further declared that a national human settlements program be formulated in conjunction with the aforementioned study, to consist of the following:

(a) Overall framework plan for the nation, which would pinpoint priority areas for human settlement projects, and serve as a general scheme for development.

(b) Project identification, preparation and development of human settlement prototypes, together with recommendations on planning and building design, management and a funding scheme for the human settlements program. This aspect of the plan will draw heavily from the proposed in-depth study to be conducted by the Task Force. It will include, but not limited to, the following aspects:

(1) Metro Manila Bay projects, which will include a development scheme and a zoning plan for the Manila Bay reclaimed land areas to be allotted for various uses, such as provision for pollution control and the specification of areas where the tourists can swim pollution-free, together with a specification and integration of all multi-sectoral requirements.

(2) Frontier and slum resettlement projects with particular reference to the Tondo reclamation project. It will devise a set of guidelines to be used in determining the necessity for either slum relocation or slum improvement/rehabilitation projects.

(3) Human settlement areas for integrated area development, which will include, but not be limited to, the areas northeast (Marikina-Infanta Road) and south (Laguna-Cavite-Batangas) of Metropolitan Manila.

(4) Tourist development areas, to include the Looc Estate and other sites to be determined by the Task Force.

(c) A national housing program for human settlements, specifying therein the organization, funding, construction, building and local materials development strategies and projects.

SEC. 3. To achieve the aforementioned purposes and objectives, there is hereby created a Task Force on Human Settlements.

(a) The Task Force shall be composed of the President of the Development Academy of the Philippines as Chairman and the following as members:

(1) The Deputy Director-General, National Economic and Development Authority (2) Director, Environmental Planning Center (3) Director, Bureau of Lands (4) Director, Bureau of Forest Development (5) Director, Bureau of Public Works (6) Director, Bureau of Public Highways (7) General Manager, Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (8) General Manager, People’s Homesite and Housing Corporation (9) General Manager, National Housing Corporation (10) General Manager, Government Service Insurance System (11) Administrator, Social Security System (12) Chairman, Development Bank of the Philippines (13) Undersecretary for Tourism (14) Dean, U.P. Institute of Planning (15) Commissioner, National Water and Air Pollution Control Commission (16) Director, National Manpower and Youth Development Council (17) Undersecretary of Social Welfare

(b) The specific functions, duties and powers of the Task Force area as follows:

(1) To assess current or proposed human settlement project;

(2) To set guidelines for the formation of sectoral programs which constitute an integrative human settlement program;

(3) To contract with international and local specialists in planning, academic and authorities and institutions, research and consultancy services in specified areas related to the Philippine human settlement problems as may further the attainment of the objectives of this act;

(4) To establish and supervise a Task Force working staff which shall keep records, abstracts, collate, and synthesize existing studies on human settlements for the Task Force. The Task Force working staff shall be drawn from the Development Academy of the Philippines. The Executive Director of the Development Academy of the Philippines shall serve as head of the Task Force working staff;

(5) To train and employ architects, engineers, social scientists, researchers, statisticians, field researchers and such other persons as may assist the Task Force in fulfilling its functions and duties;

(6) To determine the qualifications and fix the compensation of its Board, Task Force working group and other personnel which it is hereby authorized to hire for administrative operations; and to appoint, discipline and remove its employees; Provided , That except as to the technical staff and such other positions as are highly technical, policy-determining or primarily confidential in nature, all positions in the Task Force shall be subject to the coverage of the plans of the Wage and Position Classification Office;

(7) To adopt rules and procedures for its government;

(8) To apply for, receive and accept from sources within and without the Philippines, for its own use and not for sale, grants or donations of equipment, materials or services. Such grants or donations shall be exempt from gift taxes and shall be deductible from the net taxable income of the grantor, or donor, and the donee, upon certification of the Task Force: Provided , however , That any grant or donation received in accordance with this act shall be disclosed to the President through the annual report;

(9) To call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government for such assistance as it may require in the performance of its duties and functions;

(10) To promote and publish information, studies and investigations on all aspects of Philippine human settlements; and

(11) To undertake and perform such other activities as are needful and desirable to promote the attainment of the aforementioned purposes and objectives.

SEC. 4. A Board of Consultants is hereby also created to advise the Task Force to be headed by Architect Antonio Kayanan.

SEC. 5. The Chairman of the Task Force shall:

(a) Preside over meetings of the Task Force;

(b) Receive gifts or donations in whatever form and from whatever source;

(c) Administer, obligate, and disburse appropriations gifts, or donations upon approval by a majority of the members of the Task Force; and

(d) Hire and maintain such working group, staff or personnel as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and objectives of the Task Force.

SEC. 6. The Chairman of the Task Force may constitute continuing ad hoc committees consisting of the members of the Task Force and such other experts as are necessary to assist the Task Force in the discharge of its functions.

SEC. 7. The Task Force shall submit its report as soon as possible.

SEC. 8. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of September in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1973). [Executive Order Nos. : 366 – 435] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.