MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 583

RECONSTITUTING THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE NATIONAL COTTAGE INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY

WHEREAS, as provided for under Executive Order No. 574, the Cottage Industry Development Council and the Cottage Industry Development Enterprise were abolished and their functions and resources were transferred to the National Cottage Industries Development Authority;

WHEREAS, under the same Executive Order, the National Cottage Industries Development Authority was transferred and attached to the Ministry of Industry for policy and program coordination;

WHEREAS, as a result of these organizational changes, it has become necessary to reconstitute the Board of Directors of the National Cottage Industries Development Authority to provide a mechanism for greater and more effective coordination in terms of policy and program formulation between it and the Ministry of Industry; and

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. The Board of Directors of the National Cottage Industries Development Authority is hereby reconstituted to be composed of the following or their representatives:

(1) Minister of Industry as Chairman (2) Minister of Trade as Vice-Chairman (3) Minister of Human Settlements (4) Minister of Education and Culture (5) Chairman of the National Manpower and Youth Council (6) Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines (7) Chairman of the Development Bank of the Philippines (8) Administrator of the National Cottage Industries Development Authority (9) Three (3) representatives from the private sector

The three (3) members from the private sector shall be appointed by the President for a term of six years: Provided , That one shall be initially appointed for a term of six years, one for a term of four years and the other one for a term of two years.

SEC. 2. All laws, decrees, charters, executive orders, administrative orders, proclamations, rules and regulations or parts thereof that are in conflict with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 3. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Executive Order Nos. : 531-605]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.