MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 638

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 31, ENTITLED “REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES OR OTHER MEANS OF TRANSPORTATION FOR OFFICIAL PURPOSES”

WHEREAS, the price of oil is continuously affecting the world economy thereby impelling the government to reorient its priorities in its efforts to sustain regional growth and development in order to realize the national objectives to accelerate economic growth and development;

WHEREAS, for realization of such objectives particularly in the area of regional development, the development thrust under the NEDA Development Plan and priorities set forth for the regions for the upliftment or improvement of depressed areas, requires extensive government action;

WHEREAS, local officials are responsible and instrumental in the implementation and supervision of government projects and improvement;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order and ordain the amendment of the following Sections of Executive Order No. 31 to read as follows:

Section 1. The Sangguniang Panlalawigan, the Sangguniang Panlungsod or the Sangguniang Bayan, as the case may be, may authorize, subject to the approval of the Ministers concerned, those officials whose duties make it necessary or advisable for them to use special means of transportation for the purpose of supervision, inspection, or investigation, to utilize their privately-owned motor vehicles for official purposes and to receive reimbursement for the same at the rate of sixty-five centavos (P0.65) for each kilometer of travel in the case of automobiles and jeeps, on official business: Provided, That the maximum allowances to be paid during any month shall not exceed those given in the following schedules:

A. For provinces and cities having 350 kilometers or more of designated first and second class roads connected with the provincial capital or city ‑

B. For provinces and cities having 200 or more of designated first and second class roads connected with the provincial capital or city but less than 350 kilometers –

C. For provinces and cities having 150 kilometers or more of designated first and second class roads connected with the provincial capital or city but less than 200 kilometers –

D. For provinces and cities having 75 kilometers or more of designated first and second class roads connected with the provincial capital or city but less than 150 kilometers –

Section 2. Employees of the National Government and/or provincial and city government who perform field duties may be given monthly allowances for providing other private means of transportation for official purposes, when properly authorized, with the approval of the Minister concerned, as follows:

a) For motorcycles, P0.25 per kilometer, or a maximum of P100.00 per month.

b) For horses, P0.30 per kilometer, or a maximum of P80.00 per month.

c) For bicycles, P0.15 per kilometer, or a maximum of P40.00 per month.

Section 3. Provincial Auditors, Division Superintendents of Schools and District Engineers who are national officials already enjoying/entitled to transportation and representation allowance under existing laws are not covered by this Executive Order except those authorized under LOI Nos. 779, 804 and 821.

Section 4. All rules and regulations on the official use of motor vehicles or other means of transportation referred to in Executive Order No. 31, series of 1954 shall remain valid/enforceable.

Section 5. Repealing Clause. All rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with or contrary to any provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended and/or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of January in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.