MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 677

AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1588

WHEREAS, there is a necessity to amend Presidential Decree No. 1588 which established a National Cartography, Photogrammetry, and Remote Sensing Center with the objective of granting to the agency a wider latitude to realize its mandated goals and objectives;

WHEREAS, there is a need to add one more Deputy Executive Director in order to assure a more efficient and smoother management and operation of the aforesaid body; and

WHEREAS, pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1416, the President is granted the power to reorganize national government agencies;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order the following amendments to Presidential Decree No. 1588, entitled. “Establishing a National Cartography, Photogrammetry, and Remote Sensing Center, Defining Its Powers and Functions, Appropriating Funds Therefor, And For Other Purposes.”

SECTION 1. The title of Presidential Decree No. 1588 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Establishing a National Cartography Authority , Defining Its Powers and Functions, Appropriating Funds Therefor, And For Other Purposes.”

SEC. 2. Sec. 2 Presidential Decree No. 1588 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 2. Creation of the National Cartography Authority . – There is hereby created a National Cartography Authority , hereinafter referred to as the “ Authority ” under the supervision of the Office of the President.”

SEC. 3. Sec. 4, paragraph 1 of P.D. 1588 is also hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 4. Executive Board . – The governance and policy direction of the Authority shall be vested in an Executive Board, hereinafter referred to as the “Board” which shall be composed of the Director-General, National Intelligence and Security Authority as Chairman and six (6) members to be appointed by the President as nominated by the Chairman.”

SEC. 4. Sec. 6, paragraph 2 of the Presidential Decree No. 1588 is also hereby amended to read a follows:

“The Executive Director shall be assisted by one (1) Deputy Executive Director for Operations, One (1) Deputy Executive Director for Production , and one (1) Deputy Executive Director for Technical Services and planning.”

SEC. 5. Staff Appointments . – The function of the Authority is hereby declared policy determining, highly technical and highly confidential and as such all staff appointments including regular professional and administrative staff of the Authority shall be exempt from the Office of Compensation and Position Classification’s rules and regulations.

SEC. 6. BCGS Mapping Functions . – The mapping functions of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey (BCGS) under the Ministry of National Defense including its applicable appropriations, records, equipment, property, personnel and projects as may be necessary are correspondingly integrated into the Authority.

SEC. 7. Sec. 12 of P.D. No. 1588 is also hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 12. Appropriations . – To carry out the objectives of this Executive Order, there is hereby appropriated for CY 1981 from the Foreign Assisted Projects Support Fund (Capital Outlay Fund) the amount of Thirty Million Pesos (P30,000,000.00) for the construction of the permanent building of the Authority. Thereafter, further appropriations for the Authority shall be included in the General Appropriations Act.”

SEC. 8. All provisions of existing laws, decrees, executive orders and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 9. The Provisions of this Executive Order are declared to be separable and if any provisions or the application thereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, the validity of the other provisions shall not be affected.

SEC. 10. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.