MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 153

CREATING THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON UNIDO MATTERS

WHEREAS, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), created on November 17, 1966, by virtue of General Assembly Resolution 2152 (XXI), as an autonomous body within the United Nations, is charged with (a) promoting and assisting industrial development to accelerate industrialization of developing countries, and (b) coordinating United Nations activities related to industrialization; and

WHEREAS, the UNIDO International Symposium on Industrial Development, held at Athens from November 20 to December 19, 1967, recommended among other things, the establishment of National Committee for UNIDO to enable the various public and private bodies concerned with industrial development to meet, coordinate their activities, and advise the governments on questions concerning UNIDO.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON UNIDO MATTERS, which shall act in accordance with paragraph 2 hereof, and prepare studies, initiate action and follow up measures for facilitating concerted actions for promoting and accelerating industrialization in the Philippines.

The Committee shall be composed of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Chairman of the National Economic Council, Secretary of Commerce and Industry, Chairman of the Board of Investments, Chairman of the National Science Development Board, and the Director-General of the Presidential Economic Staff. In addition, the President of the Philippine Chamber of Industries shall be invited to join this Committee. The members of the Committee may designate qualified and competent representatives to act in their stead.

The Chairman of the Committee shall be elected from among its members during its regular meeting in January. He shall be empowered to appoint members to s consultative board consisting of representatives from specialized governmental agencies, and from the private sector.

The Presidential Economic Staff shall act as the Secretariat of the Committee and shall render the necessary staff support and technical assistance.

The Committee and the Secretariat are hereby authorized to secure data and information directly from all government offices, agencies, corporations, and entities and to consult with officials and personnel thereof, on matters related to the above functions.

The officers and personnel of all government offices, agencies, corporations and entities are hereby enjoined to render full support and cooperation to the Committee and the Secretariat in the discharge of their functions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE J. LEIDO, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.