MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 819

CREATING THE POSITION OF PRESIDENTIAL REGIONAL MONITORING OFFICER IN EVERY REGION

WHEREAS, it is necessary for the President to be always on top of the major developments in the regions;

WHEREAS, it is necessary for the decision-making process of the President that accurate, comprehensive and timely information on government efforts in the regions be made available at all times;

WHEREAS, there is a need for the Office of the President to establish regional monitoring arms which will provide the President the necessary information on the developments in the regions;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order;

Sectiom 1. The creation of the position of Presidential Regional Monitoring Officer (PREMO) in every region except in Regions IX and XII where there exist the Lupong Tagapagpaganap ng Pook (LTP) -Presidential Management Staff (Office of the President) Monitoring Units.

Sec. 2. The funds, records, equipment, vehicles and all other properties of the Presidential Regional Officer for Development (PROD) are hereby transferred to the PREMO. The PROD funds for Regions IX and XII are hereby transferred to the LTP-PMS Monitoring Task Force in Regions IX and the LTP-PMS Monitoring Unit in Region XII. The funds for the PREMO and the LTP-PMS Monitoring Units shall be released through the PMS.

Sec. 3. The PREMO, to be appointed by the President, and the Head of the LTP-PMS Monitoring Units in Regions IX and XII shall serve as monitoring and action officers of the Office of the President in the regions and are hereby placed under the overall supervision of the Presidential Executive Assistant (PEA). They shall report to the Office of the President through the PMS.

SEC. 4. The Chairman of the LTP shall automatically be the Head of the LTP-PMS Monitoring Units in Regions IX and XII.

SEC. 5. The PREMO/Head of LTP-PMS Monitoring Units shall be assisted by Deputy PREMO/Deputy Heads (one for Region IX and one for Region XII) who shall be designated by the President from among the regional executives.

SEC. 6. The PREMO/Head of LTP-PMS Monitoring Units shall regularly provide the President, through the PMS, comprehensive reports on the major problems/issues and the status of government programs and projects in the regions.

SEC. 7. To ascertain the status of programs and projects, and to identify problem areas/bottlenecks, the PREMO/Head of LTP-PMS Monitoring Units shall regularly conduct project-inspection and initiate meetings with the regional/provincial/local officials and target beneficiaries of government projects/programs.

If there are problems/issues in the regions which could not be solved at the regional level and which require Presidential intervention, the PREMO/Head of LTP-PMS Monitoring Units shall, in all cases, submit to the Office of the President, through the PMS, his recommendations for corrective action. He shall be tasked to institute measures to solve the problems so identified.

SEC. 8. The PREMO/Head of LTP-PMS Monitoring Units is authorized to call on all government offices to provide him necessary assistance in carrying-out his functions.

SEC. 9. The PMS is hereby directed to establish the operational system within which the PREMO can effectively exercise his functions and responsibilities. Mobility, rapid response, field orientation, speedy decision-making, and effective Presidential control shall be the guiding features of the desired system. Towards this end, the PMS shall undertake the following:

1. design the organizational set-up and the operational framework of the PREMO; and

2. design the PREMO operations manual that shall prescribe, among other things, the standard operating procedures and the reporting system to be followed.

SEC. 10. Repealing Clause . -All provisions of existing laws, proclamations, orders, decrees, instructions, rules and regulations or parts thereof contrary to or in conflict with the provisions of this order are hereby modified or repealed accordingly.

This order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of July in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 781-857]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.