MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 477

EXTENDING THE TERM OF THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON REORGANIZATION CREATED UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 281, SERIES OF 1970

WHEREAS, it has been declared policy to pursue a continuing program of administrative reform that would assure and sustain the reinvigoration of the bureaucracy;

WHEREAS, full implementation of the Integrated Reorganization Plan (IRP), as amended, as enjoined to be effected pursuant to Letter of Instructions No. 449, is about to be completed;

WHEREAS, there is now therefore need to evaluate, follow-up and monitor the extent and effectiveness of the implementation of the IRP, as amended, particularly as this pertains to administrative decentralization and regionalization, to ensure that implementation has been affected not only in form but also in substance;

WHEREAS, there is need to provide continued staff advice and assistance to the Office of the President in assessing proposals for further organizational changes and adjustments emanating from the various government agencies to assure consistency with the major thrusts and principles of the reorganization;

WHEREAS, there is a need for the Presidential Commission on Reorganization (PCR) to provide continued technical and administrative support to a desired extended study of government corporations pursuant to Executive Order No. 464; and

WHEREAS, it is desirable for the PCR to continue providing staff assistance and consultative advice to the Civil Service Commission in the assessment of proposals for exemptions from the civil service pursuant to P.D. No. 868, to the Career Executive Service Board in the administration of the career executive service, and to the various agencies of the government with respect to reorganization matters;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby extend the term of the Presidential Commission on Reorganization up to December 31, 1977.

The Presidential Executive Assistant shall issue the necessary directives for the detail or the extension of the detail of such technical personnel as may be needed by the Commission, under the same conditions as prescribed in Executive Order No. 281, as amended.

The Commission is authorized to disburse and defray all expenses for its operations from January 1 to December 31, 1977 from funds as may be available from the Office of the President.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1976). [Executive Order Nos. : 436 – 530 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.