MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 782

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE TO MONITOR AND REGULATE THE IMPORTATION OF USED TRUCKS AND ENGINES

WHEREAS, there is a need to rationalize the importation of used trucks and used diesel/gasoline engines, in support of the Progressive Truck and the Diesel Engine Manufacturing Program;

WHEREAS, there is need to assure end-users of trucks and engines of adequate supply of these items at reasonable cost;

WHEREAS, the rationalization effort and supply assurance require active monitoring and regulation of imports of used trucks and engines;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and ordain:

Section 1. There is hereby created an Inter-Agency Committee on the Importation of Used Trucks and Engines, to be composed of the Ministry of Trade and Industry, the Ministry of Transportation and Communication, the Board of Investments, the Central Bank of the Philippines, and the Bureau of Customs. The Chairman of the Inter-Agency Committee shall be the Ministry of Trade and Industry.

Section 2. The Inter-Agency Committee shall monitor and regulate the importation of used trucks and engines subject to the following conditions:

1. Prior authorization from the Inter-Agency Committee on Used Trucks and Engines shall be required for all importation of used trucks and used diesel/gasoline engines (i.e. for stationary and/or transport use).

2. Only the following shall be allowed for importation:

a. Used Trucks with rated gross vehicular weights (GVW) greater than 40,000 lbs. and of models not more than six (6) years old.

b. Used diesel/gasoline engines with rated capacities greater than 150 horsepower and of models not more than five (5) years old.

c. Special purpose vehicles as determined by the Inter-Agency Committee.

3. Completely built-up (CBU) second hand passenger buses, including tourist buses, shall not be allowed for importation.

4. The following may be allowed to import items listed in Paragraph 2:

a. Direct end-user firms, legitimately engaged in essential agricultural-industrial pursuits, mining, logging, construction and other industrial operations.

b. Traditional trader-importers, provided the aggregate value of the importation shall not exceed US$9 Million for each import year.

5. Reconditioning of imported used trucks by reconditioning centers accredited by the Ministry of Industry per LOI No. 590 shall now be optional.

6. Violation of any of the provisions of this Order and of the Guidelines which will be issued by the Inter-Agency Committee to implement the same shall constitute sufficient cause for imposition of appropriate disciplinary measure/s, including seizure proceeding, blacklisting of importer/foreign suppliers, and/or suspension/revocation of the firm’s import authority.

Section 3. Guidelines which may be necessary for the effective implementation of this program, shall be formulated and issued by the Inter-Agency Committee.

Section 4. The Inter-Agency Committee may enlist the assistance of other government agencies and/or private institutions in the effective implementation of this Order.

Section 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE IN THE CITY OF MANILA, this 13th day of March, in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Eighty Two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 781 – 857 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.