MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 545

MERGER OF THE COLLEGE OF NURSING AND SCHOOL OF NURSING OF THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES.

WHEREAS, there are at present two schools of nursing in the University of the Philippines System, namely, the School of Nursing at the Philippine General Hospital created under Act No. 2467 and the College of Nursing created by the Board of Regents of the University 1948;

WHEREAS, the continued operation of the two units offering practically the same courses while requiring the administrative and academic bodies is economically wasteful and administratively cumbersome, and therefore, not properly promotive of educational goals of the New Society;

WHEREAS, considerations of efficiency and economy, as well as modern trends in nursing education establish the advantages of only one College of Nursing in the University.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby Order:

SECTION 1. The School of Nursing of the Philippine General Hospital and the College of Nursing of the University of the Philippines are hereby merged into one unit which shall hereafter be called the College of Nursing of the University of the Philippines System.

SECTION 2. There shall be close coordination between the College of Nursing and the Philippine General Hospital in the areas of practical training, patient care and research.

SECTION 3. The College of Nursing shall be under the supervision and control of the Board of Regents, University of the Philippines System. Its administrative set-up, curriculum, and faculty appointments shall be made under such rules as the Board of Regents may adopt.

SECTION 4. The Board of Regents of the University of the Philippines System may authorize the establishment of scholarships in the College of Nursing covering free tuition, and a board and subsistence assistance in accordance with such rules as it may adopt.

SECTION 5. The University of the Philippines shall provide for the budgetary outlay of the College of Nursing; however, the Philippine General Hospital may contribute thereto in furtherance of the clinical training and educational programs of the hospital, provided that the intended purpose is to evolve and enhance the patient-care objectives of the hospital, the extent of which shall be determined by the Director of PGH; the PGH shall share in providing the budgetary outlay for the former authorized positions chargeable to the former School of Nursing until such time as such positions shall no longer be authorized or shall have been absorbed by the University of the Philippines.

SECTION 6. Students who have been admitted to the School of Nursing program as of June 1977 shall continue to enjoy free tuition, board and subsistence as provided by Act 2467, until they shall have completed the requirements of the aforementioned program but not later than the end of the first semester of academic year 1980-81.

SECTION 7. Provisions of existing laws, orders and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed.

SECTION 8. This order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1979). [Executive Order Nos. : 531 – 605]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.