MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 805

ABOLISHING THE MINISTRY OF YOUTH AND SPORTS DEVELOPMENT, TRANSFERRING ITS FUNCTIONS TO A MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, CULTURE AND SPORTS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, under the New Republic, national economic development shall be pursued with renewed dedication and determination;

WHEREAS, educational and cultural programs and youth and sports programs which are presently being administered by separate Ministries are directed to the development of the youth to become responsible and useful members of society;

WHEREAS, it is now appropriate to effect a more coordinated and integrated approach to the formulation of programs aimed at the intellectual, cultural and physical development of the youth of the land;

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1772, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstance and new developments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416 as amended, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. The existing Ministry of Youth and Sports Development established pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 604 as amended is abolished together with its services, bureaus and similar agencies, regional offices, and all other entities under its supervision and control. Except as may otherwise be provided for hereinafter, its functions, including records, equipment, property, and such applicable appropriations and personnel as may be necessary are hereby transferred to the Ministry of Education and Culture, which is renamed the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports and hereinafter referred to as the Ministry. The Ministry shall be headed by a Minister of Education, Culture and Sports, hereinafter referred to as the Minister.

SEC. 2. In addition to its current responsibilities on education and culture, the Ministry shall have the following additional functions concerning sports:

(1) Plan and implement an integrated program by physical fitness and amateur sports development in the country, including both those in school and out-of-school;

(2) Plan and conduct amateur open sports competitions at different administrative levels of the government and provide guidelines for their implementation;

(3) Establish or develop, as may be necessary, additional sports facilities in strategic places throughout the country, as well as a modern sports complex adequate for major international sports competitions;

(4) Establish and maintain the necessary linkages and coordination with the national sports associations through the Philippine Olympic Committee and agencies of the government as well as private institutions and associations.

SEC. 3. A Bureau of Sports Development is created as an additional bureau under the supervision and control of the Ministry. The Bureau shall be responsible for the development and evaluation of programs for promoting and improving organized sports and physical fitness for all members of the community. It shall be responsible for formulating guidelines and standards relative to physical fitness, the promotion of organized and individual sports activities, and the establishment and maintenance of sports centers and facilities except the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex in Manila, in Paoay, Ilocos Norte and other training centers determined by the President which shall be under the management of Project: Gintong Alay. It shall also develop athletic, sports, and physical fitness programs at local, regional and national levels, including programs for periodic interscholastic and other athletic meets, and provide guidelines for their implementation.

The various programs of the abolished Ministry aimed at the development of the youth shall be transferred as appropriate to the various bureaus and regional offices of the Ministry, or to the Pambansang Katipunan ng Kabataang Barangay ng Pilipinas or to other ministries, as may be determined by the Minister in consultation with the Office of Budget and Management and the Presidential Commission on Reorganization.

SEC. 4. The National Youth and Sports Development Foundation of the Philippines shall be an additional entity attached to the Ministry for policy and program coordination. The Minister shall be ex-officio Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the National Youth and Sports Development Foundation of the Philippines and shall recommend to the President for appointment the other members representing the government and private sectors.

The Gintong Alay Foundation Project: Gintong Alay is attached to the Office of the President for policy and program coordination.

Gintong Alay shall continue as the national sports training program of the country which shall have the same task of recruiting, selecting and training of Filipino athletes in preparations for international competitions, in coordination with the Philippine Olympic Committee and the national sports associations. For purpose of this national training program, the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports and other government ministries and agencies shall extend full assistance to this program.

Any student athlete, either college or high school, recruited for training by Project: Gintong Alay should be allowed by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports to cross-enroll from their original school to an equivalent school in the vicinity of the Gintong Alay training camp to enable the student concerned to have an uninterrupted schooling within the year and for the duration of their training.

The Gintong Alay Foundation and Project: Gintong Alay are attached to the Office of the President for policy and program coordination.

SEC. 5. The Minister of Education, Culture and Sports shall assume the position of Chairman or member, as appropriate, of all boards or other bodies previously held by the Minister of Youth and Sports Development in an ex-officio capacity.

SEC. 6. There shall be established in each region a subsidiary unit under the supervision and control of the Regional Director of the Ministry which shall be responsible for the implementation in the region of an integrated sports development program for both in-school and out-of-school youth. The Regional Director of the head of the subsidiary unit, as appropriate, may assume the position of chairman or member as suitable of all councils or similar bodies previously held by the regional director of the abolished Ministry of Youth and Sports Development in an ex-officio capacity.

SEC. 7. The Ministry is hereby authorized to issue such orders, rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this Executive Order; provided , that approval of the Office of Budget and Management is obtained relative to the new staffing pattern including appropriate salary rates, the organizational structure at divisional and lower levels, and the realignment of existing appropriations. The Minister may appoint qualified personnel of the abolished Ministry to appropriate positions in the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports, and those not so appointed are deemed laid off.

SEC. 8. All Presidential appointees of the abolished Ministry of Youth and Sports Development and its respective bureaus, offices and other entities under the supervision and control of or under the administrative supervision of the abolished Ministry are laid off, unless otherwise reappointed by the President; provided , that those who are Career Executive Service Officers shall either be reappointed or reassigned by the President upon the recommendation of the Minister to appropriate positions in the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports, or assigned to the Career Executive Service Board in which shall endeavor to find appropriate placement for them in other ministries or agencies; provided , further , that those Career Executive Service Officers who have been assigned to the Career Executive Service Board shall continue to receive their salaries from any available and applicable funds; and Provided, finally, that those who are not placed in appropriate positions within six months after their assignment to the Career Executive Service Board shall be similarly laid off.

SEC. 9. All those who are laid off under the provisions of this Executive Order shall be entitled to all benefits and gratuities provided for under existing laws.

SEC. 10. Except as may otherwise be determined by the Minister, all present incumbents of positions in the abolished Ministry shall continue to exercise their usual functions, duties, and responsibilities, pending the issuance of the appropriate implementing orders.

SEC. 11. All laws, decrees, orders, proclamations, rules, regulations or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 12. Any portion or provision of this Executive Order that may be declared unconstitutional shall not have the effect of nullifying the other provisions thereof, provided that such remaining portions can still stand and be given effect in their entirety to accomplish the objectives of this Executive Order.

SEC. 13. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 781-857]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.