MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 258

CREATING THE NATIONAL ACTION COMMITTEE ON ANTI-SMUGGLING AFFAIRS

WHEREAS, the problem of smuggling is not the sole concern and responsibility of a single government agency;

WHEREAS, the existence of gaps and inadequacies in the current anti-smuggling effort of the government, particularly on matters relating to intelligence, operation or apprehension, prosecution and disposition of smuggling cases, has served to hamper the effectiveness of the drive; and

WHEREAS, to wage a more dynamic and vigorous campaign against smuggling, it is necessary that there be a concerted and well-coordinated action among the different agencies of the government engaged in anti-smuggling activities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a National Action Committee on Anti-Smuggling Affairs composed of the following;

Commissioner of Customs Chairman, Anti-Smuggling Action Center Representative of the Secretary of Justice Representative of the Commissioner, BIR Representative of the Chief of Staff, AFP Commandant, Philippine Coast Guard Representative of such other government entities that the Committee may call on on-the-need basis.

The Committee shall elect from among its members its Chairman on a quarterly basis.

The Committee shall be charged with the planning, programming, implementation, direction and supervision of combined anti-smuggling operations of government agencies concerned with anti-smuggling activities. It shall also conduct joint investigation and prosecution of all cases involving violations of existing laws, rules and regulations on smuggling throughout the country.

The Committee shall have a Permanent Secretariat at the Office of the Anti-Smuggling Action Center (ASAC) to be composed of one (1) Secretary and two (2) assistants to be provided by ASAC. The Secretariat shall have the following functions.

1. To maintain liaison among the members of the Committee;

2. To issue appropriate memoranda or directives to agencies concerned to implement and follow up the decisions of the Committee;

3. To maintain the records and files of the Committee; and

4. To prepare and submit such reports as the Action Committee may direct.

Each member of the Committee shall designate a person to contact at the member’s office who shall be considered a member of the Secretariat but not necessarily holding office therein.

The Committee is hereby authorized to create sub-committees and composite teams from various government agencies upon approval of the respective department or agency heads concerned, and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the powers and authority granted to it. It is further authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government for assistance in the performance of its functions.

Funds necessary to implement this Executive Order, particularly transportation expenses and per diems that may be incurred by the Committee or any of its authorized teams created in connection with the performance of mission pertinent to the powers and duties granted to it shall be chargeable against the funds of the respective offices of the members represented therein as determined by the Committee.

The Committee shall coordinate its functions and investigations with any government agency to avoid overlapping or duplication of functions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of September in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.