MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 114-A

CREATING AN EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAMS

WHEREAS, there is need for an effective machinery to assist in coordinating the activities of government agencies concerned with project implementation and to ensure integrated execution of government infrastructure programs;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby establish an Executive Committee for the implementation of the infrastructure programs of the government, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, which shall be directly responsible to the President of the Philippines.

Section 1. Composition – The Committee shall have as members the following:

Section 2. Functions and Responsibilities of the Committee – The functions, duties and responsibilities or the Committee shall be the following:

1. To direct, manage and control, through the individual agencies, the implementation of the infrastructure program;

2. To coordinate and facilitate inter-agency participation in program and project implementation;

3. To coordinate, through its Chairman, with the Financial Policy Committee created under Executive Order No. 97, dated October 26, 1967 in the formulation of the capital improvement programs and reprogramming of financial resources for infrastructure project;

4. To institute or promulgate such measure as are necessary to eliminate problem areas to accelerate program and project implementation;

5. To provide the President at all times accurate information on the actual progress in implementation;

6. To maintain, in cooperation with the Department of National Defense, facilities and staff for purposes of effective rapid monitoring of project progress reports and transmittal of directives and appraisal of data; and

7. To establish and supervise regional and provincial operations rooms at such time as the Committee may deem necessary.

Section 3. Supervision of Monitoring Facilities – The technical supervision of the monitoring facilities at the existing Infrastructure Operations Room (IOR) and other such field offices shall be under the Undersecretary of National Defense. The IOR shall continue to serve as the central repository of all reports.

Section 4. Responsibility of Agency Head – It is incumbent on the individual agency head to carry out promulgations and directives emanating from the Executive Committee.

Section 5. Frequency of Meetings – The Committee shall meet the last Tuesday of every month or oftener as it may so desire and shall submit a report to the President at the end of every month.

Section 6. Authority to Request Assistance from other Offices – All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby enjoined to cooperate with and assist the Committee in the performance of its responsibilities.

Section 7. Repealing Clause – All previous Orders, directives and memoranda issued inconsistent with the above are hereby revoked.

Section 8. Effectivity of this Order – This order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff