MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 747

CREATING A SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON THE PHILIPPINE COCONUT INDUSTRY

WHEREAS, the coconut industry is the primary source of foreign exchange in the country and directly affects the livelihood of more than six million farmers and workers;

WHEREAS, in the light of recent adverse developments in the world market situation, there is a need to review and reassess existing policies, practices and institutions relative to the Philippine Coconut Industry;

WHEREAS, the state is committed to the growth of the Philippine coconut industry and to the upliftment of the economic conditions of its members, particularly the coconut farmers; and

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created a Special Committee on the Philippine Coconut Industry, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, which shall be composed of the following:

Deputy Prime Minister Jose A. Roño, Chairman Minister Roberto Ongpin, Member Minister Juan Ponce Enrile, Member Minister Placido Mapa, Jr., Member Minister-of-State Emmanuel Pelaez, Member Assemblyman Hilario Davide, Jr., Member Assemblyman Mariano Logarta, Member Assemblyman Cesar Villariba, Member Ambassador Eduardo Cojuangco, Member Administrator Rolando de la Cuesta, Member Mrs. Maria Clara Lobregat, Member

SEC. 2. The Committee shall undertake the following functions:

a) To conduct an extensive study and assessment of current developments and trends affecting the Philippine coconut industry; and

b) To determine and recommended such long-range policies and solution of problems as may be necessary to promote the Philippine coconut industry and enhance the well-being of the coconut farmers.

SEC. 3. The Committee shall meet as soon as possible upon call of the chairman and shall determined and adopt rules as may be deemed necessary in the conduct of its proceedings.

SEC. 4. The National Economic Development Authority (NEDA) shall provide the Committee with the necessary staff and technical support. The Committee, however, through its chairman, may call on other government agencies and institutions to provide such assistance as may be required to attain its objectives.

SEC. 5. The Committee shall submit to the President a report on its findings and recommendations within the earliest time possible.

SEC. 6. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 706 – 780]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.