MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 148

SIMPLIFYING EXPORT PROCEDURES OF GOVERNMENT COMMODITY AGENCIES

WHEREAS, it is the avowed policy of the government to promote and increase export trade in order to realize more foreign exchange receipts and establish a favorable balance of trade;

WHEREAS, the processing of export papers by government commodity agencies in one accessible piece through simplified procedures would benefit exporters by way of savings in the time and money; and

WHEREAS, the savings derived would provide exporters as well as manufacturers incentives to accelerate production and trade;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. To promote the policy enunciated above it is hereby ordered that all existing procedures involved in the processing of export papers of government commodity agencies shall be conducted in one place. Such place shall be located at the Bureau of Customs, Port Area, Manila.

SECTION 2. To carry out the simplification of export procedures, government commodity agencies shall provide representatives who shall perform the existing functions of their respective offices, relative to export procedures. Such representatives shall be deputized by the Heads of their respective offices to perform the following duties:

a. The Inspectors shall undertake all functions pertaining to the inspection, classification, grading, or standardization of export products;

b. The Senior Examiners shall grant the proper Government Certificate of Indentification and the Certificate to Export local products found in order;

c. The Cashiers shall collect the minimum permit fees and/or service fees required by law from the exportation of Philippine products.

SECTION 3. The government commodity agencies which shall appoint and deputize representatives are:

a. Philippine Tobacco Administration b. Philippine Virginia Tobacco Administration c. Parks and Wildlife Office d. Bureau of Fiber Inspection e. Philippine Coconut Administration f. Philippine Fisheries Commission g. Bureau of Animal Industry h. Food and Drug Administration i. National Cottage Industries Development Authority j. Bureau of Plant Industry k. Bureau of Standards l. Bureau of Internal Revenue m. Sugar Quota Administration, other Quota Products Division

SECTION 4. The supervision of representatives shall be vested in an Officer-in-Charge who shall be designated by the National Export Coordinating Center.

SECTION 5. All fees collected shall be for the account of the corresponding government agencies which are lawfully entitled to such fees.

SECTION 6. The Auditor General is hereby directed to designate representatives from the General Auditing Office to audit the various cashiers in the collection and disposition of funds.

SECTION 7. Salaries and other expenses of the personnel detailed by various agencies in accordance with the preceding sections shall continue to be for the account of their respective agencies.

SECTION 8. Equipment and supplies necessary for the efficient performance of the representatives shall be provided for by their respective offices.

SECTION 9. This order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.