MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 525

DESIGNATING THE PUBLIC ESTATES AUTHORITY AS THE AGENCY PRIMARILY RESPONSIBLE FOR ALL RECLAMATION PROJECTS

WHEREAS, there are several reclamation projects which are on going or being proposed to be undertaken in various parts of the country which need to be evaluated for consistency with national programs;

WHEREAS, there is a need to give further institutional support to the Government’s declared policy to provide for a coordinated, economical and efficient reclamation of lands;

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 3-A requires that all reclamation of areas shall be limited to the National Government of any person authorized by it under a proper contract;

WHEREAS, a central authority is needed to act on behalf of the National Government which shall ensure a coordinated and integrated approach in the reclamation of lands;

WHEREAS, the Presidential Decree No. 1084 creates the Public Estates Authority as a government corporation to undertake reclamation of lands and ensure their maximum utilization in promoting public welfare and interest; and

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 1416 provides the President with continuing authority to reorganize the national government including the transfer, abolition, or merger of functions and offices.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and pursuant to the Presidential Decree No. 1416, do hereby order direct the following:

Section 1. – The Public Estates Authority (PEA) shall be primarily responsible for integrating, directing, and coordinating all reclamation projects for and on behalf of the National Government. All reclamation projects shall be approved by the President upon recommendation of the PEA, and shall be undertaken by the PEA or through a proper contract executed by it with any person or entity; Provided, that, reclamation projects of any national government agency or entity authorized under its charter shall be undertaken in consultation with the PEA upon approval of the President.

Sec. 2 – The PEA, in addition to the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1084, shall exercise the following powers and functions:

a. Provide advise and assistance to the President in the formulation, implementation, and evaluation of plans or policies relative to all reclamation projects as would maximize their contribution to national development;

b. Issue such rules and regulations including the identification of such requirements as may be necessary for the evaluation and sound administration of all reclamation projects;

c. Establish and implement a system of coordination with all concerned government agencies including monitoring of the progress of all reclamation projects; and

d. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President.

Sec. 3 – All lands reclaimed by PEA shall belong to or be owned by the PEA which shall be responsible for its administration, development, utilization or disposition in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1084. Any and all income that the PEA may derive from the sale, lease or use of reclaimed lands shall be used in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1084.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 14th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1979). [Executive Order Nos. : 436 – 530]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.