MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 367-A

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 367 DATED JANUARY 18, 1972, ENTITLED “MODIFYING THE RATES OF IMPORT DUTY ON CERTAIN IMPORTED ARTICLES AS PROVIDED UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 1937, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES, AS AMENDED.”

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 367 dated January 18, 1972, might create some ambiguity in the interpretation and application of its provisions, apart from the fact that it contains superfluous and unnecessary subheadings;

WHEREAS, it is deemed necessary to simplify and harmonize commodity classifications in the executive order with those of the Tariff and Customs Code for a more effective, proper and correct implementation and administration of said executive order; and

WHEREAS, it is also necessary to effect a more comprehensive adoption of the recommendations of the Tariff Commission and the National Economic Council;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby amend Executive Order No. 367 dated January 18, 1972, to read as follows:

“SECTION 1. The articles specifically listed hereunder as classified under Section 104 of Republic Act No. 1937 shall pay the following rates of import duty:

Tariff Heading No.

Rate of Duty

ex Shoulders, other pork, beef or veal, poultry and other smoked, dried, salted or cooked meat

ex Onions and potatoes

ex Chick peas and sweet peas (excluding those in bulk containers for canning); lentils and other legumes (pulses)

ex Almonds, chestnuts and walnuts

ex Apples and pears

ex Cherries, peaches and plums

ex Coffee, roasted including ground

ex Pepper, in consumer containers

ex Ginger, fresh, dried, including frozen not in airtight containers

ex Other spices, ground, n. e. s. (in consumer containers)

ex Barley, pearled

ex Soybean powder

ex Other seeds for food (melon, watermelon, pumpkin) n.e.s.

ex Moss and seaweeds, dried.

1. Sausages, Bilbao type

2. Other

ex Ham, bacon, poultry, other pork and beef and meat pastes and spreads in airtight containers

ex Soups (in liquid, solid or powder), meat juice and other meat extracts and preparations, n.e.s. in airtight containers

1. Tuna

2. x x x

ex Anchovies

ex Sugar cane syrup, sugar beet syrup, maple sugar and maple syrup, corn syrup for table use and other sugar and syrup, n.e.s.

ex Molasses, edible

ex Cereal foods for infants; food preparations for babies, all kinds, n.e.s. and other preparations of cereals, flour and fecula for food n.e.s. (including cereal products made from flour or starch containing not more than 20% sugar, honey, eggs, fats, cheese, fish, shrimps, fruit, etc.

ex Pickled olives, pickled soybean (tausi) and other pickled vegetables, n.e.s.

ex Pineapple concentrates in airtight containers and natural fruit juice concentrates (liquid form) in retail containers (cans, bottles, etc.)

ex Pineapple juice and other fruit juices, unfermented; tomato juice and other vegetable juices, unfermented, n.e.s. in airtight, containers

ex Non-alcoholic beverages excluding fruit and vegetable juices falling within heading No. 20.07

ex Other fermented cereal beverages

ex Other fermented cereal beverages

ex Rubbing (denatured) alcohol

ex Gin and rum

ex Smoking pipe tobacco

ex Cigars and cheroots

ex Refined salt (purified vacuum pan salt or grained salt in the form of fine crystals, 100% passing thru a No. 20 U.S. Bureau of Standards sieve, containing not less than 99.5% of sodium chloride on a dry basis but not including chemically pure sodium chloride)

ex Food seasoning in retail containers (monosodium glutamate)

ex Cough drops

ex Water paints and ready mixed paints

ex Writing ink

ex Clorox and similar bleaching, disinfecting and deodorizing agents (e.g., Sani-color and Purex); detergents and emulsifiers put up in retail packages; other cleansing preparations, n.e.s.

ex Gelatin, edible, n. e. s., (excluding U.S.P. grade)

ex Paste

ex Pyrotechnical articles (fireworks, etc.)

ex Flints

ex Meat tenderizer

1. x x x

2. x x x

ex Rubber mats and mattings

ex Garden hose

ex Rubber tires for tricycles, baby carriages and other velocipedes; motorcycles tires and tubes; bicycle tires with sizes as follows:

From

To

Balloon Type

24” x 2.125”

22” x 2.125”

20” x 2.125”

1. x x x

ex Automobile tires or casings

2. x x x

ex Automobile tubes

ex Men’s, boys’, women’s, girls’ and infants’ raincoats

1. x x x

2. x x x

3. x x x

4. x x x

ex Bond, writing and tablet paper in rolls, sheets or reams (excluding linen stationery paper)

5. x x x

6. x x x

7. x x x

ex Toilet paper, in rolls or in sheets

8. x x x

9. x x x

10. x x x

11. x x x

ex Other wrapping and packing paper, n.e.s.; other paper, n.e.s.

1. x x x

2. x x x

3. x x x

4. x x x

ex Other paperboard, n.e.s.

ex Crepe paper

1. x x x

2. x x x

ex Gift wrapping paper

ex Cigarette paper, cut to size, in booklet or tubes

1. x x x

2. x x x

1. x x x

2. x x x

ex Typewriter carbon paper

1. x x x

2. Gummed tape, not printed

3. x x x

4. Toilet paper, in rolls, packets or otherwise put up

5. x x x

6. x x x

ex Blotting paper, cut to size

ex Sipping straws; towels; tableware of paper and paperboard (placemats, plates, doilies, etc.); foto corners; printed cards for statistical machines; and other manufactures of paper and paperboard, n.e.s.

ex Advertising materials (commercial publicity materials, excludes catalogues in book form)

ex Pictures and designs printed or otherwise reproduced on paper or cardboard (including lithoprints)

1. x x x

ex Sanitary pads and/or napkins (including Tampax)

ex Non-sterile absorbent cotton

ex Standard lamps and lanterns

ex Lamp and stove wicks (except stove wicks, tubular type, mounted; and lamp wicks, tubular type) and other wicks, n.e.s.

ex Jackets, sweaters and other outerwear, of cotton other vegetable textiles or rayon

ex Jackets, sweaters and other outerwear, of synthetic or of other artificial textiles other than rayon

ex Jackets, sweaters and other outerwear, of wool or of other textile materials n.e.s.

ex Men’s drawers, men’s and boys’ shirts (including polo shirts) and other underwear, of cotton, other vegetable textiles or rayon

ex Men’s drawers and other underwear for men and boys

ex Men’s drawers and other underwear for men and boys, of silk, wool and of other fabrics

ex Gloves and mittens, of cotton or wool

ex Blankets

ex Bed linen, table linen, toilet linen, kitchen linen, made-up curtain, draperies and household articles

ex Bed linen, table linen, toilet linen, kitchen linen, made-up curtains, draperies, and household articles

ex Belts of synthetic textile materials

ex Standard lamps and lanterns, of textile materials

ex Sandals and slippers of synthetic materials; rubber boots; other rubber footwear, n.e.s, and plastic shoes

ex Leather slippers and house footwear (front of sole to heel tip not less than 22 cm.); men and women’s shoes, leather soles, leather top; men and women’s shoes, leather top, rubber soles

ex Footwear with rubber soles, fabric top (front of sole to heel tip less than 22 cm.); boys’ and girls’ shoes, leather soles, men’s and women’s shoes, leather soles, uppers of other materials; boys’ and girls’ shoes, leather top, rubber soles; leather slippers and house footwear (front of sole to heel tip less than 22 cm.); footwear, leather soles, fabric top; infants’ and children’s, shoes, leather soles; infants’ and children’s shoes, with leather top, rubber soles

ex Silk slippers and house footwear; sandals and slippers, of synthetic textile materials; slippers, other materials, n.e.s. (straw, ruches; palm leaf)

ex Gaiters, spats, leggings and puttees

ex Hats, caps and other headgear, of wool-felt and fur-felt

ex Straw hats and panama hats

ex Caps

1. x x x

2. x x x

ex Bathing caps; other headgear, n.e.s.

ex Umbrellas, excluding hand umbrellas

ex Walking sticks and similar articles

ex Artificial flowers, foliage or fruit

ex Fans, of any material, not electrical

ex Dishes and other tableware, porcelain, (excluding plain, white, undecorated plates, cups, saucers and bowls of all sizes); plain, white, undecorated plates, cups, saucers and bowls of porcelain (all sizes)

ex Dishes and other tableware, ironstoneware; dishes and other tableware, fine earthenware (excluding plain, white, undecorated plates, cups, saucers and bowls of all sizes); plain, white, undecorated plates, cups, saucers, and bowls, of fine earthenware (all sizes)

ex Jardinieres and other ornamental articles, stoneware; jardinieres and other ornamental articles, fine earthenware; jardinieres and other ornamental articles, porcelain; table lamps and other lighting fittings of ceramic materials; ash trays, of ceramic material

ex Table and kitchen glasswares and kitchen utensils; other articles of glass for household, hotel and restaurant use, n.e.s; ash trays, of glass

ex Chimneys, globes, shades for lighting fixtures (excluding glass chimneys for air-pressure lamps), of glass; standard lamps and lanterns of glass, n.e.s., not electrical

ex Other glass, n.e.s.; other glassware, n.e.s.

ex Synthetic stones, cut but not set

ex Hair clips iron or steel

ex Stoves, grates, kitchen ranges, cookers, of iron or steel (not electrical)

ex Rice plates, coffee pots and lunch carriers, of iron or steel, enamelled; buckets and pails; portable ice chests, fiberglass insulated; pressure cookers, domestic type, with a liquid capacity of below 20 quartz; chamber pots, washbasins (sizes up to 38 cm. diameter at mouth) and kitchen sinks (sizes 14” x 20”; 16” x 24”; 18” x 30”) porcelain enameled

ex Compacts (vanity cases) of steel; trunks, suitcases and the like of iron or steel; and other office supplies, n.e.s. excluding paper (paper weights, etc.)

ex Domestic heating apparatus, copper (not electrical); stoves, grates, kitchen ranges, cookers, of brass (not electrical); and stoves parts, brass (not electrical)

ex Household utensils, copper; household utensils, brass; and miscellaneous accessories and parts of household utensils, n.e.s., of copper

ex Pot scourers, scouring and polishing pads, etc. made of copper; compacts (vanity cases) of brass; pins, copper, n.e.s.; and metal caskets

ex Household utensils, nickel; pot scourers, scouring and polishing pads, etc. made of nickel; miscellaneous accessories and parts of household utensils, n.e.s. of nickel; and trunks, suitcases and the like, of nickel

ex Shoe trees, aluminum; household utensils, of aluminum (bottle sterilizers, aluminum ice buckets, etc.); and miscellaneous accessories and parts of household utensils, n. e. s., of aluminum

ex Pot scourers, scouring and polishing pads, etc. made of aluminum; and trunks, suitcases and the like of aluminum

ex Household utensils, lead; and miscellaneous accessories and parts of household utensils, n.e.s., of lead

ex Kitchen appliances and tools, hand operated, n.e.s. (ice picks and crushers, etc.); and parts of kitchen appliances and tools, hand operated, n.e.s.

ex Razor blades (excluding those valued at $1.75 and below per 100 pieces C&F Manila), and razor blades valued at $1.75 and below per 100 pieces, C&F Manila

ex Manicure sets, n.e.s., including nail files

ex Tableware, plated gold and silver

ex Table knives, iron or steel (not including silver or gold plated)

ex Tableware, iron or steel (not including silver or gold plated), excluding table knives; tableware of brass, copper, nickel, zinc; and tableware of other base metals, n.e.s.

ex Parts of kitchen appliances and tools, hand-operated, n.e.s.

ex Filing cabinets and racks of metal

ex Staples, base metal, for ordinary office paper stapling machines (except undulated staples)

ex Standard lamps of base metal; and lanterns of base metal, n.e.s., not electrical

ex Bells (non-electric) of base metal

1. Compression type:

a. x x x x x x

b. x x x x x x

ex Household refrigerators, electric (except electric household refrigerators of 12 cu. ft. and below); soft drink coolers, and ice cream freezers

2. x x x x x x

ex Soft drink coolers; household refrigerators, self-contained unit (10 cu ft. and below); home freezer, non-electric (10 cu. ft. and below); other refrigerators, non-electric, n.e.s.

3. x x x

a. x x x

b. x x x

ex Lawn mowers (not agricultural)

1. Domestic or household type

2. x x x

a. x x x

b. x x x

ex Pencil sharpeners; other office supplies, n.e.s. excluding paper (staple removers, office daters, etc.)

ex Coin-operated machines, n.e.s. (excluding juke-boxes, and vending machines, coin-operated); vending machines, n.e.s. (excluding vending machines for both hot and cold food and beverages, coin-operated)

ex Storage batteries for motorcycles, scooters and other motorized cycles

ex Electric floor polishers with brush diameter ranging from 8” to 16”

ex Portable battery and magneto lamps (excluding miners’ electric safety lamps portable)

ex Electric stoves and ranges (includes completely knocked down stoves and ranges); electric toasters; electric flat iron, domestic (excluding non-automatic type); electric flatiron non-automatic; electric flatiron parts, domestic, (excluding flat base with attachments, iron cover, socket holder, screw and handle)

ex Electric amplifiers, public address and musical reproduction (including completely knock-down)

1. x x x

ex Radio-phonograph combination (including Hi-Fi sets), complete or in CKD condition; television receiving sets; radio receiving sets complete with cabinets (excluding clock radios); including transistor radios; clock radios

ex Radio-phonograph combination (including Hi-Fi sets), complete or in CKD condition; television receiving sets; radio receiving sets complete with cabinets (excluding) clock radios); including transistor radios; clock radios

2. x x x

ex Radio receiving sets and radio kits without cabinets, completely knocked down as to component parts

3. x x x

ex Incandescent lamps (general purpose types), of 10 to 1500 watts with voltage range of 100 to 130 and 200 to 260 volts (excluding lamps falling under heading 85.20 A)

ex Arc lamps (includes reflector arc lamps); straight-tube type fluorescent lamps, n.e.s. (excluding those falling under subheading 85.20 B); Christmas tree bulbs in complete sets or otherwise

1. x x x

ex Jeeps, jeepsters and similar vehicles, diesel or semi-diesel

2. x x x

ex Jeeps, jeepsters and similar vehicles, other than diesel or semi-diesel

1. Diesel of semi-diesel:

a. x x x

b. Other

2. Other:

a. x x x

b. Assembled:

(1) With not more than four cylinders

(2) With six cylinders

(3) x x x

ex Tanks for war

ex Motorcycles (including all types of motorized cycles) and side cars, complete (excluding CKD)

ex Baby perambulators, (buggies, carriages, prams, sulkies, strollers, walkers): carriages excluding articles falling in heading 97.03

ex Wheelbarrows

ex Rifle parts and accessories (telescopic sights)

ex Rulers, of all materials, excluding carpenters’ rules

ex Phonographs and gramophones, including record players or record changers in built-up (completely assembled) condition, with or without amplifiers, speaker/horn, etc.; juke boxes

ex Phonograph (gramophone) records, n.e.s. (excluding phonograph records for language studies)

ex – Rifles for firing blank shots, line-throwing and the like

ex Sporting ammunitions (cartridges, shotgun shells, etc.); projectiles and ammunitions, filled or unfilled, except sporting ammunition; ammunitions for air pistols of base metals (examples: steel and lead shots, lead pellets, etc.)

ex Chairs and other seats (including convertible bed-setters and the like), of any material

ex Barbers’ chairs of any material

ex Wood furniture and fixtures; filing cabinets and racks, of metal; other furniture of metal (desks and other office furniture), n.e.s.; other furniture, of other materials, n.e.s.

ex Quilts, all kinds of fabrics, mattresses and mattress supports

ex Fancy carved articles of vegetable materials (not including jewelry)

ex Fancy carved articles of natural mineral materials (e.g., jet, amber, meerschaum), not including jewelry

ex Fancy carved articles of natural or mineral materials (not including jewelry)

ex Brooms merely bound together and not mounted in head, all materials

ex Brooms mounted in head, all materials; hairbrushes; mops; toothbrushes; other brushes, n.e.s.

ex Powder puffs and pads for applying cosmetics, of any material

ex Wheeled toys designed to be ridden by children

ex Dolls, excluding parts and accessories

ex Microscope sets, children’s, of sufficient magnification as to be usable for rudimentary laboratory instruction purposes

ex Mahjong sets, playing cards; other funfair games, n.e.s.

ex Baseball catchers’ mask, body protector and base; softball catchers’ mask, body protector and base

ex Amusement park and playground devices; badminton equipment; shuttlecocks, badminton; golf clubs; archery equipment, n.e.s., boxing equipment, n.e.s, golf balls; bowling balls; other balls for sports and outdoor games, n.e.s. other sporting goods and equipment, n.e.s.; other appliances, apparatus and accessories for gymnastics, athletics or for sports and outdoor games (except rubber sole, fabric top footwear), n.e.s.

ex Fishing rods, reels and tackles (except for commercial fishing)

ex Buttons of cellulose compounds (including plastic) and other materials; cuff links and studs

ex Mechanical pencil; mechanical pencil parts; penholders and pencil holders

1. x x x

ex Lead pencils valued at P5 and below per gross, CIF Manila

2. Wax crayons

3. Writing and drawing chalks

ex Crayons, except school crayons

ex Magic slates

ex Cigar and cigarette lighters; cigar and cigarette lighter parts

ex Cigarette pipes and cigar holders; smoking pipes; other smoker’s articles, n.e.s. (includes combination sets)

ex Combs of any material

SECTION. 2. After the expiration of thirty (30) days from the issuance of this Order, all the above described articles entered or withdrawn from warehouse, in the Philippines, for consumption shall be subject to the rate of import duty herein prescribed.

SECTION. 3. The articles whose rates of duty are increased by this Order are those that are described and classified as Unclassified Consumer Goods (UC), Semi-Unclassified Consumer Goods (SUC) and Non-Essential Consumer Goods (NEC) by the Central Bank of the Philippines in accordance with Central Bank Circular numbered 289, dated February 21, 1970, as amended.

SECTION. 4. Any unwarranted increase in the prices of local products benefited by these tariff changes may be sufficient ground for the revocation of such tariff changes.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd). FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1972). [Executive Order Nos. : 366-435]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.