MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 174

FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 571 CREATING A DECORATION TO BE KNOWN AS THE ORDER OF SIKATUNA

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby further amend Section 2 of Executive Order No. 571, promulgated on February 27, 1953, to read as follows:

“SEC. 2. The Order of Sikatuna, which commemorates the first treaty (Pacto de Sangre) between the Philippines and a foreign country, shall be divided into the following classes:

“Special Class RAJA – To be awarded to actual or former heads of state and/or heads of government, Filipino or foreign, for extraordinary services in the field of international relations.

“First Class DATU – To be awarded to foreign ministers and other officials of cabinet rank, Filipino or foreign, for exceptionally meritorious services in the field of international relations.

“Second Class LAKAN – To be awarded to vice foreign ministers, cabinet undersecretaries, ambassadors and officials of equivalent rank, Filipino or foreign, for outstanding services in the field of international relations. Ministers Plenipotentiary may also qualify for this class.

“Third Class MAGINOO – To be awarded to ministers, consuls general and senior officials of the Department of Foreign Affairs, whether in the Home Office or in the Foreign Service, for excellent services in the field of international relations. This may likewise be awarded to other government officials of the Philippines and of foreign countries of equivalent or similar rank and to other distinguished persons. Before any Filipino government official or employees may be entitled to the award, he must have served at least six (6) years in the government.

“Fourth Class MAHARLIKA – To be awarded to other officers of the Department of Foreign Affairs, whether in the Home Office or in the Foreign Service, to other government officials of the Philippines and of foreign countries, and to private citizens deserving of such honor, for meritorious services in the field of international relations. Before any Filipino government official or employee may be entitled to the award, he must have served at least four (4) years in the government.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 174, February 26, 1969