MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 429

CREATING THE CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL ON MUSLIM AFFAIRS

WHEREAS, it is the aim of the New Society to achieve formal unity of all communities through the involvement of all sectors in the activities of government;

WHEREAS, the Muslims of the Philippines constitute an important sector of our society and should be involved in the formulation of the government;

WHEREAS, the government considers it essential in the statement of the goals and programs for Muslim Mindanao to periodic consultation with a representative body of Muslims;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E, MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 1972, as amended do hereby create a Consultative Council on Affairs.

The President shall preside in the meetings of the Council, the members of which shall include:

1. All former Muslim members of the House of Representatives and the House of Senate.

2. All former Muslim Delegates to the Constitutional Convention.

3. All retired Muslim AFP officers with the rank of Colonel or higher and retired Muslim Ambassadors.

4. The following individuals shall be among the members of the Council:

5. All incumbent CNI Commissioners, Muslim governors, City mayors, Muslim CFI judges and justice of the Court of Appeals, AFP Muslim Officers with the rank of Colonel or higher and such other Muslim officials as may be designated by the President, shall be ex-officio members of the Council.

6. The Presidential Task force for the Reconstruction and Development of Mindanao shall act as the Secretariat of the Council during its meetings.

The Council shall meet once every two months; however, the President may convoke the Council as often as he deems necessary.

7. The members of the Council shall be entitled to transportation expenses and allowances to and from their residences during their attendance of Council meetings chargeable against the funds of the Philippine Amanah Bank.

8. The Council shall have the following functions:

a. Advice the President of Muslim affairs;

b. Act as the representative body for the Muslim communities;

c. To report to the President developments in Muslim Mindanao; and

d. Such other functions as may be assigned by the President.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1974). [Executive Order Nos. : 366 – 435] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.