MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 818

AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1003-A, CREATING THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES

WHEREAS, it is desirable to make more efficient the administrative functions and operations of the National Academy of Science and Technology;

WHEREAS, it is necessary for the Academy to embark on programs traditionally and internationally expected of a national Academy of Science;

WHEREAS, the constitutional mandate that the “State shall promote scientific research and inventions” and that “The advancement of science shall have priority in the National Development”, requires that the Academy be made explicitly closer as advisers on science and technology to the President and his Ministers;

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416 as amended, do hereby order and direct:

SECTION 1. Section 1 of Presidential Decree No. 1003-A is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SECTION 1. There is hereby created the National Academy of Science and Technology, hereinafter referred to as the Academy, which shall be composed of outstanding scientists to serve as a reservoir of competent scientific and technological manpower for the country. The Academy shall be attached to the National Science and Technology Authority (NSTA) for general coordination. The Academy shall have its own Secretariat/Administrative Staff.”

SECTION 2. The second paragraph of Section 9 of the same Decree is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Initially, each member of the Academy shall receive a gratuity of Six Thousand Pesos (P6,000.00) per annum. The Academy May Determine Stipends, Incentives and/or Recommend Adjustment of Gratuity to/or of its Member Subject to the Approval of the National Science and Technology Authority.

SECTION 3. The Academy may engage in projects or programs designed to recognize outstanding achievements in Science to promote scientific productivity.

SECTION 4. To carry out the purposes of this Executive Order, the Office of Budget and Management is hereby authorized to provide such amounts as may be necessary from available or applicable funds of the government.

SECTION 5. All other provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1003-A not otherwise affected by this Executive Order shall remain in force and all laws, Decrees, Orders, Proclamations, Rules, Regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SECTION 6. Any portion or provision of this Executive Order that may be declared unconstitutional shall not have the effect of nullifying the other provisions thereof, Provided that such remaining portions can still stand and be given effect in their entirety to accomplish the objectives of this Executive Order.

SECTION 7. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 16th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 781-857]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.