MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1077

REVISING THE COMPUTATION OF CREDITABLE VACATION AND SICK LEAVES OF GOVERNMENT OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES

WHEREAS, under existing law and civil service regulations, the number of days of vacation and sick leaves creditable to a government officer or employee is limited to 300 days;

WHEREAS, by special law, members of judiciary are not subject to such restriction;

WHEREAS, it is the continuing policy of the government to institute to the extent possible a uniform and equitable system of compensation and benefits and to enhance the morale and performance in the civil service.

WHEREAS, it is, therefore, necessary to remove the existing disparity in the leave privileges between the members of the judiciary and the other officers and employees of the government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct the following:

SECTION 1. Any officer or employee of the government who retires or voluntary resigns or is separated from the service through no fault of his own and whose leave benefits are not covered by special law, shall be entitled to the commutation of all the accumulated vacation and/or sick leaves to his credit, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, without limitation as to the number of days of vacation and sick leaves that he may accumulate.

SECTION 2. All officials and employees shall be required to go on vacation leave for a minimum of five (5) working days annually. The head of office shall adopt a staggered scheduling of vacation leaves of officials and employees in his office: Provided , That he may, as the exigency of the service requires, cancel any previously scheduled leave.

SECTION 3. The provisions of this Executive Order shall not apply to government officials and employees who are no longer in the service at the time of its approval.

SECTION 4. All laws, decrees, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are contrary to or inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030 – 1093 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.