MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 724

DIRECTING THE REORGANIZATION OF THE PHILIPPINE COCONUT AUTHORITY

WHEREAS, the organizational structure of the Philippine Coconut Authority (PCA) should be attuned and responsive to the development programs being undertaken by it for the benefit of the Coconut Industry;

WHEREAS, there is also a need to institute reforms in the organizational structure of the Philippine Coconut Authority to effect economy and promote efficiency within the limits of fund constraints;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, and laws, do hereby order the following:

Section 1. The PCA Governing Board, in accordance with this Executive Order and the enabling act of the Philippine Coconut Authority, shall effect a reorganization of the PCA within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Executive Order.

Section 2. For purposes of the reorganization, the PCA Governing Board is hereby authorized and directed to:

a. Group, coordinate, consolidate or integrate positions and functions in the PCA;

b. Create, classify, split and abolish positions;

c. Fix the salaries and other compensation of PCA officers and employees;

d. Adopt just and equitable program for the benefit of those who may be phased out from the PCA by reason of the reorganization.

Section 3. The PCA Governing Board shall promulgate the necessary implementing details to carry out the reorganization, which shall include the internal organization of units and offices corresponding staffing pattern therefor, as well as such other measures necessary to assure the orderly implementation of this Executive Order.

Section 4. Any officer or employee of the PCA who is not re-appointed within the period of sixty (60) days as fixed in Section 1 hereof shall be deemed to have been phased out on account of the abolition of his position.

Section 5. All appointments to be made by the PCA Government Board under this Executive Order shall primarily be based on merit and fitness.

Section 6. Hereafter, all personnel actions in the PCA, including the fixing of salaries and other compensation of its officers and employees, shall not be subject to the regulations of the Office of Compensation and Position Classification.

Section 7. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty One.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 706 – 780]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.