MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 719

DEFINING THE FUNCTIONS OF THE SPECIAL PRESIDENTIAL REPRESENTATIVE FOR TRADE NEGOTIATIONS

WHEREAS, there is a need for a coordinated and unified approach to trade negotiations as they relate to the export development objectives of the country;

WHEREAS, the worldwide trend towards protectionism and restricted trade barriers make trade negotiations crucial in the over-all export trade and industrial strategy of the country;

WHEREAS, trade policy formulation and trade negotiations should take into account implications on industrial development and trade leverages on a long-term basis;

WHEREAS, there is a need for a strengthened trade negotiation mechanism which takes into consideration the overall national policy on industrial and trade development;

WHEREAS, taking into account the above objectives, Executive Order No. 709 creating the Ministry of Trade and Industry has authorized the President to appoint a Special Presidential Representative for Trade Negotiations with a Cabinet rank;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416 as amended, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. The Special Presidential Representative for Trade Negotiations shall negotiate international trade agreements as may be assigned by the President from time to time. All other negotiations shall be undertaken by the Ministry of Trade and Industry.

SEC. 2. The Special Presidential Representative for Trade Negotiations, shall, in the execution of his assigned tasks, consult and coordinate with the Minister of Trade and Industry in order to assure a consistent trade policy.

SEC. 3. The Ministry of Trade and Industry is hereby directed to provide assistance to the Special Presidential Representative for Trade Negotiations on matters which may be assigned by the President to the Special Presidential Representative for Trade Negotiations.

SEC. 4. All laws, decrees, orders, proclamations, rules and regulations or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed and modified accordingly.

SEC. 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 19th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 706 – 780]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.