MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 30

CREATING THE CULTURAL CENTER OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the preservation and promotion of Philippine culture in all its varied aspects and phases is a vital concern of the State;

WHEREAS, valuable donations have been received and financial commitments have been made by civic-spirited individuals, groups, associations and other persons for the preservation, promotion, enhancement and development of Philippine culture and for the establishment of a Cultural Center, and

WHEREAS, it is imperative that an effective organization be provided to take over and to receive such donations and commitments and to carry out the will of the donors for the enduring benefit of the Filipino people;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, for and in the name of the Republic of the Philippines, and by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a trust, for the benefit of the Filipino people, under the name and style of “Cultural Center of the Philippines” hereinafter referred to as the “Center” with a Board of Trustees composed of seven (7) members to be appointed by the President of the Philippines.

The estate of the Center shall consist of such real, personal and other types of property, now owned or reserved for, or may hereafter be given, donated, acquired, transferred or conveyed to, the Center in order to carry out its purposes and objectives as set forth herein by the Philippine government, its branches and instrumentalities, any foreign government as well as trust, foundations, corporations, or persons, alien or domestic. Without in any way limiting the generality of the preceding sentence, the estate of the Center shall include:

(1) The parcel of land reserved for the Center under Proclamation No. 20 dated March 12, 1966.

(2) Donations, monetary or otherwise already received, and those to be received by the Government or by the Center for, or in furtherance of the purpose of, the Cultural Center of the Philippines.

The purposes and objectives of the Center are:

1. To construct, establish and maintain in a single site a national theater, a national music hall, an art and such other buildings and facilities as are necessary or desirable for the holding of conferences, seminars, concerts and the like;

2. To awaken the consciousness of our people to our cultural heritage, and to encourage them to assist in its preservation, promotion, enhancement and development;

3. To cultivate and enhance public interest in, and appreciation of, distinctive Philippine arts in various fields;

4. To discover, assist and develop talents connected with Philippine cultural pursuits and create greater opportunities for individual and national self-expression in cultural affairs; and

5. To encourage the organization of cultural groups, associations or societies and the holding or staging of cultural exhibitions, performances and similar activities.

For the accomplishment of the above purposes and objectives, the Center, acting through its Board of Trustees, shall have the power and is authorized:

1. To acquire and hold property of whatever nature and description, and to dispose of such property;

2. To enter into such contract or contracts as are deemed necessary by its Board of Trustees to carry out or accomplish the purposes and objectives of the Center;

3. To solicit donations and funds in the form of contributions, whether in cash or in property, from both the public and private sectors;

4. To open such accounts in and with banks and other financial institutions, and to disburse such funds or invest the same as the Board may direct to accomplish or advance the purposes of the Center;

5. To invite foreign artists and concert and cultural troupes to perform or hold exhibits in the Philippines;

6. To sponsor or assist in the sponsorship of foreign performances by local artists and cultural groups;

7. To adopt rules and regulations consistent with law and the provisions hereof to govern the administration and operation of the affairs of the Center; and

8. To do all such other acts and things as are or may be necessary for the accomplishment of the purposes and objectives of the Center.

The members of the Board of Trustees shall serve without compensation for a period of four (4) years and until their successors shall have been appointed and qualified. Any vacancy in the Board shall be filled by another suitable person, who shall serve for the unexpired term, with the right to hold over. The Board of Trustees of the Center shall elect a Chairman who must be one of its members, and who shall be the presiding officer of the Board of Trustees, act as the Chief Executive Officer of the Center with authority, among others, to appoint, remove, and fix the number and compensation of the personnel thereof, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees.

Four (4) members of the Board of Trustees shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business of the Center, and any decision of such four members on any matter duly presented to the Board of Trustees shall constitute a valid and binding act of the Center.

The Center may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in the pursuit of its purposes and objectives.

The books and accounts of the Center shall be subject to periodical auditing by the Auditor General or his authorized representative.

The Center shall render to the President of the Philippines an annual report of its activities and recommendations.

If for any reason the Center is terminated, the estate or any residual assets of the Center remaining at the time of such termination shall revert to the State for disposition in accordance with law.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of June, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.