MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 658

CREATION OF A COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT PLANNING

WHEREAS, certain ministries and agencies are involved in transport planning activities within their respective areas of jurisdiction;

WHEREAS, there is need to ensure more effective interministerial coordination in the formulation and implementation of government plans and programs relating to transport development in the country; and

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. Creation . – There is hereby created a Committee on Transport Planning in the National Economic and Development Authority to be composed of the following: the Minister of Economic Planning, the Minister of Transportation and Communications, the Minister of Public Works, the Minister of Public Highways and the Minister of Tourism. The Chairman of the Committee shall be elected by the members on a rotation basis and for such periods as may be determined by the Committee.

Membership in the Committee shall be open to other Ministers as may be deemed necessary by the Committee; or alternatively, other Ministers concerned may be invited to attend and participate in particular meetings and deliberations of the Committee where the subject matter involves their respective ministries.

SEC. 2. Meetings . – The Committee shall hold meetings as often as may be necessary, provided, that there shall at least be one meeting every month. The members of the Committee shall be entitled to per diems for actual attendance in meetings of the Committee.

SEC. 3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Committee . – The Committee shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

a. To advise the President and the NEDA Board on Matters concerning transport planning and development;

b. To coordinate inter-ministerial activities of individual agencies and instrumentalities concerned with transport planning and development;

c. To formulate government policies, plans and priorities on transport planning and development in order to ensure consistency with national development objectives and priorities established by the NEDA Board;

d. To set the general goals and guidelines necessary for the pre-planning and planning activities of the agencies concerned during the planning cycles, and to undertake the review and integration of the various modal transport plans, programs and projects in relation to the transportation component of the over-all national development plan, and where deemed necessary to the annual budgetary cycle;

e. To serve as the mechanism for the integration, coordination, and rationalization of inter-and intra-modal plans for transport planning and development, especially at the inter-ministerial level; and

f. To regularly monitor development plans and trends, both local and international, affecting transport facilities and services.

SEC. 4. Technical Staff and Secretariat . – The Inter-Agency Technical Committee on Transport Planning created under Memorandum Order No. 473 of the President shall, in addition to its present duties, act as the Technical Staff and Secretariat of the Committee.

SEC. 5. Financial Requirements . – The operations of the Committee shall be supported by contributions from the various agencies represented in the Committee, from funds as are made available to the Inter-Agency Technical Committee on Transport Planning, as well as from funds as may be released by the Ministry of the Budget from existing appropriations.

SEC. 6. Repealing Clause . – All laws, decrees, charters, executive orders, administrative orders, proclamations, rules and regulations or part thereof that are in conflict with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 7. Effectivity . – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.