MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 877

AUTHORIZING THE REORGANIZATION OF THE PHILIPPINE INTERNATIONAL TRADING CORPORATION CREATED UNDER PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1071, AS AMENDED

WHEREAS, it is the declared policy of the New Republic to pursue national development with renewed dedication and determination;

WHEREAS, there is a need to position and gear up the country’s export marketing resources in anticipation of a recovery in the world economy;

WHEREAS, the Philippine International Trading Corporation, hereinafter referred to as the Corporation, is in the vanguard of marketing Philippine exports worldwide;

WHEREAS, in order to accelerate and expand its exports, there is a need to upgrade the management and marketing expertise of the Corporation consistent with the requirements of international marketing;

WHEREAS, in the light of the foregoing, the reorganization of the Corporation becomes imperative;

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational changes as may be necessary in the light of changing circumstances and development;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, and the authority vested on me by Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, do hereby order and direct:

1. Reorganization . The Minister of Trade and Industry is hereby designated Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation with full powers to restructure and reorganize the Corporation and to determine or fix its staffing pattern, compensation structure and related organizational requirements. The Chairman shall complete such restructuring and reorganization within six (6) months from the date of this Executive Order. All personnel of the Corporation who are not reappointed by the Chairman under the new reorganized structure of the Corporation shall be deemed laid off; provided, that personnel so laid off shall be entitled to the benefits accruing to separated employees under Executive Order No. 756 amending the Revised Charter of the Corporation.

2. Functions of Chairman . The Chairman of the Corporation shall have the following functions and powers:

a. Exercise all the powers incident to the functions of a Chief Executive Officer, including supervision and control over all personnel of the Corporation;

b. Review, develop, supervise and direct the export marketing thrusts and strategy of the Corporation;

c. Upon recommendation of the President of the Corporation, appoint personnel of the Corporation in executive and senior management positions;

d. Call meetings of the Board of Directors and of the Executive Committee of the Corporation.

3. Personnel Recruitment and Other Services . In recognition of the special nature of its operation, the Corporation shall, in recruiting personnel and in availing of outside technical services, continue to be exempt from OCPC rules and regulations pursuant to Section 6 of Executive Order No. 756 and Section 28 of Presidential Decree No. 1071. In addition, the provision of Section 7 of Executive Order No. 756 is hereby reaffirmed.

4. Repealing Clause . All provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1071 and Executive Order No. 756, as well as of other laws, decrees, executive orders or issuances, or parts thereof, that are in conflict with this Executive Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

5. Effectivity . This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1983). [Executive Order Nos. : 858 – 927]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.