MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 182-A

CREATING A NATIONAL SOCIAL ACTION COUNCIL

WHEREAS, real economic development can be achieved only in an atmosphere where the masses of our people are free from the clutches of illiteracy, poverty and social injustice; and

WHEREAS, this massive task needs the combined efforts of the government, the church and the private sector;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a National Social Action Council composed of eleven (11) members appointed by the President as follows:

3 from the Government 3 from the Catholic Bishop Conference of the Philippines 1 from the National Council of Churches 1 from the Commission of National Integration 4 from nationally known private organizations

The Council shall elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman from among themselves.

The Council shall have the following functions:

1. Conduct surveys and project studies in the areas of social action which the existing government entities, the church and private organizations could work upon;

2. Plan and carry out long-range and short-term programs of social action;

3. Solicit from the public and conduct such shows or programs, as may be necessary to carry out an integrated social action program;

4. Conduct information and educational campaigns to make the program truly effective;

5. Enlist the support and cooperation of any government department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality;

6. Perform such other duties as may be necessary for the performance of its mission.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 182-A, May 1, 1969