MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 726

REVISING THE INTEGRATED COMPENSATION SCHEME FOR UNIFORMED PERSONNEL OF THE INTEGRATED NATIONAL POLICE

WHEREAS, the Constitution directs the adoption of a standard compensation scheme in Government, which mandate is implemented by Presidential Decree No. 985 authorizing the President to, among others, establish a compensation plan for all government officials and employees;

WHEREAS, Letter of Instruction No. 1116 dated March 21, 1981 directs the Minister of National Defense and Minister of the Budget to review the compensation structure of the uniformed personnel of the Integrated National Police to achieve a more equitable level relative to the entire Armed Forces of the Philippines.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the following:

Section 1. The following salary schedule shall apply to all uniformed personnel of the Integrated National Police;

SALARY SCHEDULE

S A L A R Y   S T E P S

Section 2. Readjustment of Salary. – The salary of a member of the Integrated National Police as prescribed under Section 3.0 of Letter of Implementation No. 98 as adjusted to the rates of Executive Order No. 688 dated March 19, 1981 shall be readjusted to conform with the rates of preceding Section 1 hereof, subject to the following guidelines:

2.1 In case the salary of any member of the Integrated National Police is lower than the first salary step prescribed in Section 1 such salary shall be raised to the rate corresponding to the first salary step prescribed herein.

2.2 In case the salary of a member of the Integrated National Police is equal or above the first step prescribed in Section 1 hereof, the member concerned shall continue to receive the same salary rate.

Section 3. The guidelines for the implementation of this Order shall be promulgated by the Minister of National Defense and the Minister of the Budget.

Section 4. Funds needed to implement the Order shall be drawn from salary lapses and savings of the Integrated National Police. Any further augmentation shall come from the Salary Adjustment Fund in the CY 1981 General Appropriations Act and from budgetary reserves. Funds intended to carry out this Order for the succeeding years shall be incorporated in the annual appropriations of the INP.

Section 5. The salary increases authorized in this Order shall take effect August 8, 1981.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of SEPTEMBER, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 706 – 780]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.