MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 284

DELEGATING AUTHORITY ON ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS IN THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF THE GOVERNMENT.

In order to effect greater efficiency and effectiveness in the conduct of governmental transactions, and provide operating agencies delegation of authority on an effective and reasonably uniform basis, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order the following delegations of authority on administrative actions as indicated hereunder:

Department Secretaries and other officials required to delegate authority under this Executive Order are directed to promulgate such guides and standards as may be necessary to carry out the delegations and to prevent abuse in discharging delegated functions. The delegatee and the delegator shall both be accountable for the proper performance of the delegated functions.

To enable regional directors to discharge functions delegated to them, they shall prepare and submit regional budget estimates for inclusion in the agency budget, exercise authority on matters relating to budget execution, particularly on disbursement of funds, exercise budgetary control over authorized appropriations for the region, and control and direct program implementation in the regional area in accordance with approved operating budgets.

Each department head is hereby directed to establish a committee to be composed, among others, of representatives from bureau directors and chiefs of regional offices, to determine what action on substantive matters shall be delegated to the undersecretary, chiefs of bureaus, and heads of regional offices, and other key officials. For this purpose, substantive matters refer to operating activities directly related to the attainment of the objectives of the agency. The technical staff of the Commission on Reorganization may be consulted for assistance.

Upon determination of the actions to be delegated each department head shall issue the appropriate directives on the delegated authority. Copies of the directives issued on delegation of authority should be furnished the Office of the President not later than February 28, 1971.

For purposes of this Executive Order, agencies under the Office of the President are deemed to be bureaus except those the heads of which have been conferred the rank of Department Secretary.

The provisions of Executive Order No. 70, dated May 28, 1967 as amended by Executive Order No. 218, dated March 21, 1970, and all other orders and rules and regulations in conflict herewith are hereby modified or repealed accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.