MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 767

PROVIDING FOR THE INCREASED PARTICIPATION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN THE NATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM

WHEREAS, the national development process can best be undertaken as an entire and harmonious effort, rather than as a fragmented and sporadic one by the various elements of government;

WHEREAS, one important area in which such mode of national development may be carried out is the participation of local governments in the national infrastructure program;

WHEREAS, although local governments now participate in implementing the national infrastructure program, such participation is limited to some projects and is without the benefit of a unified and consolidated program;

WHEREAS, such a program requires improved allocation and management of the funds appropriated for the infrastructure projects in which local governments are or should be involved;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby order that local governments henceforth be given increased participation in the construction of school buildings; in the repair of school buildings; in the construction and maintenance of roads including foreign-assisted road development programs such as the Rural Roads Program and the Rural Roads Improvement Program; is small-scale public works projects, such as municipal wharves, river and flood control structures, artesian wells and other water supply projects; and in such other projects as may hereafter be determined.

The following rules and procedures shall be followed in carrying out this Order:

1. The Minister of Local Government and Community Development shall, after consultation with the Association of Barangays, determine in what municipality a consolidation of Barangay road maintenance funds may be allowed; provided, however, that the same procedure shall be followed to determine the priorities in the utilization of these funds within the municipality.

2. In provinces which are covered by the Provincial Development Assistance Program (PDAP) or the Rural Roads Improvement Program (RRIP), and which have the proper equipment and technical capability, roads projects under the Construction, Rehabilitation, Betterment and Improvement Program (CRBI) shall be entirely implemented (100% participation) by the local governments, provided that the Ministry of Public Works and Highways shall have technical supervision over the projects.

In provinces not covered by the PDAP or RRIP, the extent of local government participation in CRBI projects shall be determined on a case-to-case basis, depending on the equipment and technical capability of the local government;

3. Out of the annual appropriation for the construction of school buildings under the Ministry of Public Works and Highways, fifty per cent shall be administered through the local government units, which shall undertake the construction of the school buildings for which such funds are so administered, provided that said construction shall be subject to the supervision without a fee by the Ministry of Public Works and Highways through the District Engineer, and provided that the construction and the administration of the corresponding funds are done in consultation with the local School Board and with the cooperation of the Parent-Teachers’ Association concerned.

4. Small public works projects shall be undertaken by local government on a case-to-case basis, either as joint undertakings with the national agency concerned, or directly by the local government, but with the technical assistance of the national agency concerned. In all cases, barangays should be involved.

The Minister of Local Government and Community Development, the Minister of Public Works and Highways, the Minister of Education and Culture, the Minister of the Budget, and the Chairman of the Commission on Audit are hereby constituted into a committee, with the Minister of Local Government and Community Development as Chairman, to promulgate rules and regulations to expedite construction of projects under the national infrastructure program in which local governments participate, as herein prescribed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 706 – 780 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.