MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 599

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE HOST COMMITTEE FOR THE 1980 WORLD TOURISM CONFERENCE OF THE WORLD TOURISM ORGANIZATION

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government during the Second General Assembly of the World Tourism Organization in Torremolinos, Malaga, Spain offered to host the World Tourism Conference in Manila on 27 September – 10 October 1980, which offer was accepted and approved by the General Assembly per Resolution/41/II of said Assembly;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government attaches great importance to the Conference which will consider vital questions regarding the true nature of tourism in the human, social, cultural, economic, and political context of present-day national and international society and identify its role in individual and group relations within countries and between nations;

WHEREAS, it is extremely important that such session of considerable magnitude and significance be efficiently organized and that all governmental and non-governmental agencies concerned should cooperate to ensure its success;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order and establish the Philippine Host Committee that will take charge of the preparations for the Conference to the end that the session can bring the desired results to the country and to the international community.

Philippine Host Committee

The First Lady and Metro Manila Governor, Madame Imelda R. Marcos, shall act as the Honorary Chairperson of the Philippine Host Committee with the Minister of Tourism as Overall Chairman assisted by two (2) Vice-Chairman, the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, Manuel Collantes and Deputy Minister of Tourism, Gregorio Araneta II; and further assisted by a Board of Advisers composed of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Minister of the Budget, Minister of Information, Minister of National Defense, Commissioner of Customs, Commissioner of Immigration and Deportation; Commanding General, Presidential Security Command; Governor, Central Bank of the Philippines; President, Philippine Air Lines, and the President, Tourism Organization of the Philippines.

The Over-all Chairman of the Philippine Host Committee is hereby empowered to create other Committees as may be necessary, and to request any agency of the Philippine Government to assist in ensuring the success of the Conference.

The Budget Commission is hereby directed to release to the Ministry of Tourism the amount of P7.5 million for the financial commitments and operational requirements of the Philippine Host Committee for the World Tourism Conference from the International Commitment Funds as programmed in the General Appropriations Act for Calendar Year 1980.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of June, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Executive Order Nos. : 531-605]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.