MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 10

CENTRALIZING THE CUSTODY AND DISPOSITION OF CONFISCATED GOODS AND PAYMENT OF REWARD TO INFORMERS

In order to provide a more efficient disposition of seized, confiscated or abandoned goods by government agencies in pursuance of the provisions of internal revenue and customs laws, and to carry out in a more expeditious manner the purposes of the law providing for payment of rewards to informers, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby designate the Secretary of Finance to take charge, within the framework of existing laws, of the overall custody and disposition of the goods mentioned above and to provide a better system of payment of rewards to bona fide informers. Among other things, it shall be his duty to take physical possession of all such goods, and he shall be responsible for their disposition thereof as well as the payment of rewards as authorized by Republic Act No. 2338.

Every seizure or confiscation of goods under internal revenue or customs laws shall, within twenty-four hours, be reported by the government agency or official concerned to the Secretary of Finance, describing the goods with particularity and stating the quantity thereof. In addition, the physical custody or possession of such goods shall be transferred to the Secretary of Finance, or to his designated representative, by the government agency or official concerned within thirty-six hours from seizure or confiscation: Provided , however , That leave of court shall be obtained thereof in any case where a court has already assumed jurisdiction over said goods: and, Provided , further , That adequate samples thereof may be retained for purposes of evidence in appropriate administrative and/or judicial proceedings, with prior leave of court in the latter case, which shall be instituted by the officer concerned without undue delay.

In the performance of his duties, the Secretary of Finance may organize an office or agency to carry out effectively the above objectives, call upon or detail any government officer or employee outside of the Department of Finance for temporary service in such office or agency, and avail of the facilities and personnel of existing offices in the Bureau of Customs and the Bureau of Internal Revenue which are presently performing such functions mentioned above.

The Secretary of Finance shall issue such implementing rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out this Order.

The funds necessary for the current fiscal year for the implementation of this Executive Order shall be allotted from available funds of the General Appropriation Act in force at the time.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.