MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 994

CREATING AN ADDITIONAL POSITION OF DEPUTY MINISTER IN THE MINISTRY OF JUSTICE

WHEREAS, under the New Republic, national development shall be pursued with renewed dedication and greater determination through a more efficient, effective and economical government;

WHEREAS, there has been a substantial increase in the workload of the Ministry of Justice due to the expansion of legal and related services rendered by the Ministry and the various agencies under it;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Executive Order No. 965, the Office of the Solicitor General was placed directly under the supervision of the Minister of Justice thereby considerably increasing the span of supervision of the Minister;

WHEREAS, it is therefore now deemed necessary to create an additional position of Deputy Minister to enable the Ministry to cope adequately with the increased supervisory workload; and

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created an additional position of Deputy Minister of Justice who shall assist the Minister of Justice in the exercise of his authority and responsibility for the supervision of the Ministry.

SECTION 2. The Minister of Justice is also hereby authorized to determine and assign the respective functional areas of responsibility of the Deputy Ministers in the Ministry; Provided , That such delineation of responsibilities shall cover substantive functions and operations of the Ministry; and Provided , further , That there shall be no Deputy Minister for Administration and that the assignment of administrative responsibilities to any Deputy Minister shall be in addition to his substantive responsibilities.

SECTION 3. All laws, decrees, orders, proclamations, rules, regulations or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 4. Any portion of this Executive Order that may be declared unconstitutional shall not have the effect of nullifying the other provisions thereof: Provided , That such remaining portions can still stand and be given effect in their entirety to accomplish the objectives of this Executive Order.

SECTION 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 5th day of November, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.