MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 1093

CREATING THE COUNCIL OF STATE AS THE HIGHEST POLICY FORMULATING AND ADVISORY BODY OF THE GOVERNMENT

Whereas, under the New Republic, national development shall be pursued with renewed dedication and greater determination through a more efficient, effective, and economical government;

Whereas, the national economic recovery program requires the active participation and cooperation of all sectors of a unified society as a critical important aspect;

Whereas, it is imperative that existing and proposed national policies receive the fullest public scrutiny and assessment by competent and respected representatives and practitioners of government, including those who have served their country in the highest positions in the past, as well as those whose points of view may be divergent but whose contributions and inputs are nevertheless valued; and

Whereas, under Presidential Decree No. 1416 as amended, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments.

Now, therefore, I, Ferdinand E. Marcos, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 2416 as amended, do hereby order and ordain:

Section 1. There is hereby created a Council of State, hereinafter referred to as the Council, which shall serve as the highest policy formulating and advisory body of the government, and which shall advise the President on such matters of public policy as he may from time to time lay before it.

The Council shall be composed of the President as Chairman, the Vice-President as Vice Chairman, and the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of National Defense, the Speaker, the Speaker Pro-Tempore, the Majority Floor Leader and Minority Floor Leader of the Batasang Pambansa, the former Presidents and Vice-Presidents of the Republic of the Philippines, and a representative from the dominant opposition party as nominated by that party.

Section 2. The Council shall have the following powers and functions:

(a) To advise the President on matters paramount to the interest of the nation, particularly those relating to the economy, foreign affairs, and national security;

(b) To recommend to the President major policies designed (1) to foster and promote economic, political and social development, (2) to stimulate production and employment in furtherance of economic and political stability, and (3) to redress any manifested inequitable distribution of real income;

(c) To appraise the various programs and activities of the Government in light of declared national policies for the purpose of determining the extent to which such programs and activities are contributing to the achievement of such policies, and make recommendations to the President with respect thereto;

(d) To make or cause to be made and furnish such studies, reports thereon and recommendations with respect to matters of national interest and legislation as the President may request and

(e) To formulate national policies and major courses of action on matters of greatest national import, for supportive action by the Batasang Pambansa or for implementation by the executive entities of government.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of February, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030 – 1093 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.