MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 11

CREATING THE ANTI-SMUGGLING ACTION CENTER

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby create an Anti-Smuggling Action Center which shall be charged with the following duties:

1. To receive, gather, collate and evaluate all information relative to smuggling and to otherwise act as the intelligence arm of the Government in the anti-smuggling campaign;

2. To relay information on smuggling cases to police or other law enforcement agencies so as to effect the apprehension of the offenders and confiscation of smuggled goods and transmit evidence of offenses relating to smuggling to the proper prosecuting officer and, generally, to refer the data so gathered to the government agencies concerned for appropriate action and, thereafter, follow-up the same to insure that expeditious action is taken thereon;

3. To assist the Secretary of Finance in the intelligence activities of government and private agencies engaged in the anti-smuggling campaign; and

4. To perform such other functions as may from time to time be assigned to it by the President or the Secretary of Finance.

The Anti-Smuggling Action Center shall be composed of a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman to be designated by the President and such subordinate officials and personnel as may be appointed and/or assigned or detailed to the Center from other offices, agencies or instrumentalities of the Government upon the recommendation of the Chairman of the Center.

The Center shall have its principal office in the City of Manila but may establish branch offices in Cebu City, Bacolod City, Davao City, Jolo, Legaspi City, San Fernando, La Union, Batangas, and such other places as the Chairman may select to better carry out its work.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.