MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1087

GRANTING COMPENSATION ADJUSTMENTS FOR GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES

WHEREAS, government officials and employees have rendered exemplary service and demonstrated dedication, and therefore should be financially recognized;

WHEREAS, the compensation system should be responsive to changes in economic conditions in order not to prejudice the standard of living of government employees and therefore family incomes should be augmented;

WHEREAS, there is need to rectify inequities in compensations programs that recently developed due to special pay adjustments for certain occupational group employees such as para-medical, lawyers, among others;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby Order and Direct:

1. The increase in the basic salary of officials and employees of the national government by two (2) salary steps in the National Salary Schedule or approximately equivalent to ten (10%) percent plus the following additional COLA per month, (after adding on the 10% increase of basic salary as authorized herein);

1.1 The positions in national government agencies covered by the National Compensation and Position Classification Plans as well as members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Integrated National Police are authorized the same percentage salary increase.

1.2 This 10% increase in basic salary shall not apply to the following:

1.2.1 Agencies which have been declared critical or have positions with separate pay plans such as those covered by the Office of the President Pay Plan which have not received any adjustment after Executive Order No. 1000 decreeing a ten (10%) percent across-the-board adjustment.

1.2.2 Positions allocated to upgraded classes in the National Compensation and Position Classification Plans in recently reorganized agencies and whose staffing patterns have been approved only in 1985.

1.2.3 Positions allocated to occupational groups in agencies who received special salary increases effective 1985 like lawyers, medical, allied medical personnel and postal workers among others.

1.2.4 Position in agencies covered by career progression systems like the BIR, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, National Science and Technology Authority (the scientist groups), Batasan, etc. which have been granted adjustments in 1985 after the implementation of Executive Order No. 1000.

1.2.5 Career Executive Officers (CESO) and equivalent.

1.3 The 2-tiered COLA authorized herein, of P150/mo. and P50/mo. for those receiving P2500 and below and P2501 to P3000 per month, respectively shall not apply to those employees and officials whose salary rates fall within this brackets if they are beneficiaries of special allowances such as inflation-connected, incentive, medical, amelioration, and similar additional allowances separately authorized by law or by Presidential approval.

1.4 Local Government units are likewise authorized to grant the same percentage salary increase provided herein, chargeable against their respective local government funds subject to availability of funds and to the rules, guidelines, procedures and conditions to be determined by the Joint Commission on Local Government and Personnel Administration.

2. Funds needed to implement this Order with respect to national government agencies shall be charged to:

2.1 Salary lapses and other personal services savings of the ministry/bureau/office/agency/state university/college concerned as a first priority funding source.

2.2 The lump-sum appropriation for salary increases incorporated in the budgets of national government agencies/offices. Any remaining deficiency shall be covered by the Salary Adjustment Fund Authorized in the CY 1986 General Appropriations Act.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions provided herein in the computation of salary adjustments, no subordinate official or employee shall be adjusted to a salary rate beyond one salary step or 5% below that authorized for his immediate supervisor.

4. Agencies that have already drawn from the Salary Adjustment Fund shall not be authorized to reprogram savings from other components to personal services (or budgetary item 01).

5. The rules and regulations needed to comply with this Executive Order shall be formulated and issued by the Office of Budget and Management.

6. This Executive Order shall take effect on January 1, 1986.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 31st day of January in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030 – 1093 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.