MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 694

CREATING THE CENTRAL VISAYAS URBAN AND RURAL PROJECTS OFFICE AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR

WHEREAS, it is the established policy of the government to promote economic growth, social justice and equitable distribution of income within and among regions;

WHEREAS, under Executive Order No. 589 date April 17, 1980, the Regional Development Investment Program (RDIP) was adopted as the implementing framework of the five-year regional development plan wherein concrete packages of programs and projects are systematically identified;

WHEREAS, a prototype of the RDIP has been completed for Central Visayas on the basis of which there is presently being negotiated a World Bank loan to finance certain urban and rural projects within said investment program;

WHEREAS, in order to satisfy the requirements of foreign financing, it is necessary to prepare in more detail the RDIP projects for Central Visayas identified for funding;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to create an organization to undertake and oversee the required detailed project preparation and development;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1416, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Central Visayas Urban and Rural Projects Office . There is hereby created a Central Visayas Urban and Rural Projects Office, hereinafter referred to as the Office, which shall be under the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA). The Office shall undertake the detailed preparation and development Investment Program for Region VII.

SEC. 2. Functions of the Office . The Office shall perform the following functions:

a. Conduct detailed preparation of the urban and rural projects identified under the RDIP in accordance with guidelines provided by the NEDA and at a level and standard acceptable by external financing institutions;

b. Recommend to the NEDA Director-General for approval the projects found feasible for external financing;

c. Upgrade the capabilities for project preparation of the technical personnel of local governments and regional line agencies directly involved in project preparation and development activities within the region;

d. Recommend appropriate measures and mechanisms for the effective implementation of RDIP projects in Central Visayas;

e. Submit to the NEDA and to the Regional Development Council periodic progress reports and special reports as required; and

f. Perform such other related functions as may be necessary for the effective implementation of the RDIP.

SEC. 3. Project Director . The Office shall be headed by a Project Director who shall be appointed by, and be responsible to, the Director-General of the NEDA. His annual compensation and allowances shall be fixed by the NEDA Director-General.

The Project Director shall have the following powers and functions:

a. Direct and supervise the detailed preparation of urban and rural projects identified under the RDIP for Central Visayas;

b. Recommend to the NEDA Director-General the organizational set-up, staffing requirements and annual budget of the office;

c. Manage the Office and adopt administrative rules and procedures for its internal operation and management;

d. Recommend to the NEDA Director-General the hiring of contractual personnel of the Office including consultants, experts and other professionals whose compensation and allowances shall be fixed in accordance with existing laws and regulations;

e. Disburse and administer the funds of the Office based on the approve budget thereof and in accordance with pertinent laws and regulations;

f. Enter into contracts with private or public entities in connection with the functions of the Office subject to the approval of the NEDA Director-General; and

g. Perform such other functions as may be necessary to ensure the efficient and effective implementation of the Office.

SEC. 4. Detail of Personnel . The Project Director may, subject to the approval of the NEDA Director-General, call on the services of technical expert and professionals from all branches of government as the Office may need in the conduct of its activities. For this purpose, the Project Director is hereby authorized to reimburse detailed personnel of actual representation and/or transportation expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their duties at rates approved by the NEDA Director-General subject to applicable accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

SEC. 5. Creation of Committees . The NEDA Director-General is hereby authorized to create such inter-agency committees and advisory bodies as may be necessary to facilitate the completion of detailed engineering and feasibility studies and other project preparation and development activities of the Office.

SEC. 6. Assistance from Government Agencies and Private Sector . The Office is hereby authorized to call upon any ministry, government-owned or controlled corporation or instrumentality of the government and private sector agency/entity for any assistance that may be required to ensure the accomplishment of its tasks.

SEC. 7. Appropriation . To carry out the provisions of this Order, the amount of THREE MILLION SIX HUNDRED THOUSAND PESOS (P3,600,000.00) is hereby authorized to be released out of the Regional Development Fund and the Project Feasibility Fund for the operation of the Office for the year 1981. For the succeeding fiscal years and until the completion of the project preparation activities of the Office, its budgetary requirements shall be provided for in the General Appropriations Act of the Government in such amounts as shall be adequate for the purpose.

SEC. 8. Effectivity . This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.