MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 299

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL

WHEREAS, the development of cooperatives is a means for redistributing income and wealth in the country;

WHEREAS, the operation of cooperatives is a way of making available essential services to both producers and consumers;

WHEREAS, social and economic strength can be gained and efficiency attained if people with common objectives bind themselves into cooperatives;

WHEREAS, it is avowed policy of the administration to encourage the organization of cooperatives and assist their growth;

WHEREAS, there is a pressing need for a comprehensive and integrated program of cooperative developments; and

WHEREAS, there are at present no less than fourteen (14) government agencies charged with the promotion, organization and development of cooperatives, thereby bringing out the need for an administrative machinery to unify all efforts towards these ends;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Presidential Cooperative Development Council.

The Council shall have the following functions:

1. To review past efforts and progress attained in cooperative development;

2. To evolve a comprehensive and integrated cooperative program;

3. To determine the organizational and financial requirements of such a program;

4. To coordinate the activities of all government and private agencies involved in cooperative development;

5. To review and recommend budgetary and financial requests by government agencies on expenditures for cooperative development;

6. To submit reports on the status and accomplishments of the cooperative development program.

The Council shall be composed of the following:

The Council may create such committees as may be necessary to carry out its functions. The Cooperatives Administration Office shall provide the Secretariat for the Council. The Council is further authorized to call on any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of government including government-owned or controlled corporations for technical-assistance, facilities and equipment as may be needed in the discharge of its duties.

This Executive Order repeals Executive Order No. 242 dated June 29, 1970, creating the Cooperative Coordinating Committee.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.