MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 92

CREATING THE GENERAL EMILIO AGUINALDO NATIONAL CENTENNIAL COMMISSION.

WHEREAS, the 22nd day of March of 1969 will be the centenary of the birth of GENERAL EMILIO AGUINALDO y FAMY, first President of the Philippine Republic and Generalissimo of the Revolutionary Forces against Spain and the United States of America from 1897 to 1901;

WHEREAS, the year 1969 also marks the seventieth anniversary of the establishment of the short-lived Philippine Republic, the first representative and democratic government in Asia which was inaugurated in Malolos, Bulacan, on January 23, 1899;

WHEREAS, to Gen. Aguinaldo and his gallant men we owe the first solemn Proclamation of Philippine Independence from foreign rule which was publicly declared to the whole world in Kawit, Cavite, on the twelfth day of June 1898, said Proclamation having been ratified by the Revolutionary Congress assembled at Malolos, Bulacan, on September 29, 1898;

WHEREAS, to Gen. Aguinaldo and his patriotic band of freedom fighters we also owe our present national flag and anthem and the institution of the first democratic and republican form of government is Asia; and

WHEREAS, there is a need of perpetuating the heroic deeds, the sacrifices, the unquestioned patriotism, and the sublime idealism of Gen. Aguinaldo and the galaxy of heroes who made this nation great and noble at the close of the nineteenth century, including the documents of the First Philippine Republic;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, in appreciation of the labors, sacrifices, loyalty, heroism, and patriotism of Gen. Aguinaldo, whose acts and deeds in behalf of our country and people deserve recognition, do hereby create a GEN. EMILIO AGUINALDO NATIONAL CENTENNIAL COMMISSION composed of the following:

The Commission shall have the following duties:

1. Prepare the general program of the Centenary and submit it to the President of the Philippines for his approval;

2. Promote and direct commemorative celebrations throughout the Philippines;

3. Collect, edit, and publish all the decrees, orders, laws, proclamations, and other writings of Gen. Aguinaldo and of the Revolutionary Government including that of the erstwhile Philippine Republic;

4. Erect a  fitting and inspiring monument in honor of Gen. Aguinaldo in the Capital of the Philippines

5. Conduct a nation-wide contest for the beat biography of Gen. Aguinaldo which shall be published by the Commission;

6. Initiate and sponsor the holding of a three-day Congress or Convention in the Capital of the Philippines to evaluate the contributions of Gen. Aguinaldo to the building of the Filipino nation;

7. Arrange for the issuance of commemorative stamps and medals for the centenary;

8. Hold a contest in painting and sculpture and music that shall appropriately and properly honor Gen. Aguinaldo;

9. Administer all funds donated to it by the public and the Government for the purposes of the Centenary; and

10. Take all other measures necessary for the successful execution of all the programs and activities adopted in celebration of the the Centenary, including the conduct of fund drives.

The Commission shall report from time to time, but not less than once in six months, its activities and functions to the President of the Philippines who shall cause such report to be published for the information and guidance of the public.

All disbursements of the Commission shall be subject to audit by the Auditor General.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.