MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 840

COMPLETION OF THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURE AND LIFE SCIENCES RESEARCH COMPLEX AT THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES AT LOS BAÑOS

WHEREAS, food and agriculture continue to be the focus of national efforts to improve the well-being of our people and to further strengthen the foundations of our national economy;

WHEREAS, recognizing the role and demonstrated competence of the University of the Philippines at Los Baños, the following specialized research institutes and laboratories have been established thereat to form the initial core of a nationally-directed effort to bring science and technology to bear on the issues of food and agriculture for the country’s near-and-long-term needs, namely:

Institute of Plant Breeding (1975)

National Crop Protection Center (1976)

National Plant Genetic Resources Laboratory (1978)

National Institutes of Biotechnology and Applied Microbiology (1979)

WHEREAS, there is now a need to establish the complementary research organization to complete the array of interdisciplinary efforts in food and agricultural research;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416 as amended, do hereby order and direct:

Section 1. The following new institutes are hereby established at the University of the Philippines at Los Baños, to form part of the national agriculture and life sciences research complex thereat, namely:

Farming Systems and Soil Resources Institute

Institute of Food Science and Technology

Institute of Animal Science

The Board of Regents of the University of the Philippines is hereby authorized to organize the abovementioned institutes from out of existing staff, physical facilities and programs of the University and its constituent units.

Section 2. Each of the above institutes shall receive for Calendar Year 1982 an initial support of at least Three Million Pesos (P3,000,000.00) and a similar amount for Calendar Year 1983 from the Special Activities Fund and/or any other appropriate sources for their current operating expenses.

Section 3. The Ministers of Budget and Management and Public Works and Highways are hereby directed to provide for the capital outlay requirements of these institutes within a three-year period starting Calendar Year 1984.

Section 4. The seven research institutes comprising the national agriculture and life sciences research complex and such other institutes, centers and laboratories which may be organized later, are hereby authorized to call upon qualified scientists and experts from other government entities and from the private sector, and to pay these scientists and experts, including their own, the appropriate allowances, honoraria, and other incentives subject to guidelines covering such matters issued by the Director-General of the National Science and Technology Authority.

Section 5. The institutes in the complex are likewise hereby exempted from government limitations in the purchase of scientific and research-related equipment and attendance abroad to scientific and technological meetings and conferences upon certification by the Director-General of the National Science and Technology Authority.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 16th day of October in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 781-857]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.