MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 956

DIRECTING ADDITIONAL BUDGETARY SAVINGS AND ECONOMY MEASURES

WHEREAS, there is urgent need to attain a manageable budget deficit; and

WHEREAS, control of government expenditures is an essential component of our ongoing economic stabilization program.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of t’ 2 Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the immediate implementation of the following which were covered by a verbal order of the President

A. Additional Reserves in the 1984 Budget

1. There shall be imposed, a budgetary reserve equivalent to five (5) percent of the 1984 budget program in addition to the earlier implemented reserves.

2. The reserves shall be applied on the major ex­penditure accounts on the basis of the following percentages:

B. Mechanism of Implementation

1. To realize the above targets, the concerned agencies and offices of the national government, including government-owned and controlled corporations and state colleges and universities shall immediately effect the above adjustments and shall submit the corresponding adjusted program of expenditures to the Office of Budget and Management

2. To effect the necessary reductions, all concerned shall accordingly review all their un-released program allotments in order that low “priority programs/projects/activities may be deferred, scaled down, or rescheduled. In addition, savings from released allotments shall not be utilized or realigned without prior approval  of the Office of Budget and Management.

C. The Office of Budget and Management shall prepare a consolidated adjusted program of expenditures for implementation purposes and shall accordingly issue the relevant budget execution circulars.

D. The provisions of Letter of Implementation No. 146 and Letter of Instructions No. 1408 prescribing economy and funds control measures, respectively, are hereby reiterated.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 6 th day of June in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.