MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 287

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE TO REVIEW THE OPERATIONS OF PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANIES

WHEREAS, there is a need to inquire into the operations of all public utility companies in the Philippines, with a view to ascertaining if their true economic conditions justify a modification of their present rates, for the better safeguarding of the public interest;

WHEREAS, appropriate bodies are required to coordinate the implementation of this inquiry;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Presidential Committee to Review the Operations of Public Utility Companies composed of the following officials:

The Committee shall undertake a general review of the operations of all public utility companies, both private and government-owned or controlled, including power, communications and transportation firms, for the purpose of ascertaining if a modification of present rates is warranted by the circumstances.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon all government departments, bureaus, offices and agencies for such assistance as it may deem necessary in discharging its functions, particularly the following:

a) Public Service Commission, for rules and regulations for granting certificates of public conveyances, rate-making policies, latest documents on PSC hearings and latest approved PSC rates on power, communications, and transportation;

b) Securities and Exchange Commission, for financial statements, past and current, of power, communications and transportations firms;

c) Civil Aeronautics Board, for the same data as paragraph (b) above; and

d) All other related agencies for data evaluation, review work and comparative analysis of the position of consumers and public utility operators, and price policy determination.

The Committee shall be provided assistance by a Technical Staff, to be composed of three groups with the following functions:

Coordinator – Vicente J. Brillantes, PES

Economic and Financial Group – to establish the general and analytical framework, guidelines and criteria in the context of broad developmental and social objectives.

Utility Operations Group – to review and evaluate the financial operations of specific utility firms within the industry grouping.

Rate Structure and Policy Group – to, evaluate the current rate-making procedures and policy and to recommend specific criteria for optimal rate structure and policy.

The Committee shall submit its report to the President of the Philippines upon completion of its work.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.