MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 280

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL CENSUS COORDINATING BOARD, AUTHORIZING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF LOCAL CENSUS BOARDS, AND PROCLAIMING APRIL 1, 1971, AS CENSUS DAY FOR AGRICULTURE AND FISHERIES

WHEREAS, Commonwealth Act No. 591 authorizes the Bureau of the Census and Statistics “to prepare for and undertake all censuses of population, agriculture, industry and commerce”, and to conduct, for statistical purposes, investigations and studies of social and economic problems and conditions in the country; and Republic Act No. 6130 sets aside an appropriation for the taking of the 1971 Censuses of Agriculture and Fisheries;

WHEREAS, pursuant to the provisions of the above-mentioned Acts, the Bureau of the Census and Statistics will undertake the 1971 Censuses of Agriculture and Fisheries; and

WHEREAS, to insure the success of this nationwide undertaking, it is deemed necessary to enlist the cooperation and assistance of the various agencies of the national government as well as the local governments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Presidential Census Coordinating Board, which shall be responsible for the systematic coordination of government agencies and instrumentalities involved in the conduct of the 1971 Censuses of Agriculture and Fisheries, to be composed of the following:

The Board is hereby authorized to issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the objectives of this Order.

As counterpart of the Presidential Census Coordinating Board, at the local government level, there shall be established Provincial, City, Municipal/Municipal District and Barrio Census Board in each province, city, municipality/municipal district and barrio to act as a consultative body and to provide such facilities and assistance as shall be required by the Bureau of the Census and Statistics in the conduct of the 1971 Censuses of Agriculture and Fisheries within their respective jurisdictions without extra compensation.

The Provincial Census Boards shall be composed of the Provincial Governors as chairman, and the highest ranking provincial officials of the Philippine Fisheries Commission, the Bureau of the Agricultural Economics, and the Agricultural Productivity Commission or, in their absence, the officials acting in their stead, Division Superintendents of Schools, Provincial PACD Officers, Philippine Constabulary Commanders and Provincial/District Engineers, as members.

The City Census Boards shall be composed of the City Mayors as chairman, and the highest ranking city officials of the Philippine Fisheries Commission, the Bureau of Agricultural Economics, and the Agricultural Productivity Commission or, in their absence, the officials acting in their stead, City Superintendents of Schools, City PACD Officers and City Engineers, as members.

The Municipal/Municipal District Census Boards shall be composed of the Municipal/Municipal District Mayors as chairman, and the highest ranking municipal/municipal district officials of the Philippine Fisheries Commission, the Bureau of Agricultural Economics, and Agricultural Productivity Commission or, in their absence, the officials acting in their stead, municipal PACD Officers, Public School Supervisors or Principal Teachers, as members.

Each Provincial, City, and Municipal/Municipal District Census Board shall have a Secretariat to be headed by an Executive Officer, which shall be composed of personnel from the different bureaus and agencies represented in the Presidential Census Coordinating Board as well as from local governments. The Executive Officer of the Presidential Census Coordinating Board shall be the Director of the Bureau of the Census and Statistics.

The Barrio Census Boards shall be composed of the Barrio Captains as chairman, and the Barrio Councils and Public School Head Teachers in the barrios, as members.

The supervisors, enumerators and other subordinate personnel for the census work shall be appointed by the Director of the Census and Statistics and/or may be drafted from personnel of the Government, including provincial, city and municipal officials and employees, school teachers, field forces of the different bureaus and offices of the national government, city and municipal police forces, members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and barrio captains.

All heads of departments, bureaus, offices and agencies of the government, including provincial, city and municipal officials, and Philippine Constabulary Provincial Commanders, are hereby enjoined to make available for purposes of census taking their facilities as well as the services of such personnel as may be requested or requisitioned by the Bureau of the Census and Statistics.

April 1, 1971, is hereby designated as Census Day for Agriculture and Fisheries on which date collection of all pertinent data shall commence and shall proceed on consecutive days from daylight to darkness including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays until finally completed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.