MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 167

CERTIFYING THAT THE MANUFACTURE OF PLASTICIZERS IN THE PHILIPPINES, AS A PREFERRED PIONEER INDUSTRY SHALL BE ENTITLED TO A POST-OPERATIVE TARIFF PROTECTION

WHEREAS, the Board of Investments has approved the application for registration of Coco-Chemical Philippines, Inc. for the local manufacture of plasticizers as a preferred pioneer industry;

WHEREAS, studies conducted by said Board indicate that this project, to be feasible, needs a post-operative tariff protection against competing imported items;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, upon the recommendation of the Board of Investments, and pursuant to the provisions of Section 8(c) of Republic Act 5186, otherwise known as the Investment Incentives Act, do hereby certify that the manufacture of plasticizers in the Philippines, as a preferred pioneer industry, shall be entitled to a post-operative tariff protection in the form of increased customs duties on primary phthalic plasticizers subject to the condition that at any time during their effectivity, the increased tariff rates may be modified in accordance with Section four hundred one of the Tariff and Customs Code or upon the recommendation of the Board of Investments whenever it finds, after due notice to the registered enterprise concerned, that the existing conditions in the industry warrant such modification.

Section 1. The articles specifically listed hereunder as classified under Section 104 of Republic Act Number Nineteen Hundred Thirty-Seven shall pay the following rates of import duty:

Tariff Heading No.

Description of Articles

Rate of Duty

29.15

Polyacids and their anhydrides, acid halides, acid peroxides, peracids, and their halogenated, sulfonated or nitrated derivatives:

A. Alkyl phthalates

n.w. kg. or ad val.

P0.70 50%

B. Others

ad val.

10%

38.19

Chemical products and preparations of the chemical and allied industries (including those consisting of mixtures of natural products) not otherwise provided for; residual products of the chemical and allied industries, not otherwise provided for:

A. xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

B. Mixtures containing alkyl phthalates

n.w. kg. or ad val.

P0.70 50%

C. Others

ad val.

10%

Section 2. The above tariff rate increases shall take effect upon the certification by the Board of Investments that the registered pioneer enterprise named above is operating on a commercial scale, and shall continue in effect until the end of the fifth calendar year after their effectivity.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 167, January 25, 1969