MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1090

ESTABLISHING THE MINDANAO AND VISAYAS CAMPUSES OF THE PHILIPPINE SCIENCE HIGH SCHOOL

WHEREAS, human resources development specifically to encourage careers in science and technology is a priority area of the National Development Plan;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Science High School (PSHS) in Quezon City created under Republic Act No. 3661, as a center of excellence in science education (secondary level), is of limited accessibility to talented young students in the Mindanao area due to economic and social reasons;

WHEREAS, PSHS campus each in Mindanao and the Visayas would resolve the problem and, at the same time, become a motivating influence for the pursuit of academic excellence in all levels of the educational system in the region;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416 as amended, do hereby order and direct:

SECTION 1. There are hereby established two regional campuses of the Philippine Science High School, one in Davao City, to be known as the “Philippine Science High School, Mindanao Campus (PSHSMC)”, and another in Iloilo City to be known as the “Philippine Science High School, Visayas Campus (PSHSVC)”. The PSHS regional school in Davao City shall be operational not later than the School Year 1986-87 while the PSHS regional school in Iloilo City, not later than the School Year 1987-88.

SEC. 2. The purpose of the said high schools is to offer on a free scholarship basis a secondary course with special emphasis on subjects pertaining to the sciences and mathematics with the end in view of preparing its students for science and technology careers.

SEC. 3. The heads of the Schools shall be known as the Director  of the PSHSMC and PSHSVC, respectively whose appointment, compensation, tenure in office, functions, powers and duties shall, except as herein otherwise set forth, be as provided in Section 3 of Republic Act No. 3661  which created the Philippine Science High School (PSHS).

SEC. 4. Both Regional schools of the PSHS shall have the general powers set out in Section 36  of the “Corporation Code of the Philippines” and the exercise of its corporate powers is hereby vested exclusively in the Board of Trustees of the PSHS and in a local School Board, hereinafter provided, and in the Director of the regional school insofar as authorized by the PSHS Board. The PSHS Board of Trustees shall have the Directors of the PSHSMC and the PSHSVC as additional members.

The PSHS Board of Trustees shall also have, with respect to the PSHSMC and the PSHSVC, the same powers and duties set out in Section 5 of Republic Act No. 3661.

SEC. 5. There shall be in each regional school a local School Board composed of a Chairman to be appointed by the Chairman of the PSHS Board of Trustees, the Regional Director, Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports to be designated by its Minister, the Regional Director, National Science and Technology Authority, to be designated by the NSTA Director General, the Director of the PSHS regional school, and the President of the Parent-Teacher Association of the PSHS regional school, as ex-officio members, and two representatives from the private sector to be appointed likewise by the Chairman of the PSHS Board of Trustees. The Chairman and last two members shall serve each for a term of two years. The members of the local School Board shall receive per diems and/or allowances per session as determined by the PSHS Board of Trustees.

SEC. 6. The functions of the local School Board shall be:

(a) To prescribe for the administration of the PSHS regional schools such rules and regulations as are consistent with this Executive Order and the policies laid down by the PSHS Board of Trustees;

(b) To act a citizens’ committee to interpret the educational needs of the region to the Board of Trustees; and

(c) To exercise such other functions, powers and duties as the Board of Trustees may prescribe or delegate.

A quorum of the local School Board shall consist of a majority of all the members holding office at the time the meeting of the Board is called. All processes against the local School Board shall be served on the Director of the regional school or Secretary thereof.

SEC. 7. There shall be an Academic Council which shall have the same membership, powers and functions provided for the PSHS Executive Council under Section 8 of Republic Act No. 3661.

SEC. 8. Sections 11, 12, 13 and 14 of Republic Act No. 3661  are hereby reaffirmed and shall apply to both the PSHS and its regional schools. Income and donations to the regional schools shall constitute a special fund to be known as the PSHSMC or PSHSVC Fund, as the case may be.

SEC. 9. To carry out the purposes of this Executive Order, including the operation of the PSHSMC, and the PSHSVC, the acquisition, improvement, and conditioning of the present site of the Davao Mental Hospital, Davao City, on which the PSHSMC, shall be located, and the future site of the PSHSVC, the construction, maintenance, and repair of buildings and improvements, and the acquisition of furniture, fixtures and equipment, the sum of Three Million Pesos or each regional school is hereby appropriated out of the Special Activities Fund of the National Priorities Support Fund for Fiscal Year 1986. Thereafter the expenses of the PSHSMC and the PSHSVC for the purposes above described, shall be provided in the yearly General Appropriation Acts of the National Government: Provided, however, That any unexpended balance for any particular year shall not revert to the General Fund but shall also form part of the aforementioned PSHSMC and PSHSVC Funds.

SEC. 10. If any provision of this Executive Order or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder thereof or the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

SEC. 11. All laws, rules and orders inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed.

SEC. 12. This Executive Order shall take effect upon its approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030 – 1093 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.