MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 178

CREATING THE PANAY DEVELOPMENT PLANNING BOARD

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law and with the aim in view of accelerating the economic progress of the Panay provinces in the Panay Island, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Panay Development Planning Board which shall conduct scientific and systematic surveys of the assets and potentialities of the Panay region, plan its development, and pool the resources of the provinces and cities thereof for the implementation of programs to enhance the economic, social, industrial and commercial development and the general welfare of the region and its people.

The Board shall have the following powers and functions:

1. To act as the technical arm of the Panay provincial and city executives on matters pertaining to regional planning;

2. To receive, screen and study such matters as may be submitted or referred by the various governmental agencies concerned with the development of the Panay area;

3. To formulate such guidelines, policies, objectives, requirements or conditions for the effective exercise of the Board in regard to the various development programs, with the end in view of affecting an integrated and systematic coordination of plans and activities in furtherance of the regional socio-economic development program;

4. To make recommendations to the President through the Committee on Regional Planning on any matter concerning Panay regional planning or affecting the plans and activities thereof;

5. To advise or assist the local planning boards within the region on phases of organization or operation or in any other matter referred to it by such boards;

6. To enlist and accept such technical assistance or financial support as it may deem essential to the proper discharge of its task;

7. To perform such other functions as may be directed by the President.

The Board, in the pursuit of its objectives, shall coordinate with the Committee on Regional Planning created under Administrative Order No. 123 dated May 6, 1965. All expenses necessary for the operations and projects of the Panay Development Planning Board shall be for the account of the member provinces and cities unless otherwise provided for by law.

The Board shall be composed of the Governors of the Provinces of Aklan, Antique, Capiz, Iloilo and the Mayors of Iloilo City and Roxas City. They shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from among themselves.

All departments, offices, bureaus, agencies, and other government entities shall render assistance to and coordinate with the Panay Development Planning Board on such matters affecting the development of the Panay region.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 178, April 21, 1969