MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 199

CREATING TASK FORCE SUGARLANDIA, DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS , the sugar industry is one of the major economic forces of our country;

WHEREAS , the efficient implementation of the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program in all areas will promote growth and global competitiveness of our sugar industry;

WHEREAS , the same sugar industry promises renewable biomass energy that will address the current oil crisis and help reduce the country’s dependence on imported fuel;

WHEREAS , the creation of a task force will support, enhance and strengthen the operations and programs relative to the development of the sugar industry and to fast track the government’s ethanol program;

WHEREAS , under Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book II of the Administrative Code of 1987, the President has the continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation and Composition . There is hereby created Task Force Sugarlandia under the Office of the President which shall be composed of one (1) representative each from the following offices with the rank of Regional Director or its equivalent as determined by the respective Department Secretaries:

Department of Agrarian Reform — Chairman Department of Energy — Member Department of Agriculture — Member Department of the Interior and Local Government — Member Department of Science and Technology — Member Department of Justice — Member National Development Corporation — Member Sugar Regulatory Administration — Member

There shall also be three (3) representatives from the private sector representing sugar farmers, sugar farm workers and landowners in the sugar industry, as members who shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Task Force.

Section 2. Powers and Functions . Task Force Sugarlandia shall exercise the following powers and functions:

a. Conduct and complete a study identifying and addressing specific problems in the implementation of the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program as provided under Republic Act 6657 directly affecting the development of the sugar industry and conduct consultations in areas to be identified by the Task Force;

b. Submit recommendations to the President on the formulation of policies, plans, programs and projects relative to the development of the sugar industry and implementation of the ethanol program;

c. Recommend modifications/amendments to existing laws, rules, regulations and procedures to remove impediments in the immediate, effective and efficient implementation of the programs and activities relative to the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program under Republic Act 6657;

d. Enlist the assistance of any branch, department, bureau, office agency or instrumentality of the Government, including government-owned and controlled corporations, to carry out the provisions of this Memorandum Order;

e. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President

The Task Force shall have a term of one (1) year from issuance of this Memorandum Order.

Section 3. Funding . Funding for the operations of the Task Force shall be taken from such available sources as may be identified by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM).

Section 4. Repealing Clause . All orders, rules, regulations and issuances or parts thereof; which are inconsistent with this Memorandum Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 5. Effectivity . This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of December in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia