MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 26

DIRECTING THE EXECUTIVE SECRETARY TO OVERSEE THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PRESIDENT’S BRIDGE PROGRAM

WHEREAS, the President’s Bridge Program was launched in 1994 to address the bridge infrastructure deficit;

WHEREAS, the Oversight Committee on the President’s Bridge Program was established under Memorandum Order No. 234 dated September 20, 1994, as amended by Memorandum Order No. 474 dated April 17, 1998, to serve as the policy coordinating body for the implementation of the President’s Bridge Program;

WHEREAS, there is a need to reduce committees and establish line accountabilities;

WHEREAS, under Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987, the President has the continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Abolition of the Oversight Committee. – The Oversight Committee on the President’s Bridge Program is hereby abolished.

SECTION 2. Primary Responsibility. – The Executive Secretary is hereby directed to oversee and monitor the effective and efficient implementation of the President’s Bridge Program (the “Program”) which include all on-going and proposed bridge projects funded through the Official Development Assistance (ODA) and implemented by the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), DPWH-Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) and other government agencies.

SECTION 3. Program Director. – In the exercise of his oversight function, the Executive Secretary shall be assisted by a full-time Program Director to be appointed by the President.

The Program Director shall have two (2) Assistant Program Directors appointed by the President to head: (a) the Administration and Finance Group and (b) the Operations Group, which shall each have their corresponding staff complement. The Administration and Finance Group shall take charge of administrative details including accounting and performance audits of all on-going and proposed bridged projects. The Operations Group shall take charge of the operational details to ensure the effective and efficient implementation of all on-going and proposed bridge projects.

The salary grade of the Program Director and his assistants shall be fixed by the Executive Secretary in coordination with the Department of budget and Management and subject to the approval of the President.

SECTION 4. Functions of the Program Director. – The Program director shall have the following functions:

a. Plan, implement and oversee the operational details and administrative arrangements necessary for the effective and efficient implementation of the Program consistent with transparency and accountability;

b. Obtain support and assistance from the appropriate departments, government-owned or controlled corporations, local government units and civil society for the attainment of program objectives;

c. Conduct a comprehensive review of all existing loan agreements and submit his recommendations to the Executive Secretary with the end in view of maximizing the utilization of the ODA funds;

d. Execute the agreements entered into by the Government of the Philippines with donor governments relative to the effective and efficient implementation of the bridge projects covered by the Program;

e. Submit to the Executive Secretary for approval of the President a priority bridge allocation list according to allocation criteria guidelines to be established by the Executive Secretary; and

f. Provide monthly reports to the Executive Secretary.

The Salam “Peace” Bridges Project Special Program Management Office/DPWH-ARMM established under Memorandum Circular No. 72 dated September 6, 1999 and the “Tulay ni Erap sa Barangay” Project Special Program Management Office established under Memorandum Circular No. 115 dated September 25, 2000 are hereby placed under the control and Supervision of the Program Director.

SECTION 5. Funding. – The Program Director shall draw operating funds from the on-going ODA-funded bridge projects under the President’s Bridge Program, subject to the pertinent accounting and auditing rules and regulations of the Commission on Audit and applicable laws.

SECTION 6. Repeal. – Memorandum Order No. 234 dated September 20, 1994 and Memorandum Order No. 474 dated April 17, 1998 are hereby repealed. All other orders, rules, regulations and issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Memorandum Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. – This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.

City of Manila, August 22, 2001.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary