MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 217

DIRECTING THE ORGANIZATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMS TO CELEBRATE PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE DAY ON JUNE 12, 2006

WHEREAS, Philippine Independence Day, June 12, is the special date set aside each year to commemorate the heroism, patriotism and nationalism of our forefathers in the struggle for independence;

WHEREAS, history is a special area of concern in the education of our people;

WHEREAS, Independence Day is a an occasion for domestic tourists to come to Manila and watch the festivities;

WHEREAS, the proper planning, implementation and coordination of all programs and activities related to the celebration are needed;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA M. ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Department of Education shall oversee the National Historical Institute;

SEC. 2. The Department of Education, through the National Historical Institute, and assisted by the Department of Tourism, is hereby directed to plan, coordinate, implement and conduct the programs and activities in celebration of the 2006 Independence Day.

SEC. 3. The Department of Education, through the National Historical Institute, and assisted by the Department of Tourism shall organize a task force headed a senior official of the Department of Tourism to organize the programs related to this event.

SEC. 4. All departments, bureaus, offices, national government agencies, local government units and government-owed and –controlled corporations are hereby enjoined to give full support, assistance and cooperation to the task force in the exercise of its responsibilities under this Memorandum Order.

SEC. 5. All agencies of government including Philippine embassies abroad shall participate actively in the 2006 Independence Day celebration as well as enlist the participation of private sector groups and non-government organizations.

Local government units and private sector groups and non-government organizations are likewise enjoined to celebrate the 108 th Anniversary of Philippine Independence in their respective localities and offices.

SEC. 6. The programs and events for the 2006 Independence Day celebration shall include, to the extent appropriate, the following:

a. Pambansang Araw ng Watawat (Philippine National Flag Day) on May 28, 2006 as the kick-off ceremony for the 2006 Independence Day celebration.

b. Flag-Raising and Wreath-Laying ceremonies at the Rizal National Monument in the Rizal Park on June 12, 2006 early in the morning. Other cities and municipalities around the country are enjoined to hold simultaneous similar activities on the same day and time.

c. The Philippine Independence Day Parade at the Quirino Grandstand on June 12, 2006 shall follow immediately after the Flag-Raising and Wreath-Laying ceremonies.

SEC. 7. In support of the 108 th Philippine Independence Day celebration, all concerned government agencies and local government units are authorized to allocate such reasonable amounts as may be necessary to defray expenses for the said events.

SECTION 8. The release of FIVE MILLION PESOS (P5,000,000.00) chargeable against the operating budgets of the Office of the President (P2,000,000.00), the Department of Education (P1,000,000.00), the Department of Tourism (P1,000,000.00) and the National Historical Institute (P1,000,000.00) for Fiscal Year 2006 is hereby authorized to carry out the provisions of this Memorandum Order.

SECTION 9. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24 th day of May in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Six.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary