MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 116

ENCOURAGING THE CONVERSION OF TRICYCLE OPERATORS AND DRIVERS ASSOCIATIONS (TODA) INTO TRANSPORT SERVICE COOPERATIVES

WHEREAS, tricycles play a vital role in the movement of passengers, particularly in remote areas and/or subdivisions where other modes of transportation do not serve the public;

WHEREAS, the tricycle sector is greatly affected by R.A. 8749, otherwise known as the Philippine Clean Air Act, the implementation of which, the tricycle sector workers fear, may result in losing their only means of livelihood;

WHEREAS, during the indoor rally of the Tricycle Operators and Drivers Associations (TODAs) in Cuneta Astrodome on 03 January 2003 government assistance was sought for TODAs to establish cooperatives that will allow them, among others, put up gasoline stations;

WHEREAS, tricycle operations need to be converted into transport service cooperatives for them to be eligible for various projects/programs of the government designed primarily for the poor and marginalized sectors of our society;

WHEREAS, the conversion of tricycle operations into transport service cooperatives will serve as a practical vehicle for promoting self reliance and harnessing people power in the attainment of economic growth, development and social justice towards the envisioned strong Republic;

WHEREAS, the Office of Transportation Cooperatives (OTC), an attached agency of the Department of Transportation and Communications, is mandated under Executive Order No 898, series of 1983 to promote the growth and development of transportation cooperatives as a vehicle to uplift the socio­economic condition of the workers of the transport industry, particularly the drivers; and

WHEREAS, the Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG) issued Memorandum Circular No. 2002-35 dated March 7, 2002 to all Local Government Units/Executives and all other concerned to support the Koop Paradahan, Pook Sakayan (KPPS) project and the conversion of tricycle associations into transport service cooperatives.

NOW , THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL- ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order:

SECTION 1 . The Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC) thru the Office of Transportation Cooperatives (OTC) is hereby directed, as the lead agency, to enhance and intensify the voluntary conversion of tricycle operation/associations into transport service cooperatives in close coordination with the Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG) thru the Bureau of Local Government Development (BLGD). Said agencies shall include in its regular plans and programs such conversion of tricycle associations into transport service cooperatives and for other purposes.

SEC . 2. The DOTC, thru the OTC, is authorized to call upon any Department, Bureau, or Office for such assistance it may require in the performance and attainment of the objectives of this order.

SEC . 3. The joint collaborative effort, commitment and coordination of the private sector, particularly that of the National Union of Transportation Cooperatives and National Federation of Tricycle Operators and Drivers Associations, is also enjoined.

SEC . 4. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 15 th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Three.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary