Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 151

GUIDELINES IMPLEMENTING ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 34, SERIES OF 2002, AS AMENDED

Pursuant to Section 5 of Administrative Order No. 34, dated 02 May 2002, as amended, providing for the revival of Cabinet Officers for Regional Development (CORD), and authorizing the Executive Secretary to “issue implementing guidelines to ensure and facilitate the submission of reports of CORD activities, findings and recommendations” and to “establish the necessary mechanism for speedy resolution of CORD-identified issues and concerns by national agencies,” the following Implementing Guidelines are hereby promulgated and adopted.

Section 1. Revival of the CORD System

The revival of the CORD System aims to:

a. Provide for an effective linkage mechanism between regional and sub-regional levels of government and the national leadership:

b. Assist the President in addressing problems in the regional and sub-regional levels of government;

c. Provide for a mechanism for the speedy resolution of CORD-identified issues and concerns; and

d. Ensure the proper implementation of the actions taken for the resolution of CORD-identified issues and concerns.

Sec. 2. Submission of Reports

In order that the foregoing objectives are met, it is important that a communications and reporting system be put in place. Accordingly:

a. Reports of the CORDs shall be submitted at the end of each month to the Office of the President, attention the Executive Secretary.

b. Special Reports may be submitted at any period as the CORD deems necessary to inform the President of issues and concerns that need immediate attention.

Sec. 3. Contents of Reports.

a. Reports shall be brief and concise and include, an Executive Summary, Narrative, and Matrix.

b. Reports shall have the following major contents:

(1) Activities

i. These shall include regular consultations, assessment meetings or any form of participation by the CORD in meetings with the following:

ii. Activities shall also include Presidential regional/provincial meetings wherein the CORD acts as Lead Convenor.

iii. A list that contains the participants in the various activities shall be submitted with the report to determine and establish the network of development constituents in the area.

The following data on the participants must be specified: Name; Agency, Institution or Sector represented; Designation or Position; Contact Particulars; and other information as necessary.

(2) Findings

i. These are significant issues, concerns, problems, grievances, difficulties and perceptions of regional institutions and stakeholders expressed, discussed, or advocated at the abovementioned activities that are deemed to affect the region’s socio-economic development, and peace and order situation.

(3) Recommendations

i. These are specific solutions, strategies, policies, programs, projects and priorities aimed at addressing the various findings.

ii. On the principle of completed- staff-work, recommendations must be specific on the following:

Sec. 4. Updates.

All reports shall include a section on Updates on actions taken on findings and recommendations presented in previous reports.

Sec. 5. Clarification and Validation of Reports.

Prior to consolidation and submission to the President, certain aspects of the reports may be clarified and validated by the Office of the Executive Secretary with the CORD concerned or with his officially designated CORD Assistant.

Sec. 6. Mechanism for the Speedy Resolution of CORD-ldentified Issues and Concerns.

T he following procedures shall be adopted as mechanism for the effective and speedy resolution of CORD-identified issues and concerns:

a. Identification of regional issues and concerns and recommendations for their resolution by CORD, in coordination with the Regional Development Councils (RDCs), Regional Peace and Order Councils (RPOCs) and other local special bodies.

b. Determination by the CORD of lead national government agency (Lead NGA) to act on said issues and concerns.

c. Referral of said issues and concerns to the identified lead NGA by CORD, copy furnished the OES.

d. Evaluation of recommendation by Lead NGA and determination of appropriate actions to address issues and concerns such as:

1. Policy and program clarification/ enhancement at agency level

2. Policy and program clarification/ enhancement requiring inter-agency action

3. Policy enhancement requiring Presidential action, submitted to OP thru OES

e. Reporting on actions taken to CORD by Lead NGA, copy furnished OES.

f. Monitoring of actions being taken on the issues and concerns by Lead NGAs, copy furnished OES

g. Local level monitoring and feedback reporting to lead NGA of effect of actions taken by CORD, copy furnished OES.

h. Consolidation of actions taken on all CORD ICs by OES.

Sec. 7. Effectivity.

This Implementing Guidelines shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Manila, 25 October 2004 Reference: Memorandum from the Acting Executive Secretary