MALACANANG
MANILA

 

MEN _ 04H
PMS LIBRARY

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 62
APPROVING THE 2002 INVESTMENT PRIORITIES PLAN

Pursuant to Article 29 of the Omnibus Investments Code of 1987,
the attached 2002 Investment Priorities Plan (IPP) is hereby approved.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its
publication as required under Article 31 of the Omnibus Investments
Code of 1987.

DONE in the City of Manila, this __/@ th day of Moy in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Two.

Vil | cron ES aznov0
poma outgoing # 11227 ey,

By the President:

We tGL.

ALBERTO G. ROMULO
Executive Secretary

 

 

~*~

al!

2002 IPP

Part | National List

 

 

2002 IPP PRIORITY INVESTMENT AREAS

The 2002 IPP shall encourage the following economic activities:

|. National List

A. Exports Activities*

This covers export producers, export traders, service exporters, and activities
considered in support of exporters.

B. Mandatory Inclusions:

1. All areas/activities which as provided for under existing laws, specifically require

their inclusion in the IPP.

LAW ACTIVITY

P.D. 705 Industrial Tree Plantation

R.A. 7103 Iron & Steel Projects*

R.A. 7942 Exploration, mining, quarrying, and processing of minerals*

R.A. 8047 Publication or printing of books or textbooks*

R.A. 8479 Refining, storage, marketing and distribution of petroleum products*

C. Support To Government Programs

1.

ZZ

Agricultural/ Fishery Production and Processing”

Limited to activities covered under RA 8435 (agricultural and fisheries
modernization), RA 7900 (production/processing of high value crops) and RA
8550 (commercial fishing)

Energy Sources

Exploration/development of indigenous and renewable energy sources and
technologies, including natural gas, and establishment of mini-hydro electric
power plants

Logistics

Covers land, air and water transport: provided, for land transportation,
applicable only to new projects or modernization projects utilizing compressed
natural gas (CNG) and altemative fuels; Air and water facilities that may
include cargo operations and liquefied natural gas terminals; Warehousing,
container yards and passenger terminals; provided, applicable only to new
facilities; Shipbuilding/ shipbreaking/ shiprepair

* With modemization program

2002 IPP

Part Il Regional List

SS

10.

11.

12.

eZ

Drugs and Medicines*

Manufacture of essential drugs (including herbal medicines and supplements)
listed in the current Philippine National Drug Formulary (PNDF) and active
substances of drugs

Engineered Products*

Manufacture of machinery and equipment, parts & components of motor
vehicles, and construction materials; preparation of designs of machinery and
equipment and/or their parts and components

Environmental Projects

Environmental protection, pollution  abatement/mitigation, including
establishment of environmental/ecological facilities and river system
rehabilitation

Information and Communication Technology*

Information Technology Services (IT Services, IT-enabled Services, ICT
Support Activities, IT Parks)

Infrastructure

Establishment of physical infrastructure, e.g., roads, bridges, and
telecommunication facilities, including those under the BOT Law (project cost in
excess of Php 1.0B will be classified as a pioneer project; otherwise, non-
pioneer); pipeline operations for transport of petroleum products, natural gas,
petrochemicals, and similar products

Mass Housing Projects including Development and Fabrication of
Housing Components**

Research and Development Activities, including Bio-technology
Social Service*

Establishment of educational training institutions, health service facilities, social
welfare institutions, and retirement villages (limited to new projects only)

Tourism-related Projects as Endorsed by the Department of Tourism*

Establishment of tourist accommodation facilities, tourism estates, historico-
cultural heritage projects, and tourist bus operations

“With modernization program
** Modernization limited to fabrication only

"2002 IPP
Part Il Regional List

Te

-3-

13. Television Film, Motion Picture, to include documentary films, and
Musical Recording

14. New projects and bio-technology projects with a minimum Project cost of

US$1 Million not commercially undertaken in the Philippines as of 31
December 2001

ll. Regional List

A. Industry Clusters

Industry clusters (ICs) endorsed by the Small and Medium Enterprise Development
Council (SMEDC). ICs will be limited to only one (1) cluster per province; subject

to approval by the BOI of the Terms of Reference (TOR) of SMEDC on the
endorsement of projects.

B. ARMM List

The ARMM List covers priority activities which have been independently identified
by the Regional Board of Investments of the ARMM in accordance with E.0. 458.
The BOI-ARMM can grant registration and administer incentives to activities listed
in the IPP, provided these are located in ARMM and subject to the General and
Specific Guidelines.

1. Export Activities

a. Export Trader and Service Exporters
b. Support Activities for Exporters

2. Agriculture, Food and Forestry-Based Industries

a. Processed Food

e Production and processing of Halal Meat
e Leguminous and other vegetable-based protein (textured,
palletized or liquid)
e Spices processing (e.g. hot pepper, black pepper, ginger, etc.)
Note: May be integrated with plantation
e Vegetable oils (e.g. peanut oil, rice bran oil, sunflower and soybean
oil) and production of food crops
(Note: Maybe integrated with post-harvest processing and other
vegetables (such as Tomatoes)
e Integrated coconut processing and plantation
e Seaweeds production and processing
e Cassava processing

Note: Maybe integrated with oe

EZ

2002 IPP
Part Il Regional List

-4-

eeeeeeeeeeSSSeSFSeSeeeeeSSsSeS

ao

“samo

2F-

¢ Fruit processing (e.g. durian, mangosteen, jackfruit, marang,
banana, mango, passion guava, calamansi, and guyabano) and
plantation
e Aquaculture (Fish Production and Processing) such as, but not
limited to:
- Frozen fish
- Chilled fish
- Canned fish
- Abalone
- Crab fattening
- Eel production
- Squid processing
- Carp and tilapia production and processing
- Tropical fish production and processing
- Shrimps/prawn
- Lapu-lapu (Grouper) and other marine products

° Com flour mill (integrated with plantation)
° Young com production

Note: May include processing/canning
° Mushrooms culture and processing
e Sweet potato plantation and processing
e Crocodile farming and processing

Cutflower Production

Pearl Culture and Processing

Industrial Tree Plantation (include Mangrove, Rattan, Bamboo, etc.) and
wood processing (cement wood board and fiberboard) reconstructed
veneer

Shipbuilding and Watercraft

Abaca Production and Pulp Production

Palm Oil Plantation, Processing and Refining

Coffee Processing (maybe integrated with plantation)

Particle Board (use of agri-based waste material such as rice straw, wood
waste, etc.)

Activated Carbon Manufacturing (use of coconut shell, wood based, etc.)
Feeds Production (animal feeds and feeds for aquaculture)

Tobacco Plantation and Processing

. Production of Beverage Crops, but not limited to:

° Cacao beans
. Coffee beans (Arabica variety)

Production of Plantation Crops and other Medical Herbs/Essential Oil
Plants (including flower extracts)
Production of Livestock and Poultry (including Dairy products)

° Beef (including cow-calf and feedlot operations)

° Carabao (water buffalo) production
° Goats and sheep wv

2002 IPP -5-
Part Il Regional List

a eee

e Frozen semen and embryos

Note: includes natural method and artificial insemination and embryo
transfer technology

p. Bricks and Roofing Tiles Production

q. Quality Seeds and Seedlings of Fruit Trees and Other Planting Materials
Propagated Asexually or by Tissue Culture

r. Sugar cane plantation and refineries

s. Sericulture

t. Mosquito coil processing

3. Basic Industries

a. Pharmaceuticals
° Antibiotics
- Penicillin
- Streptomycin
-  Tetracycline’s
- Soft gelatin capsules

° Medical Devices
- Prosthetics
- Diagnosis
° Other pharmaceuticals, herbal medicines

b. Textile and Textile Products

° Yarns and fabrics

e Hand-woven textiles
° Specialty fabrics

° Tire cord fabrics

Note: Must be integrated with weaving and dipping units

Ramie (degumed, staple fiber, combed tops, noels and slivers)
Fish nets

Fabrics made of indigenous raw materials

Silk reeling

c. Fertilizers (organic and inorganic)
Solid waste materials

d. Mining (Exploration and development of Mineral Resources)

e Mining and quarrying of metallic and non-metallic minerals
including small scale as defined under P.D. 1899, but to exclude
river beds in operations)

e Processing of minerals (such as beneficiation and other
metallurgical methods)

e. Cement -— atleast 1.0 MTPY Capacity (clinker based)

y

 

2002 IPP -6-
Part Il Regional List

ee

 

4. Consumer Manufactures

a. Rubber Products such as:
e High pressure and hydraulic rubber hoses
e Rubber bolts
e Industrial rubber rollers
e Rubber tires

b. Leather Products

5. Infrastructure And Services

a. Public Utilities (with developmental route of the five provinces and one city
of the ARMM and other adjacent Cities and Provinces)

Common carriers (land, air and water transport facilities)
Electric transmission/distribution

Water supply facilities/waterways and sewerage systems
Buses/cargo trucks

Other specialized mass transport systems

Power generation like Hydro Power, and Geothermal

b. Telecommunications with Intemational Gateways

c. Tourism
e Tourism estates

Subject to guidelines developed jointly by the Board of Investments —
ARMM and Department of Tourism (DOT)
e Tourist accommodation facilities
- Hotels
- Resorts
- Other tourist accommodation facilities such as appartels,
pension houses, tourist inns, and others
e Tourist transport facilities
- Ajr
- Water
- Tourist buses and taxi/van
Note: *Endorsed by the DOT
**New and expansion projects may be registered

d. Industrial Service Facilities

This will cover the following activities:
e Common centers:
- Testing and quality control laboratories
- Training and demonstration centers
- Tool shops and similar facilities

.

2002 IPP
Part Il Regional List

a ee TY A

Note.

Metal working

¢ Electroplating

@ Foundry

¢ Forging

# Machining

¢ Heat treatment

¢ Brass making
Furniture

¢ Kiln drying

¢ Treatment and processing facilities
Ceramics

¢ Kiln

¢ Glazing
Food Processing

¢ Bottling and canning of distilled water/mineral water

¢ Industrial salt

¢ Vapor heat treatment

¢ Slaughterhouse/abattoir
Automotive battery plate manufacturing

. The following criteria must be met:

The project will serve the common needs of the industry in the
locality and;

The project will improve the relative Status and comparative
advantages of the industry.

e Development of Retirement Villages

Shall include health and medical facilities including amenities
required by the Philippine Retirement Authority (PRA)
Subject to the guidelines to be approved by BOI-ARMM in
consultation with the PRA, the Department of Health (DOH),
the Regional Planning and Development Office (RPDO) and
other concerned agencies.

e. Petrochemical Complex /
f. Industrial Gases (such as oxygen and nitrogen)
g. Miscellaneous Chemical Products

-  Biotechnological/biosynthetic chemicals
- Essential oils
- Fine chemicals

ass?

2002 IPP
Part li Regional List

ee
6. Engineering Industries

a. Engineering Products
- Motor vehicle parts and components
- Automobile parts and assembly
- Modern offset printing

b. Electronics and Telecommunication Products
7. ARMM Priority and Tourism Areas

Listed below are potential tourist destinations which need further
exploration and evaluation for intensified promotions, development and

marketing.
NUCLEUS GATEWAY SATELLITE
DESTINATION
Area I-Sulu Jolo Sulu Province
Area |l-Tawi-Tawi Bongao Tawi-Tawi Province
Area IIl-Lanao del Sur Marawi City Lanao del Sur Province
Area |V-Maguindanao Cotabato City Maguindanao Province

Area V-Basilan Isabela Basilan Province |