MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 173

DIRECTING THE SECRETARY OF TOURISM TO LEAD THE ORGANIZATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMS IN CELEBRATION OF THE 107 th ANNIVERSARY OF PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE

WHEREAS, the heroism, patriotism and nationalism of our forefathers in the struggle for independence deserve to be commemorated;

WHEREAS, the 107 th anniversary of the proclamation of Philippine Independence is the ideal occasion for all Filipinos to unite and rally behind the government and the country’s institutions;

WHEREAS, the proper planning, implementation and coordination of all programs and activities leading to the celebration are urgently needed.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Secretary of Tourism (Tourism Secretary, hereinafter) is hereby directed to take the lead role in the planning, coordination, implementation and conduct of programs and activities in celebration of the 2005 Independence Day.

SEC. 2. The Department of Tourism, being the lead agency of this national event, shall immediately convene the inter-agency organizing task force to plan and implement effectively all programs, projects and activities related to this event.

SEC. 3. The inter-agency task force shall be composed of the Tourism Secretary as Chair, with the Executive Director of the National Historical Institute and the Secretary of Education as Vice Chairs. Other members of the inter-agency task force shall be designated by the Tourism Secretary.

SEC. 4. All departments, bureaus, offices, national government agencies and local government units and government owned and controlled corporations are hereby enjoined to give full support, assistance and cooperation to the Tourism Secretary in the exercise of his responsibilities under this Memorandum Order.

SEC. 5. All branches of government are enjoined to participate actively in the 2005 Independence Day celebration as well as to enlist the participation of private sector groups and non-government organizations so that the 107 th Philippine Independence Day Celebration will be a show of unity and strength during these challenging times.

Local government units together with private sector groups, non-government organizations and Philippine embassies abroad are likewise enjoined to celebrate the 107 th Anniversary of Philippine Independence in their respective localities and offices.

SEC. 6. The programs and events for the 2005 Independence Day celebration shall include, to the extent appropriate, the following:

a. Pambansang Araw ng Watawat (Philippine National Flag Day) on May 28 as the kick-off ceremony for the 2005 Independence Day celebration;

b. Flag-raising and Wreath-Laying Ceremonies at the Rizal National Monument, Rizal Park, Manila on June 12, 2005 at around 7:00 in the morning. This activity will be particularly replicated in places of national significance such as the Barasoain Church, Malolos City, Bulacan; Aguinaldo Shrine, Kawit, Cavite; Mausoleo delos Veteranos de la Revolution, Manila North Cemetery; Bonifacio National Monument, Caloocan City; and Pinaglabanan Memorial Shrine, San Juan, Metro Manila. All other cities and municipalities around the country are enjoined to hold simultaneous similar activities on the same day and time.

c. The Philippine Independence Day Parade at the Quirino Grandstand in the afternoon of June 12, 2005 shall be meaningful and relevant to the theme of the celebration, to be followed by a special cultural program on the same venue.

SEC. 7. In support of the 107 th Philippine Independence Day celebration, all concerned government agencies and local government units are subject to budgetary laws and issuances and are authorized to allocate such amounts as may be necessary to defray expenses for the said event.

SEC. 8. The release of FIVE MILLION PESOS (PhP 5,000,000.00) chargeable against the President’s Contingency Fund for Fiscal Year 2005 is hereby authorized to carry out the provisions of this Memorandum Order. Any deficiency shall be charged against the regular budget of the participating agencies.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary