MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 288

AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 184, DATED AUGUST 18, 2005

SECTION 1. Memorandum Order No. 184 is hereby amended to read as follows:

I. PURPOSE

a. To enhance the well-being and protect the welfare of Office of the President (OP) officials and employees;

b. To ease their transport problem thereby improving efficiency, effectiveness and productivity;

c. To ensure the proper utilization of the OP Shuttle Service and the maximization of its usage.

II. DEFINITION OF TERMS

a. Official Trip – refers to trip sanctioned by the Office and related to the official functions/activities of the OP proper. b. Special Trip – refers to trip related to special activities not falling under the category of official or emergency trip. c. Emergency Trip – when the need is exceptionally urgent or absolutely indispensable or whenever the need cannot be delayed without causing detriment to public service. d. Shuttle Service – refers to the service vehicle provided by OP to transport authorized passengers in going to and from the OP premises from Mondays to Fridays. e. Authorized Passengers – refers to OP rank and file employees and to other government rank and file personnel who wish to avail of the shuttle service. f. Other Government Personnel – refers to non-OP government employees who wish to avail of the shuttle service but only upon the approval of the proper authority as recommended by the Committee on Shuttle Service. g. Fare – amount to be collected as may be determined and approved by the proper authority from authorized passengers who will avail of the shuttle service. h. Committee – refers to the Committee on Shuttle Service. i. Proper Authority – may refer to the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary or Deputy Executive Secretary for Finance and Administration. j. Routes – refers to the designated pick-up and drop off points of authorized passengers coming from the Malacañang premises to the point of destination & vice versa which maybe determined by the Committee on Shuttle Service from time to time considering practicality and effectiveness as well as the safety of the passengers.

III. ROUTES

IV. GUIDELINES

3.1 Scheduled medical check-ups.

3.2 Special domestic situations for minor children, senior citizens and handicapped who cannot travel/commute on their own.

3.3 Pregnant wife of OP Proper employees

3.4 Special cases of former O.P. Employees.

The above stated consideration will be allowed on a temporary basis only, provided that they secure a formal approval from any member of the Committee, through a Passenger’s Requisition Slip that will be made available for presentation to the security-escorts of the shuttle bus concerned. Each member of the Committee is allowed to approve only five (5) personal requests monthly.

4. Authorized passengers especially OP Proper Employees, are given priority to available seats in the bus. Sponsoring OP Passengers seeking special consideration must give up their seats in favor of their immediate family members. The security-escorts on duty will make sure that requesting OP employees will have to give up their seats in favor of their immediate family member if there is an authorized passenger standing (i.e. if the bus is in full capacity).

5. A minimal fare of P10.00 for PSO V and below, P75.00 for PSO VI and P30.00 for non-OP employees per ride shall be charged to the authorized passengers. Office ID and the ticket will be the pass to board the Shuttle Buses. Tickets will be color-coded to differentiate PSO V and down, PSO VI and non-OP passengers and shall be made available at the OP Cashier’s Office. However, the Committee, after evaluation and deliberation, may recommend the increase or adjustment of the amount of fare at any given time subject to the approval of the SDES/DESFA.

6. Only authorized personnel i.e., shuttle bus drivers and security-escorts have access to tools, accessories and audio­visual equipment of their respective shuttle buses.

7. The use of shuttle buses shall be allowed for official trips only. Special trips may be allowed subject to the approval of the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary (SDES) and/or Deputy Executive Secretary for Finance and Administration (DESFA).

8. Official and Special Trips should be duly covered by Special Order (SO) and Travel Permit as may be provided in this guidelines.

9. The Director of MMP shall evaluate the request of special trips based on following criteria:

9.1 availability of vehicles and/or drivers on a first-come, first-served basis;

9.2 route of travel must be paved/concrete roads and regularly plied by commercial buses; and

9.3 when the use of a shuttle service shall be more advantageous than using public transportation.

10. Changes in the schedule, purpose and/or destination of the trip shall be allowed only if duly authorized by SDES/DESFA before the scheduled trip.

11. While inside the bus, all passengers must observe the proper norms of conduct and code of ethics for public servants as provided for in the Civil Service Law, Rules and Regulations. Any violation thereof shall be dealt with accordingly.

12. A passenger who is under the influence of liquor or carrying obnoxious or foul-smelling goods, items or products shall not be allowed to board the bus.

13. The Policy of “No reservation of seats” shall be strictly enforced.

14. The Shuttle Bus drivers and security escorts shall make sure that the maximum extra weight capacity of 500 kilos per bus is strictly observed. This will include standing passengers and/or luggage. Passengers are required to inform the driver/security escort of any extra luggage that they will bring with them before hand in order to prevent the bus from overloading.

The drivers, by using their sound discretion, may disallow any or all extra luggage if this will compromise the safety of the passengers and/or may damage the Shuttle Bus.

V. PROCEDURES

A. FOR OFFICIAL TRIPS

1. The Requesting Office submits a letter request addressed to the SDES/DESFA thru the Director, MMP indicating the following information:

a. Date of Use

b. Expected Time of Departure and return

c. Destination(s)

d. Purpose(s) of Trip

e. Authorized Passenger(s)

2. The Director, MMP evaluates the requests based on the guidelines set forth herein. Thereafter, he forwards his recommendation to the approving authority for approval.

a. If approved, a corresponding Special Order shall be prepared by the Human Resource Management Office (HRMO) for the signature of the SDES/DESFA.

b. If disapproved, the request shall be returned to the requesting party.

B. FOR SPECIAL TRIPS

1. Except in cases of emergency, the requesting Unit/office shall prepare a letter-request addressed to the SDES / DESFA, thru, Director, MMP at least two (2) weeks before the scheduled trip indicating the same information as in V.A.1, which shall be signed by the Director / Head of Unit.

2. The Director, MMP evaluates the requests based on the guidelines set forth herein. Thereafter, he forwards his recommendation to the approving authority for approval.

a. If approved, a corresponding Special Order shall be prepared by the Human Resource Management Office (HRMO) for the signature of the SDES/DESFA.

b. If disapproved, the request shall be returned to the requesting party.

VI. SHUTTLE BUS DRIVERS

1. The bus drivers shall be under the immediate and direct control and supervision of the Chief Dispatcher, Dispatch Section of the MMP Office and under the general and overall supervision of the Head of the Malacañang Motor Pool.

2. Drivers assigned to OP shuttle service are entitled to overtime compensation and covered by the appropriate Special Order (SO) on overtime or compensatory overtime credit.

3. Each driver and their respective security personnel shall be responsible for the over-all cleanliness and maintenance of the shuttle bus assigned to him as well as the care and custody of the vehicle’s tools and accessories. The driver/s shall report immediately to the Chief Dispatcher any dents, damages, defects or signs of engine and/or mechanical malfunction of his assigned bus/vehicle.

4. The cleaning time for the buses shall be from 9:00 to 10:00 AM upon arrival in the Malacañang Motor Pool and/or after the first shuttle run.

5. The Chief Dispatcher, Dispatch section of MMP Office, shall regularly inspect the shuttle buses and shall ensure that the vehicles are in good running condition and are well-cleaned inside and outside. Any mechanical or engine problems/defects reported by the assigned driver shall be reported immediately to the Head-Operations Section for appropriate action.

6. The bus drivers shall perform and discharge their duties with utmost courtesy to the employee-passengers, to their fellow motorists, to traffic enforcers and to the general public. They shall avoid any act of recklessness which may unnecessarily put in danger, not only their respective buses but more importantly, the lives and limbs of their passengers, the pedestrians and other road users. They shall avoid any act of impropriety which may tarnish the image of the Office of the President proper.

7. While the shuttle buses are in transit, the overseer or guard on board shall observe not only the performance of the drivers but also their behavior and those of the employee/passengers on board, with the purpose of ensuring the safety of everybody in the bus.

8. The shuttle bus drivers shall not give undue favors to the employee/passengers by extending the specified routes or by deviating from them merely to accommodate the request of the passengers.

9. The shuttle bus drivers shall avoid any act which could result to wastage of fuel and other consumable items. When the buses are not in use, they shall avoid prolonged engine running, except for the purpose of warming-up. They shall turn on the buses’ air conditioning systems only when necessary. They shall not use the buses’ as their “hang-out” or sleeping quarters.

10. The shuttle bus drivers and guards on boards/conductors shall observe the norms of conduct and code of ethics of public servants. They shall comply with office rules and regulations and shall wear their uniforms and display their identification cards at all times.

10.1   Drop boxes for suggestions and/or comments/complaint shall be made available for the purpose to serve well the employees and personnel of the Office of the President-Proper and other authorized passengers.

11. The shuttle bus drivers shall perform other duties that may be reasonably assigned by the Head of MMP from time to time.

SECTION 2. All Executive Issuances, Orders, Rules and Regulations, or any part thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby revoked, amended or modified accordingly.

SECTION 3. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

Executive Secretary

Manila, September 22, 2008