MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 127

GUIDELINES ON THE USE OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT SHUTTLE SERVICE

I. Purpose

a. To enhance the well-being and protect the welfare of Office of the President (OP) officials and employees;

b. To ease their transport problem thereby improving efficiency, effectiveness and productivity;

c. To ensure the proper utilization of the OP Shuttle Service and the maximization of its usage.

I.     Definition of Terms

a. Official Trip – refers to a trip sanctioned by the Office and related to the official functions/activities of the OP proper.

b. Special Trip – refers to a trip related to special activities not falling under the category of official or emergency trip.

c. Emergency Trip – when the need is exceptionally urgent or absolutely indispensable or whenever the need cannot be delayed without causing detriment to public service.

d. Shuttle Service – refers to the vehicle service provided by OP to transport authorized passengers in going to and from the OP premises from Mondays to Fridays.

e. Authorized Passengers – refers to OP and other government personnel who are not entitled to Transportation Allowance (TA) and who wish to avail of the shuttle service.

f. Other Government Personnel – refers to non-OP government employees who wish to avail of the shuttle service only during return trips to the garage.

g. Fare – amount to be collected from authorized passengers who will avail of the shuttle service.

III. Routes

1. The OP Shuttle service will have two routes with one (1) air-conditioned bus for each route:

Waiting time & departure :

Afternoon schedule

Waiting point :

Waiting time & departure :

5:00 – 5:30 am

Mabini Hall compound

5:00 – 5:30 pm

Waiting time & departure :

Afternoon schedule

Waiting point :

Waiting time & departure :

Mabini Hall compound

5:00 – 5:30 p.m

2. The designated pick-up points are as follows:

3)      Delta (New Jacinto Food Center)

3)      Baclaran (in front of Seaside Market along service road)

4)      McDonalds, Taft Avenue cor. Quirino Ave.

5)      Metro Gas Station, Pedro Gil cor. Quirino Ave.

However, these routes are subject to change upon evaluation and recommendation of the Committee on Shuttle Service based on their practicality and effectiveness.

3. In case of extreme urgency and necessity, such as during the occurrence of demonstrations, traffic re-routings, accidents, parades or processions, floods or any natural calamity and other unforeseen events, the shuttle service may deviate from its specified route.

IV. Guidelines

1. OP Shuttle Service operates during workdays (Monday to Friday). Drivers and guards on board/conductors will be provided by the MMP.

2. OP Shuttle Service shall be for the exclusive use of authorized passengers as herein defined. Companions are strictly prohibited.

3. A minimal fare of P10.00 per ride will be charged from authorized passengers. Office ID and the ticket will be the pass to board the Shuttle Service. Tickets are available at the OP Cashier’s Office.

4. The use of OP Shuttle Service shall be allowed for official trips only. Special trips may be allowed subject to the approval of the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary (SDES) and/or Deputy Executive Secretary for Finance and Administration (DESFA).

5. Official and Special Trips should be duly covered by Special Order (SO) and Travel Permit as may be provided in this guidelines.

6. The Director, MMP shall evaluate the request based on the following criteria:

a. availability of vehicles and/or drivers on a first-come, first-served basis;

b. maximum of ten (10) hours travel time or a maximum of 300 km. traveling distance;

c. route of travel must be paved/concrete roads and regularly plied by commercial buses; and

d. when the use of a shuttle service shall be more advantageous than using public transportation.

7. Changes in the schedule, purpose and/or destination of the trip shall be allowed only if duly authorized by SDES/DESFA before the scheduled trip.

8. Littering, smoking & drinking liquor inside the bus is strictly prohibited.

V. Procedures A. FOR OFFICIAL TRIPS

1. The Requesting Office submits a letter request addressed to the SDES/DESFA through the Director, MMP indicating the following information:

a. Date of Use

b. Expected Time of Departure and return

c. Destination(s)

d. Purpose(s) of Trip

e. Authorized Passenger(s)

2. The Director, MMP evaluates the requests based on the guidelines set forth herein. Thereafter, he forwards his recommendation to the approving authority for approval.

a. If approved, a corresponding Special Order shall be prepared by the Personnel Office for the signature of the SDES/DESFA.

b. If disapproved, the request shall be returned to the requesting party.

B. FOR SPECIAL TRIPS

a. If approved, a corresponding Special Order shall be prepared by the Personnel Office for the signature of the SDES/DESFA.

b. If disapproved, the request shall be returned to the requesting party.

VI. Shuttle Bus Drivers

1. The bus drivers shall be under the immediate and direct control and supervision of the Chief Dispatcher, Dispatch Section of the MMP Office and under the general and overall supervision of the Head of the Malacañang MMP.

2. Drivers assigned to OP shuttle service are entitled to overtime compensation and covered by the appropriate SO on overtime.

3. Each driver shall be responsible for the over-all cleanliness and maintenance of the shuttle bus assigned to him as well as the care and custody of the vehicle’s tools and accessories. The driver/s shall report immediately to the Chief Dispatcher any dents, damages, defects or signs of engine and/or mechanical malfunction of his assigned bus/vehicle.

4. The cleaning time for the buses shall be from 9:00 to 10:00 AM upon arrival in the Malacañang MMP and/or after the first shuttle run.

5. The Chief Dispatcher, Dispatch Section of MMP Office, shall regularly inspect the shuttle buses and shall ensure that the vehicles are in good running condition and are well-cleaned inside and outside. Any mechanical or engine problems/defects reported by the assigned driver shall be reported immediately to the Head-Operations Section for appropriate action.

6. The bus drivers shall perform and discharge their duties with utmost courtesy to the employee-passengers, to their fellow motorists, to traffic enforcers and to the general public. They shall avoid any act of recklessness which may unnecessarily put in danger, not only their respective buses but more importantly, the lives and limbs of their passengers, the pedestrians and other road users. They shall avoid any act of impropriety which may tarnish the image of the OP proper.

7. While the shuttle buses are in transit, the overseer or guard on board shall observe not only the performance of the drivers but also their behavior and those of the employees/passengers on board, with the purpose of ensuring the safety of everybody in the bus.

8. The shuttle bus drivers shall not give undue favors to the employees/passengers by extending the specified routes or by deviating from them merely to accommodate the requests of the passengers.

9. The shuttle bus drivers shall avoid any act which could result to wastage of fuel and other consumable items. When the buses are not in use, they shall avoid prolonged engine running, except for the purpose of warming-up. They shall turn on the buses’ air conditioning systems only when necessary. They shall not use the buses’ as their “hang-out” or sleeping quarters.

10. Like the rest of the personnel of the OP, the shuttle bus drivers are expected to observe the norms of ethics and conduct of public officials and employees. They shall comply with office rules and regulations and shall wear their uniforms and display their identification cards at all times.

10.1. Drop boxes for suggestions and/or comments/complaint are available for the purpose to serve well the employees and personnel of the Office of the President proper.

11. The shuttle bus drivers shall perform other duties that may be reasonably assigned by the Head of Office from time to time.

Manila, 15 December 2003

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary