MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 26-A

DIRECTING THE EXECUTIVE SECRETARY TO OVERSEE THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PRESIDENT’S BRIDGE PROGRAM

WHEREAS, the President’s Bridge Program was launched in 1994 to address the bridge infrastructure deficit;

WHEREAS, the Oversight Committee on the President’s Bridge Program was established under Memorandum Order No. 234 dated September 20, 1994, as amended by Memorandum Order 474 dated April 17, 1998, to serve as the policy coordinating body for the implementation of the President’s Bridge Program;

WHEREAS, there is a need to reduce special project committees; encourage and promote efficiency, line accountability and transparency; and establish controls in the implementation of the President’s Bridge Program;

WHEREAS, under Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987, the President has the continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Abolition of the Oversight Committee. The Oversight Committee on the President’s Bridge Program is hereby abolished.

Section 2. Primary Responsibility. The Executive Secretary is hereby directed to oversee and monitor the effective and efficient implementation of the bridge projects under the President’s Bridge Program initiated by the Office of the President, namely: the Salam “Peace” Bridge Project, the Tulay ng Pangulo sa Barangay Project and the Tulay ng Pangulo sa SZOPAD Project.

Section 3. Program Director. In the exercise of his oversight function, the Executive Secretary shall be assisted by a Program Director who shall be appointed or designated by the President upon the recommendation of the Executive Secretary.

The Program Director shall be assisted by two (2) Assistant Program Directors. An Assistant Program Director for Administration and Finance and an Assistant Program Director for Operations who shall be appointed or designated by the Executive Secretary.

The salary grade of the Program Director and the Assistant Program Directors shall be determined by the Executive Secretary in coordination with the Department of Budget and Management subject to the approval of the President.

Section 4. Functions of the Program Director. The Program Director shall have the following functions:

a. Plan, implement and oversee the general operation and administration of the Program consistent with efficiency, accountability and transparency.

b. Conduct a comprehensive review of all existing loan agreements and submit his recommendations to the Executive Secretary with the end in view of maximizing the utilization of the ODA funds;

c. Implement agreements entered into by the Government of the Philippines with donor governments relative to bridge projects covered by the Program;

d. Submit to the Executive Secretary for approval of the President a priority bridge allocation list according to the allocation criteria guidelines to be established by the Executive Secretary;

e. Provide monthly reports to the Executive Secretary;

f. Obtain support and assistance from appropriate departments, government-owned or controlled corporations, local government units, private organizations and individuals for the attainment of the Program’s objectives; and

g. To execute and perform duties which the Executive Secretary may order from time to time.

Section 5. Bridge Programs Monitored by the Program Director. The Salam “Peace” Bridge Project Special Program Management Office under Memorandum Circular No. 72 dated September 6, 1999; the Tulay ni Erap sa Barangay Project (now Tulay ng Pangulo sa Barangay) Special Program Management Office created under Memorandum Order No. 115 dated September 25, 2000; and the Tulay ng Pangulo sa SZOPAD Special Management Office shall be monitored by the Program Director through the Assistant Program Director for Operations.

The Tulay ng Pangulo sa SZOPAD shall be implemented by a Special Project Management Office of the Department of Public Works and Highways.

Section 6. Functions of the Assistant Program Directors. The Assistant Program Director for Administration and Finance shall take charge of administrative matters including accounting and performance audits of the Salam “Peace” Bridge Project; Tulay ng Pangulo sa Barangay; and the Tulay ng Pangulo sa SZOPAD. The PBP-Technical Working Group composed of the Technical Staff, Finance, Administration, Plans and Documentation, Monitoring, Special Inspectorate Team and Performance Audit Team shall be placed under the direct control and supervision of the Assistant Program Director for Administration and Finance.

The Assistant Program Director for Operations shall, however, monitor the actual implementation of the bridge projects.

Section 7. Internal Auditor. The Executive Secretary shall appoint an Internal Auditor whose duties shall include the review and check of disbursements made from the proceeds of the loan proper and the Government of the Philippines (GOP) counterpart funds. The Internal Auditor shall report directly to the Executive Secretary.

Section 8. Funding. The Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management shall release, in a timely manner, the allotments and disbursements authority intended for the projects under the President’s Bridge Program, as authorized in the General Appropriation’s Act, covering both foreign loan proceeds and government counterpart funds.

Section 9. Repeal. Memorandum Order No. 234 dated September 20, 1994,Memorandum Order No. 474 dated April 17, 1998 and Memorandum Order No. 26 dated August 22, 2001 are hereby repealed. All other orders, rules, regulations and issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Memorandum Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 10. Effectivity. The Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.

City of Manila, DECEMBER 10, 2001.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary