Malacañang Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 157

CREATING A PROJECT MANAGEMENT OFFICE FOR THE PANGLAO AIRPORT DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order No. 338 datedFebruary 6, 1996 created an Inter-Agency Task Force in the Panglao Island Tourism Estate;

WHEREAS, the Panglao Airport Development Project (PADP) has been identified as a priority project, which is included in the Medium Term Philippine Development Plan;

WHEREAS, there is a need to effectively carry out the smooth and timely implementation of the PADP;

NOW , THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of thePhilippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Steering Committee. – There is hereby created a Project Management Office (PMO) for the Panglao Airport Development Project (PADP), hereinafter referred to as the Panglao PMO.

Section 2. Panglao Project Manager. – The Panglao PMO shall be headed by an Assistant Secretary of the Department of Transportation and Communications, who shall be referred to as the Panglao Project Manager.

Section 3. Functions. – The Panglao Project Manager shall have the following functions:

3.1. Oversee the overall activities of the Project;

3.2. Facilitate and monitor the implementation of activities for the development of PADP;

3.3. Assist the Inter-Agency Task Force in the Panglao Island Tourism Estate in issuing resolution, including delineation of functions of concerned agencies to support the PADP;

3.4. Ensure and promote measures on environmental protection, ecotourism and sustainable development within the PADP;

3.5. Assist and facilitate investment promotional activities to encourage local and foreign investors in the PADP in coordination with the Investment Promotion Units of the concerned agencies;

3.6. Invite the Governor and the 1 st District Representative of Bohol in meetings and other activities, for consultation purposes; and

3.7. Consult with the local government units concerned and interest groups in the localities to ensure that the community’s needs, concerns and ideas are considered in the planning, development and monitoring of the PADP.

Section 4. Technical staff. – There shall be a Technical staff to assist the Panglao Project Manager.

Section 5. Functions and Responsibilities. – The Technical Staff shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

5.1. Assist the Panglao Project Manager in the overall activities of the project;

5.2. Recommend land acquisition and resettlement activities for the project;

5.3. Invite the Mayor of the Municipality of Panglao in meetings and other activities, for purposes of consultation; and

5.4. Perform such other functions and responsibilities as may be assigned to it by the Panglao Project Manager.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 29th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Four.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary