: MALACANANG
Manila

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
MEMORANDUM ORDER NO, 136
APPROVING THE 2004 INVESTMENT PRIORITIES PLAN

Pursuant to Article 29 of the Omnibus Investments Code of 1987, the
attached 2004 Investment Priorities Plan (IPP) is hereby approved.

This Memorandum Order (MO) shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its
publication as required under Article 31 of the Omnibus Investments Code of

DONE in the City of Manila, this /@TH day of FE® , in the year of Our

Lord, Two Thousand and Four.

By the President:

)
} ‘
Cl GA
ALBERTO G. ROMULO
Executive Secretary

 

e :
Be a ania wad
at i an i acm At

eee ene tS

<u

 

 

 

 

2004 IPP

Part | National List

2004 IPP PRIORITY INVESTMENT AREAS

The 2004 IPP shall encoura
the listed activities shall be li

Board of Investments (BOI).

I. National List

A. Exports Activities

This covers export Producers, servic

€ exporters and activities considered in

support of exporters.

1.

Export Producers

Covers manufacture of non-traditional export products with capability to
export at least 50% of its output, if Filipino-owned or at least 70%, if
foreign-owned. To qualify for incentives, industrial goods for export should
have undergone manufacturing and mineral products for exports should
have undergone Processing. Production of industrial goods involving
simple processing covering any or a combination of activities such as but
not limited to cleaning, sorting, cutting, shredding, pulverizing, grinding,
crushing, compacting, dissolving and filtration are excluded.

Exports of mineral products without Processing shall not be entitled to
ITH, e.g., mineral production without Processing such as (i) quarrying and
mining only, (ii) mining of direct shipping ore, (iii) minor Processing as
cleaning, sorting or size reduction.

Export of recycled materials with no or with simple processing involving
any or a combination of activities such as but not limited to cleaning,
Sorting, cutting, shredding, pulverizing, grinding, crushing, compacting,
dissolving and filtration shall not qualify for registration for Purposes of
incentives,

The BOI may, if national interest requires, withhold registration of an
export product including industry inputs that are in short supply
domestically.

Activities in Support to Exporters - covers

a) Services comprising a portion of the manufacturing process;

b) Sub-assembly of parts/components of the final export product;

c) Fabrication of parts/components of final products wherein the raw
materials are provided by the direct exporter;

d) Product testing and inspection; and,

e) Repair and maintenance.

B. Mandatory Inclusions:

1.

All areas/activities, whose inclusion in the IPP are required under existing

laws.

NOTE: All modemization Projects may qualify for registration for as long as the activity is listed in the 2004 IPP.

Soe, & }\

 

ge the following listed activities. The descriptions/coverage of
mited and clarified in the Specific Guidelines to be issued by the

2004 IPP
Part | National List

LAW
P.D. 705
R.A. 7103

R.A. 7942

R.A. 8047

R.A. 8479

R.A. 9003

ACTIVITY
Industrial Tree Plantation
Iron and Steel

Covers primary steel products as blooms, billets, slabs and ingots
and intermediate steel products (hot rolled products, cold rolled
products, tin mill black plates and tin plates).

Exploration, Mining, Quarrying, and Processing of Minerals

Covers exploration, mining or quarrying, mineral processing and
mining or quarrying integrated with mineral processing. Simple
processing such as sorting, crushing or washing are not qualified
to avail of income tax holiday (ITH) incentive.

Activities involving exploration, mining or quarrying only and
mining, quarrying or processing of aggregates and direct shipping
ore shall not be granted ITH.

Publication or Printing of Books or Textbooks
Covers the following:

a) Publication of books and textbooks
b) Printing of books and textbooks
c) Reprinting of books and textbooks

Application for registration shall be endorsed by the National Book
Development Board (NBDB).

Refining, Storage, Marketing and Distribution of Petroleum
Products

These activities may register under E.O. 226 or R.A. 8479. Upon
application, firms are required to indicate under which law to
register, as there would be no switching of law of registration once
registered. Under E.O. 226 registration, no income tax holiday
(ITH) incentive shall be granted on Refinery, Storage, Distribution
and Marketing and other activities under R.A. 8479. However, if
registered under R.A. 8479, activities may qualify only to
incentives provided under R.A. 8479. Registration of activity
under R.A. 8479 shall be through the BOI and shall be subjected
to BOI qualifications as provided under the Memorandum of
Agreement (MOA) between BO! and the Department of Energy
(DOE).

Ecological Solid Waste Management
Covers the following activities:

a. Recycling/Treatment Facility with Manufacturing
b. Sanitary Landfill-Waste Management Services

NOTE: All modernization projects may qualify for registration for as long as the activity is listed in the 2004 IPP.

 

2004 IPP

Part I National List

Cc. Support Services

Application for registration of projects under R.A. 9003 shall be
accompanied by an endorsement from the National Solid
Waste Management Commission (NSWMC)

2. Activities covered under Bilateral Agreements

This covers bilateral agreements entered into by the Philippine government
with other foreign governments specifically granting incentives to a particular
activity.

C. Other Preferred Activities

Agricultural/ Fishery Production and Processing

Limited to commercial production and commercial primary processing of
agricultural (including sericulture) and fishery products including their by-
products and wastes.

Sugar refining integrated with sugar milling may qualify for registration.

Coconut oil refining integrated with coconut oil milling may qualify for
registration.

. Energy Sources

Covers new and/or renewable energy sources (geothermal, wind, solar,
biomass, etc.), and natural gas (provided that for natural gas, the cost of
production per kwh is lower than the 2003 cost of production of existing power
plants).

. Logistics

Covers air and land transport, inter-island shipping including RORO
operations, agricultural services such as cold storage and blast freezer,
container yards and passenger terminals, integrated logistics, pipeline
operations, natural and liquefied petroleum gas projects that include
refueling station, and land transport using CNG/LPG for commercial
operations.

. Drugs and Medicines

Manufacture of essential drugs (listed in the current Philippine National Drug
Formulary of the Department of Health), including herbal medicines and
supplements, food supplements limited to the manufacture of Vitamin A, iron
and iodine for use in the Food Fortification Law and subject to DOH
certification, and vaccines for animal diseases (listed under the Bureau of
Animal Industry — DA A.O. No. 12, Series of 1992) and active substances of
these drugs.

NOTE: All modernization projects may qualify for registration for as long as the activity is listed in the 2004 IPP.

eh

 

2004 IPP

Part | National List

10.

11.

12.

13.

Engineered Products

Covers dies and molds, manufacture/assembly of motor vehicles,
manufacture of motor vehicle parts and components, manufacture of
machinery and equipment parts, original design manufacturing (ODM) and
lead frames.

Information and Communications Technology

Covers ICT Services such as application software, software development,
firmware/middleware and animation; |CT-enabled Services such as contact
center, engineering design and medical transcription; and ICT Support
Activities such as e-learning services and community access facilities (limited
to Less Developed Areas for community access facilities).

. Infrastructure

Covers the establishment of physical infrastructure such as_ tural
electrification system, telecommunications and power projects including those
under the BOT Law. BOT and infrastructure projects with government
guarantee shall not be entitled to income tax holiday (ITH) incentive.

. Mass Housing Projects including Development and Fabrication of

Housing Components

Covers mass housing development (socialized and low cost housing projects)
and fabrication of housing components.

. Research and Development Activities

Covers in-house R & D activities of any manufacturing/producing firm and
commercial R & D activities of private firms and research institutions.

Social Service

Covers the establishment of retirement villages (limited to new projects only),
health services including medical tourism, educational services and social
welfare services.

Tourism-related Projects as Endorsed by the Department of Tourism

Covers the establishment of tourist accommodation facilities, tourist estates,
historico-cultural heritage projects and eco-agri tourism facilities.

Motion picture limited to films with historical and socio-cultural
significance, and documentary films

Printing

Covers printing including printing in support of packaging using only high
technology and brand new equipment.

NOTE: All modernization projects may qualify for registration for as long as the activity is listed in the 2004 IPP.

y 2

 

2004 IPP
Part | National List

14. Environmental Services

Covers the establishment of toxic and hazardous waste (THW) merchant
facilities; testing and measuring services for industrial/institutional point
sources of emission and effluent and other related environmental parameters
for machinery and equipment excluding motor vehicles; river system
rehabilitation; and Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) projects.

15. Packaging

Covers packaging materials using only high technology and brand new
equipment

16. Petrochemicals

Covers upstream (naphtha cracker) and midstream activities (polymerization
plant which produces PE, PVS, PP, PS, etc.).

Il. Regional List
A. Industry Clusters

Industry clusters (ICs) are endorsed by the Small and Medium Enterprise
Development Council (SMEDC). In the event that there is no operational SMEDC
at the provincial/regional level, the DTI provincial/regional offices shall make the
endorsement. ICs will be limited to only one (1) cluster per province.

B. ARMM List

The ARMM List covers priority activities which have been independently identified
by the Regional Board of Investments of the ARMM in accordance with E.O. 458.
The BOI-ARMM can grant registration and administer incentives to activities
listed in the IPP, provided these are located in ARMM and subject to the General
and Specific Guidelines.

1. Export Activities

a. Export Trader and Service Exporters
b. Support Activities for Exporters

2. Agriculture, Food and Forestry-Based Industries

a. Processed Food
e Production and processing of halal meat and halal foods
e Leguminous and other vegetable-based protein (textured, pelletized or
liquid)
* Spices processing (e.g. hot pepper, black Pepper, ginger, etc.)
Note: May be integrated with plantation

e Vegetable oils (e.g. peanut oil, rice bran oil, sunflower and soybean
oil) and production of food crops

NOTE: All modernization projects May qualify for registration for as long as the activity is listed in the 2004 IPP.

 

2004 IPP
Part | National List

Note: Maybe integrated with post-harvest processing and other
vegetables (such as tomatoes)

e Integrated coconut processing and plantation
Seaweeds production and processing

e Cassava Processing and root crops
Note: Maybe integrated with plantation.

° Fruit processing (e.g. durian, mangosteen, jackfruit, marang, banana,
mango, passion guava, calamansi, and guyabano) and plantation

e Aquaculture (Fish Production and Processing) such as, but not limited
to:

Frozen fish

Chilled fish

Canned fish

Abalone

Crab fattening

Eel production

Squid processing

Carp and tilapia production and processing
Tropical fish production and processing
Shrimps/prawn

Lapu-lapu (Grouper) and other marine products

¢ Corn flour mill (integrated with plantation)
e Young corn production

Note: May include Processing/canning
e Mushrooms culture and Processing
e Sweet potato plantation and processing
e Crocodile farming and processing

b. Cutflower Production

c. Pearl Culture and Processing

d. Industrial Tree Plantation (include Mangrove, Rattan, Bamboo, etc.) and
wood processing (cement wood board and fiberboard) reconstructed
veneer.

e. Shipbuilding / Ship Breaking / Ship Repair and Watercraft

f. Abaca Pulp Production and Processing

g. Palm Oil Plantation, Processing, Refining and Germinated Oil Palm Seeds

h. Coffee Processing (maybe integrated with plantation)

i. Particle Board (use of agri-based waste material such as rice straw, wood
waste, etc.)

j. Activated Carbon Manufacturing (use of coconut shell, wood based, etc.)

k. Feeds Production (animal feeds and feeds for aquaculture)

|. Tobacco Plantation and Processing

NOTE: All modernization projects may qualify for registration for as long as the activity is listed in the 2004 IPP.

 

gop

2004 IPP

Part | National List

m. Production of Beverage Crops, but not limited to:

e Cacao beans
e Coffee beans (Arabica variety)

Production of Plantation Crops and Other Medical Herbs/Essential Oil
Plants (including flower extracts)

Production of Livestock and Poultry (including Dairy products)

¢ Beef (including cow-calf and feedlot operations)

e Carabao (water buffalo) production

e Goats and sheep

° Frozen semen and embryos
Note: includes natural method and artificial insemination and embryo
transfer technology

Bricks and Roofing Tiles Production

Quality Seeds and Seedlings of Fruit Trees and Other Planting Materials
Propagated Asexually or by Tissue Culture

Sugar Cane Plantation, Processing and Refineries
Sericulture

Mosquito Coil Processing

3. Basic Industries

a.

Cc.

Pharmaceuticals
e Antibiotics
- Penicillin
- Streptomycin
- Tetracycline
- Soft gelatin capsules
e Medical Devices
- Prosthetics
- Diagnosis
e Other pharmaceuticals, herbal medicines

Textile and Textile Products

e Yarns and fabrics

Hand-woven textiles

Specialty fabrics

Tire cord fabrics

Note: Must be integrated with weaving and dipping units
Ramie (degumed, staple fiber, combed tops, noels and slivers)
Fish nets

Fabrics made of indigenous raw materials

Silk reeling

Fertilizers (organic and inorganic)

NOTE: All modemization projects may qualify for registration for as long as the activity is listed in the 2004 IPP.

a

 

2004 IPP
Part | National List

d. Min
e

Solid Waste Materials

ing (Exploration and Development of Mineral Resources)

Mining and Quarrying of Metallic and Non-Metallic Minerals (including
small scale as defined under P.D. 1899, but to exclude river beds in
operations)

Processing of minerals (such as beneficiation and other metallurgical
methods)

e. Cement -— at least 1.0 million MTPY Capacity (clinker based)

4. Consumer Manufactures

a. Rubber Products such as:

High pressure and hydraulic rubber hoses
Rubber bolts

Industrial rubber rollers

Rubber tires

b. Leather Products

5. Infrastructure and Services

a. Public Utilities (with developmental route of the five provinces and one city
of the ARMM and other adjacent Cities and Provinces)

Common carriers (land, air and water transport facilities)
Electric transmission/distribution

Water supply facilities\waterways and sewerage systems
Buses/cargo trucks

Other specialized mass transport systems

Power generation like Hydro Power, and Geothermal

b. Telecommunications with International Gateways

c. Tourism

NOTE: All modernization projects may qualify for registration for as long as the activity is listed in the 2004 IPP.

y |

Tourism estates
Subject to guidelines developed jointly by the Board of Investments —
ARMM and Department of Tourism (DOT)
Tourist accommodation facilities
- Hotels
- Resorts
- Other tourist accommodation facilities such as appartels, pension
houses, tourist inns, and others
Tourist transport facilities
- Air
- Water
- Tourist buses and taxi/van
Note: *Should be endorsed by the DOT.
*“New and expansion projects may be registered.

2004 IPP
Part | National List

d. Industrial Service Facilities
This will cover the following activities:

e Common centers:
- Testing and quality control laboratories
- Training and demonstration centers
- Tool shops and similar facilities
- Metal working
¢ Electroplating
Foundry
Forging
Machining
¢@ Heat treatment
¢ Brass making
- Furniture
¢ Kiln drying
¢ Treatment and processing facilities
- Ceramics
@ Kiln
¢ Glazing
- Food Processing
¢ Bottling and Canning of Water
¢ Industrial Salt
¢ Vapor heat treatment
¢ Slaughterhouse/abattoir
- Automotive battery plate manufacturing

Note: The following criteria must be met:
- The project will serve the common needs of the industry in the
locality and;
- The project will improve the relative status and comparative
advantages of the industry.

e Development of Retirement Villages

- Shall include health and medical facilities including amenities
required by the Philippine Leisure and Retirement Authority
(PLRA).

- Subject to the guidelines to be approved by BOI-ARMM in
consultation with the PRA, the Department of Health (DOH), the
Regional Planning and Development Office (RPDO) and other
concerned agencies.

e. Petrochemical Complex
f. Industrial Gases (such as oxygen and nitrogen)
g. Miscellaneous Chemical Products

¢ Biotechnological/biosynthetic chemicals

e Essential oils
e Fine chemicals

NOTE: All modernization projects may qualify for registration for as long as the activity is listed in the 2004 IPP.

 

2004 IPP
Part | National List

6. Engineering Industries

a. Engineering Products
¢ Motor vehicle parts and components

¢ Automobile parts and assembly
e Modern offset printing
b. Electronics and Telecommunication Products

7. ARMM Priority and Tourism Areas

Listed below are potential tourist destinations, which need further
exploration, and evaluation for intensified promotions, development

and marketing.
NUCLEUS

Area | - Sulu

Area Il - Tawi-Tawi
Area Ill - Lanao del Sur
Area IV - Maguindanao
Area V - Basilan

GATEWAY

Jolo

Bongao
Marawi City
Cotabato City
Isabela

 

SATELLITE
DESTINATION

Sulu Province
Tawi-Tawi Province
Lanao del Sur Province
Maguindanao Province
Basilan Province

NOTE: All modernization projects may qualify for registration for as long as the activity is listed in the 2004 IPP.

Y