Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 125

AUTHORIZING THE ADOPTION OF FLEXIBLE WORK SCHEDULE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PROPER)

Pursuant to Section 6, Rule XVII of the Omnibus Rules Implementing Book V of the Administrative Code of 1987 and in the interest of employees of the Office of the President (Proper) especially those who commute from far-away places, a flexible work schedule is hereby adopted subject to the following guidelines:

1. The Official Working Hours shall be from 7:00 AM to 5:30 PM, Mondays to Fridays, with lunch break from 12:00 NN to 1:00 PM.

2. All employees are required to complete at least eight (8) hours of work per day. An employee may choose between the following work schedules:

2.1   From 7:00 AM to 4:00 PM

2.2   From 8:00 AM to 5:00 PM

3. The Core Working Time shall be from 8:30 AM to 4:00 PM. An employee who reports after the start of the Core Working Time shall be considered tardy and will be barred from off-setting his tardiness. An employee who leaves before the end of the Core Working Time shall be considered on undertime.

4. If an employee reports after his chosen work schedule but on or before the start of the Core Working Time, then he must off-set the same with the corresponding length of time he was late in reporting for work to complete the required eight (8) hours of work per day.

5. Should an employee fail to off-set the length of time he was late in reporting for work, he will be considered on undertime. Corresponding deductions shall be from his leave credits.

6. When an employee takes his lunch break, the interval between his time-out and time-in should be at least thirty (30) minutes.

7. Regardless of the work schedule chosen, all employees are required to attend the Flag Raising Ceremony every Monday.

8. Despite the adoption of a flexible work schedule, heads of offices must ensure that public service is not prejudiced. Every head of office must prepare a fair and equitable distribution of their respective employees between the two (2) flexible work schedules and submit the same to the Personnel Office not later than three (3) days from the effectivity of this Memorandum Order.

9. Special groups of employees ( i.e., Household, Engineering and Communication personnel, drivers, janitors and utility aides) may be required to follow a schedule appropriate to the nature of their work.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila this 11 th day of December, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Three.

By Authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary