Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 170

DECLARING MAY 16-21, 2005 AS THE NATIONAL SCHOOLS MAINTENANCE WEEK

WHEREAS, the Department of Education (DepEd) is tasked to operate and manage over 42,000 public elementary and secondary schools and is responsible for getting these schools ready for over 18 million pupils and students in time for the opening of classes;

WHEREAS, the School Year 2005-2006 is set to open on the first Monday of June for both public elementary and secondary schools;

WHEREAS, in an effort to place the collective social ownership of each public school in the hands of the immediate stakeholders – teachers, parents, the community, the local government, others, the DepEd launched the Schools First Initiative as a way of placing accountability and responsibility for schooling outcomes with the community in partnership with the national government;

WHEREAS, the National Schools Maintenance Week, otherwise known as Brigada Eskwela, is a nationwide effort to involve the community stakeholders in the minor repair and maintenance of their public school buildings in order to get these ready for the opening of classes;

WHEREAS, the Brigada Eskwela effort is wholly voluntary, with 16,083 public school participants in 2004 (12,533 in 2003) generating over 1.4 million volunteer man-days (838,768 volunteer man-days in 2003) and over P717 million in community MOOE over a five-day period (P392 million in 2003);

WHEREAS, the Brigada Eskwela project has become a major part of the program of each schools division and largely explains the decrease in school opening problems nationwide.

NOW , THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Declaration of the National Schools Maintenance Week. The National Schools Maintenance Week, otherwise known as Brigada Eskwela, is hereby set for May 16-21, 2005 under the organization and supervision of the Department of Education (DepEd) as a wholly voluntary effort on the part of all communities, nationwide.

SEC . 2. Participation of National and Local Government Agencies. National agencies and local government units are encouraged to voluntarily participate in Brigada Eskwela by directly volunteering in the public school nearest their respective offices.

SEC . 3. Participation of Local Stakeholders. Parents, local business, local school board and local community are also invited to be part of Brigada Eskwela activities organized by schools in their respective barangays.

SEC . 4. Scope of Work of the Brigada Eskwela Effort. Brigada Eskwela activities include painting of roofs, which add two or more years to the life of the roof; cementing existing footpaths and drains; repairing comfort rooms and toilets; repairing leaking water pipes; painting exterior walls of classrooms; repairing or replacing ceiling boards; repairing, refinishing or repainting chairs, desks, and furniture; cleaning up the gardens; repairing or replacing broken windows, jalousies, and doors; replacing school signs; and doing any other types of repairs as may be necessary.

SEC . 5. The Principal as the Key to the Organization of the Effort. Principals and school heads are the keys in the organization of the effort. In February, they are to organize through the PTCA, looking at areas within the school that the local community can repair. In March, they can recruit parent volunteers through the PTCA and approach local business for donations in kind. In April, the principal and the PTCA should organize the work groups by appointing teams and team leaders, agreeing on specific tasks per team per day, organizing the logistics required. During the National Schools Maintenance Week (May 16-21, 2005), the effort should be documented with photographs before and after the activity. On the last day, the community should celebrate the community/bayanihan effort. In October, the DepEd shall recognize the Most Innovative Brigada Eskwela projects at the Educator’s Congress.

SEC . 6. Funding. As a voluntary effort, each school should raise the necessary materials for its Brigada Eskwela effort. Schools may also apply to the DepEd and the Department of Budget and Management for Small School Building Repair and Maintenance Funds under the World Bank-funded Second Social Expenditure Management Project.

SEC . 7. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 13th of May, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO ERMITA Executive Secretary