MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 56

DESIGNATING AN OFFICER-IN-CHARGE TO OVERSEE THE MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE PRESIDENT’S SOCIAL FUND AND OTHER FUNDS PRESENTLY UNDER THE PRESIDENTIAL MANAGEMENT STAFF

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order No. 184 dated August 1, 1988 and Memorandum Order No. 184-A dated September 15, 1988 designated the Presidential Management Staff (“PMS”) as the unit in the Office of the President which shall identify, evaluate and recommend to the President project beneficiaries of the Special Presidential Acton for Regional Concerns, known as the President’s Social Fund (“PSF”); handle the disbursement of said fund; and process and monitor the implementation of approved projects;

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order No. 1 dated February 12, 2001 authorized the PMS and the PMS Head to exercise on behalf of the President the following functions with regard to the PSF and other special funds presently administered by the PMS (collectively, the “Funds”):

(1)    Review of all requests for assistance from the Funds;

(2)    Signing of Memoranda of Agreement/Deeds of Donation covering projects/requests approved by the President for assistance from the Funds;

(3)    Approval of requests for revision of project specifications and project realignments (e.g., fund, site, activity/component) and utilization of savings/unused funds of projects assisted by the Funds;

(4)    Referral to appropriate government agencies of those requests for assistance which cannot be accommodated by the Funds.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Officer-in-Charge (“OIC”) designated by the President shall oversee the management and administration of the Funds. The OIC shall be responsible for the final review of all requests for assistance from the Funds and the submission of the appropriate recommendation to the President.

SECTION 2. Only projects duly approved by the President shall receive assistance from the Funds.

SECTION 3. The Office for Special Projects shall be placed under the supervision of the OIC and shall continue to do the following:

(1)    Conduct preliminary identification of project beneficiaries and initial evaluation of requests for assistance from the Funds;

(2)    Submit the results of the initial evaluation of requests for assistance from the Funds to the OIC;

(3)    Undertake site validations in connection with requests for assistance;

(4)    Monitor, evaluate and audit the physical and financial performance of projects.

The PMS Office for Regional Concerns and the PMS Regional Field Units shall assist the Office for Special Projects in conducting site validations and monitoring, evaluating and auditing the physical and financial performance of projects assisted by the Funds.

SECTION 4. The OIC, or any one of the Undersecretaries in the Office of the President (“OP”) specifically designated, is authorized to sign Memoranda of Agreement/Deeds of Donation covering projects/requests approved by the President for assistance from the Funds.

SECTION 5. The OP Finance and Administration Office shall do the following:

(1)    Receive remittances for the PSF and accept donations to the Funds from the government and the private sector;

(2)    Maintain the books of accounts for the Funds;

(3)    Facilitate the preparation of disbursement vouchers covering fund releases from the Funds;

(4)    Facilitate the preparation and release of checks for projects assisted by the Funds.

The Head, OP Auditing Office and the Head, OP Cashier’s Division shall be in charge of the preparation of all disbursement vouchers, checks and financial reports.

SECTION 6. Signatories of the disbursement vouchers for projects approved by the President for assistance shall be the following:

SECTION 7. All checks covering fund releases from the Funds shall be signed and countersigned as follows:

SECTION 8. The OP shall ensure that the Office for Special Projects and the OP Finance and Administration Office shall have the necessary manpower, equipment and materials to perform their functions relative to the Funds. Other OP and PMS offices shall likewise provide technical, legal and administrative support for the management of the Funds.

SECTION 9. Memorandum Order No. 184 dated August 1, 1988, Memorandum Order No. 184-A dated September 15, 1988, Memorandum Order No. 1 dated February 12, 2001, and other presidential issuances, guidelines, rules and regulations, or parts thereof which are contrary or inconsistent with the provisions of this Memorandum Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 10. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

City of Manila, March 15, 2002.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary