MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 266

CREATING A COMMITTEE ON DECORUM AND INVESTIGATION (CODI) OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT CASES IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

SECTION 1. OP-CODI- There is hereby created in the Office of the President a Committee on Decorum and Investigation (CODI) of Sexual Harassment Cases.

Sec. 2. Composition; Quorum. – The CODI of Sexual Harassment Cases shall be composed of (5) members as follows:

A quorum, consisting of a majority of the members of CODI, shall be required for the transaction of the business. However, in rendering or issuing its findings and recommendation, the majority of all the CODI members is required.

SEC. 3. Functions and Responsibilities of OP-CODI. – The CODI shall perform the following functions:

1.1 Receive complaints of sexual harassment;

1.2 Investigate sexual harassment complaints in accordance with the prescribed procedure as found in Resolution No. 01-0940 (Administrative Disciplinary Rules on Sexual Harassment Cases) of the Civil Service Commission;

1.3 Submit a report of its findings with the corresponding recommendation to the Internal Affairs and Complaints Committee (IACC) for decision;

1.4 Lead in the conduct of discussions about sexual harassment within the Office of the President to increase understanding and prevent incidents of sexual harassment;

The CODI shall act as the Preliminary Investigator of all sexual harassment cases/complaints against public officials and employees of the Office of the President who are non-presidential appointees. In investigating the complaint, the CODI shall observe closely pertinent provisions of the CSC Administrative Disciplinary Rules on Sexual Harassment Cases, Administrative Code of 1987 (EO 292), CSC Rules and Regulations and other related laws, and shall submit its findings and recommendation to the IACC, through the IACC Chairman, within five (5) working days from the termination of the preliminary investigation.

For purposes of investigation pursuant to Administrative Disciplinary Rules on Sexual Harassment Cases, Uniform Rules on Administrative Cases in the Civil Service and the Administrative Code of 1987 (EO 292), the OP-CODI is authorized to examine ex parte the documents submitted by the complainant and the person complained of, as well as documents readily available from other government agencies, to require the parties to submit affidavits and counter affidavits, and summon parties to a conference.

Sec. 4. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20 th day of July, in the Year of our Lord Two Thousand and Seven.

By authority of the President:

Executive Secretary