MALACANANG MEM 10832

Manila i
PMS ; LIBRARY
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 95
‘APPROVING THE 2003 INVESTMENT PRIORITIES PLAN
Pursuant to Article 29 of the Omnibus Investments Code of 1987,
the attached 2003 Investments Priorities Plan (IPP) is hereby approved.
This Memorandum Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its
publication in a newspaper of general circulation, as required under Article

31 of the Omnibus Investments Code of 1987.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 44% day of April in year of our

Lord, two thousand and three.

By the President:

ALBERTO G. ROMULO
Executive Secretary

ol

BRARY BCODE00951

   

<0

PGMA Hologram # 1921

2003 IPP
Part | National List

acer

2003 IPP PRIORITY INVESTMENT AREAS

The 2003 IPP shall encourage the following economic activities:

|. National List

A. Exports Activities*

This covers export producers, export traders, service exporters, and activities
considered in support of exporters.

B. Mandatory Inclusions:

All areas/activities, whose inclusion in the IPP are required under existing laws.

LAW

P.D. 705
R.A. 7103
R.A. 7942
R.A. 8047
R.A. 8479

R.A. 9003

ACTIVITY

Industrial Tree Plantation

Iron & Steel Projects*

Exploration, Mining, Quarrying, and Processing of Minerals*
Publication or Printing of Books or Textbooks*

Refining, Storage, Marketing and Distribution of Petroleum
products*

Ecological Solid Waste Management Act

C. Support To Government Programs

1. Agricultural/ Fishery Production and Processing”

Limited to activities covered under RA 8435 (agricultural and fisheries
modemization), RA 7900 (production/processing of high value crops) and RA
8550 (commercial fishing).

. Energy Sources

Exploration/development of indigenous, new and renewable energy sources and
technologies, including natural gas, and establishment of mini-hydro electric
power plants.

. Logistics

Covers land, air and water transport: projects utilizing natural gas and alternative
fuels = such as conversion shops, _ terminals/refueling _ stations,
manufacture/assembly of Natural Gas Vehicles (NGVs) and land transportation;
air and water transport facilities that may include cargo operations and
passenger terminals; container yards and passenger terminals (only new
facilities are applicable for Passenger terminals);
shipbuilding/shipbreaking/shiprepair; integrated logistics; agricultural services;
pipeline operations; environmental service activities.

/

*With Modemization Projects 1

2003 IPP

Part | National List

4.

10.

1

=

12.

Drugs and Medicines*

Manufacture of essential drugs (listed in the current Philippine National Drug
Formulary of the Department of Health), herbal medicines and supplements,
vaccines for animal diseases (listed under the Bureau of Animal Industry —

Department of Agriculture Administrative Order No. 12, Series of 1992) and
active substances of drugs.

Engineered Products*

Manufacture of machinery and equipment including their parts and components,
and parts & components of motor vehicles; manufacture of motor vehicles;
preparation of designs of machinery and equipment and/or their parts and

components
Information and Communications Technology*

Information and Communications Technology Services (ICT Services, ICT-
enabled Services, ICT Support Activities)

Infrastructure

Establishment of physical infrastructure, e.g., roads, bridges, and
telecommunication facilities, including those under the BOT Law.

. Mass Housing Projects including Development and Manufacture of

Housing Components™
Research and Development Activities, including Bio-technology

Social Service*

Establishment of educational training institutions, health service facilities, social
welfare institutions, and retirement villages (limited to new facilities only).

. Tourism-related Projects as Endorsed by the Department of Tourism*

Establishment of tourist accommodation facilities, tourism estates, historico-
cultural heritage projects, tourist bus operations, and agri and eco tourism
facilities.

Motion picture limited to films with historical and socio-cultural
significance, and documentary films

13. New projects and bio-technology projects with a minimum project cost of

US$2 Million not commercially undertaken in the Philippines as of 3

14. Printing Facilities

*With Modemization Projects

December 2001
2

2003 IPP

Part | National List

ll. Regional List

A.

Industry Clusters

Industry clusters (ICs) endorsed by the Small and Medium Enterprise Development

Council (SMEDC). ICs will be limited to only one (1) cluster per province subject to

the approved Terms of Reference (TOR) between BO! and SMEDC on the
endorsement of projects.

. ARMM List

The ARMM List covers priority activities which have been independently identified by
the Regional Board of Investments of the ARMM in accordance with E.O. 458. The
BOI-ARMM can grant registration and administer incentives to activities listed in the

IPP, provided these are located in ARMM and subject to the General and Specific
Guidelines.

1. Export Activities

a. Export Trader and Service Exporters
b. Support Activities for Exporters

2. Agriculture, Food and Forestry-Based Industries

a. Processed Food

e Production and processing of halal meat

e Leguminous and other vegetable-based protein (textured, palletized or
liquid)

e Spices processing (e.g. hot pepper, black pepper, ginger, etc.)
Note: May be integrated with plantation

e Vegetable oils (e.g. peanut oil, rice bran oil, sunflower and soybean oil)
and production of food crops
Note: Maybe integrated with post-harvest processing and other
vegetables (such as tomatoes)

e Integrated coconut processing and plantation

e Seaweeds production and processing

e Cassava processing
Note: Maybe integrated with plantation.

e Fruit processing (e.g. durian, mangosteen, jackfruit, marang, banana,
mango, passion guava, calamansi, and guyabano) and plantation

e Aquaculture (Fish Production and Processing) such as, but not limited to:
- Frozen fish
- Chilled fish
- Canned fish
- Abalone
- Crab fattening
- Eel production
- Squid processing

*With Modernization Projects / 3

2003 IPP
Part | National List

- Carp and tilapia production and processing
- Tropical fish production and processing
- Shrimps/prawn
- Lapu-lapu (Grouper) and other marine products
¢ Corn flour mill (integrated with plantation)
e Young corn production
Note: May include processing/canning
e Mushrooms culture and processing
¢ Sweet potato plantation and processing
¢ Crocodile farming and processing

b. Cutflower Production
c. Pearl Culture and Processing

d. Industrial Tree Plantation (include Mangrove, Rattan, Bamboo, etc.) and
wood processing (cement wood board and fiberboard) reconstructed veneer.

e. Shipbuilding and Watercraft

f. Abaca Pulp Production and Processing

g. Palm Oil Plantation, Processing, Refining and Germinated Oil Palm Seeds
Coffee Processing (maybe integrated with plantation)

i. Particle Board (use of agri-based waste material such as rice straw, wood
waste, etc.)

j. Activated Carbon Manufacturing (use of coconut shell, wood based, etc.)
k. Feeds Production (animal feeds and feeds for aquaculture)
|. Tobacco Plantation and Processing

m. Production of Beverage Crops, but not limited to:
e Cacao beans
e Coffee beans (Arabica variety)

n. Production of Plantation Crops and other Medical Herbs/Essential Oil Plants
(including flower extracts)

0. Production of Livestock and Poultry (including Dairy products)
e Beef (including cow-calf and feedlot operations)
e Carabao (water buffalo) production
e Goats and sheep
e Frozen semen and embryos
Note: includes natural method and artificial insemination and pmbryo
transfer technology

*With Modernization Projects 4

Bricks and Roofing Tiles Production

2003 IPP

Part | National List
p.
q.

r.

Ss.

v

Quality Seeds and Seedlings of Fruit Trees and Other Planting Materials
Propagated Asexually or by Tissue Culture

Sugar cane plantation and refineries

Sericulture

Mosquito coil processing

3. Basic Industries

a.

Pharmaceuticals
e Antibiotics
- Penicillin
- Streptomycin
- Tetracycline
- Soft gelatin capsules
e Medical Devices
- Prosthetics
- Diagnosis
e Other pharmaceuticals, herbal medicines

Textile and Textile Products
e Yarns and fabrics

e Hand-woven textiles
¢ Specialty fabrics
e Tire cord fabrics
Note: Must be integrated with weaving and dipping units
e Ramie (degumed, staple fiber, combed tops, noels and slivers)
e Fish nets
e Fabrics made of indigenous raw materials
e Silk reeling
Fertilizers
e Organic
e Inorganic

Mining (Exploration and Development of Mineral Resources)

e Mining and quarrying of metallic and non-metallic minerals (including
small scale as defined under P.D. 1899, but to exclude river beds in
cperations)

e Processing of minerals (such as beneficiation and other metallurgical
methods)

Cement — at least 1.0 million MTPY Capacity (clinker based)

ry

*With Modemization Projects

2003 IPP
Part | National List

4. Consumer Manufactures

a. Rubber Products such as:

High pressure and hydraulic rubber hoses
Rubber bolts

Industrial rubber rollers
Rubber tires

b. Leather Products

5. Infrastructure And Services

a. Public Utilities (with developmental route of the five provinces and one city of
the ARMM and other adjacent Cities and Provinces)

Common carriers (land, air and water transport facilities)
Electric transmission/distribution

Water supply facilities/waterways and sewerage systems
Buses/cargo trucks

Other specialized mass transport systems
Power generation like Hydro Power, and Geothermal

b. Telecommunications with International Gateways

c. Tourism

Tourism estates
Subject to guidelines developed jointly by the Board of Investments —
ARMM and Department of Tourism (DOT)
Tourist accommodation facilities
- Hotels
- Resorts
- Other tourist accommodation facilities such as appartels, pension
houses, tourist inns, and others
Tourist transport facilities
- Ajr
- Water
- Tourist buses and taxi/van
Note: Should be endorsed by the DOT.
New and expansion projects may be registered.

d. Industrial Service Facilities

This will cover the following activities:

Common centers:
- Testing and quality control laboratories
- Training and demonstration centers
- Tool shops and similar facilities
- Metal working
Electroplating

*With Modernization Projects 6

2003 IPP
Part | National List

Foundry
Forging
Machining
Heat treatment
¢ Brass making
- Furniture
¢ Kiln drying
¢ Treatment and processing facilities
- Ceramics
@ Kiln
¢ Glazing
- Food Processing
¢ Bottling and Canning of Water
¢ Industrial salt
¢ Vapor heat treatment
¢ Slaughterhouse/abattoir
- Automotive battery plate manufacturing

“fe @

Note: The following criteria must be met:
- The project will serve the common needs of the industry in the
locality and;
- The project will improve the relative status and comparative
advantages of the industry.

e Development of Retirement Villages
- Shall include health and medical facilities including amenities required
by the Philippine Leisure and Retirement Authority (PLRA).

- Subject to the guidelines to be approved by BOI-ARMM in
consultation with the PRA, the Department of Health (DOH), the
Regional Planning and Development Office (RPDO) and other
concerned agencies.

e. Petrochemical Complex
f. Industrial Gases (such as oxygen and nitrogen)

g. Miscellaneous Chemical Products
e Biotechnological/biosynthetic chemicals
e Essential oils
e Fine chemicals

6. Engineering Industries

a. Engineering Products
e Motor vehicle parts and components
e Automobile parts and assembly
e Modern offset printing
b. Electronics and Telecommunication Produ /'

*With Modemization Projects 7

2003 IPP
Part | National List

7. ARMM Priority and Tourism Areas

Listed below are potential tourist destinations which need further
exploration and evaluation for intensified

marketing.
NUCLEUS

Area |-Sulu

Area Il-Tawi-Tawi
Area IIl-Lanao del Sur
Area IV-Maguindanao
Area V-Basilan

*With Modernization Projects

GATEWAY

Jolo

Bongao
Marawi City
Cotabato City
Isabela

promotions, development and

SATELLITE
DESTINATION

Sulu Province
Tawi-Tawi Province
Lanao del Sur Province
Maguindanao Province
Basilan Province