MALACAÑANG

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 185

For the proper and effective implementation of the government’s energy conservation program and austerity measures under Administrative Order No. 103 (s. 2004), Administrative Order No. 110 (s. 2004) and Administrative Order No. 126 (s. 2005), an Energy Audit Team is hereby constituted composed of Senior Deputy Executive Secretary Waldo Q. Flores of the Office of the President and Undersecretary Peter A. Abaya of the Department of Energy. The Energy Audit Team has the following functions, among others:

1.            Conduct energy surveys and audits, or provide technical assistance for the conduct of such surveys and audits, in all national government agencies (NGAs), including state universities and colleges (SUCs), government-owned and controlled corporations (GOCCs), government financial institutions (GFIs), and other government corporate entities (OGCEs) and their subsidiaries, and other instrumentalities under the Executive Department.

2.            Ensure that each government entity designate a senior official as its Energy Conservation Officer who will be responsible for the government entity’s compliance with the provisions of AO 110 and AO 126 as well as the development and implementation of energy efficiency and conservation measures.

3.            Liaise with local government units and encourage them to implement energy efficiency and conservation measures proposed by the Department of Energy.

4.            Coordinate with the Energy Conservation Officers for the proper and effective implementation of energy measures and require them to submit a monthly report of the measures taken and the results thereof. The monthly report shall be submitted not later than the 15th day following the reporting month.

5.            Prepare and submit a summary report to the President, through the Executive Secretary, within five (5) days after the last reporting day.

6.            Adopt other measures not contrary to existing laws, rules and regulations for the strict implementation of the energy conservation program and austerity measures.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

Manila, August 23, 2005