2022 IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF 
REPUBLIC ACT (R.A.) NO. 9208 (THE “ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
ACT OF 2003”), AS AMENDED BY R.A. NO. 10364 (THE EXPANDED 
ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS ACT OF 2012) AND FURTHER 
AMENDED BY R.A. NO. 11862 (THE EXPANDED ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS ACT OF 2022)

RULE I 
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1 
Preliminary Provisions

Section 1. Title. These rules and regulations shall be known and cited as “The 
2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing Republic Act No. 9208, 
as amended”.

Section 2. Purpose. These rules and regulations are hereby promulgated to 
prescribe the procedures and guidelines for the implementation of R.A. No. 
9208, as amended, in order to facilitate compliance therewith and achieve the 
objectives thereof.

Section 3. State Policies. (a) The State values the dignity of every human 
person and guarantees the respect for individual rights. Towards this end, the 
State shall give the highest priority to the enactment of measures and 
development of programs that will promote human dignity, protect the people 
from any threat of violence and exploitation, eliminate trafficking in persons 
(TIP), and mitigate pressures for involuntary migration and servitude of 
persons, not only to support trafficked persons but more importantly, to ensure 
their recovery, rehabilitation and reintegration into the mainstream of society in 
a manner that is culturally-responsive, gender- and age-appropriate, and 
disability-inclusive.

(b) The State also recognizes the equal rights and inherent human dignity of all 
members of the human family, as enshrined and guaranteed in the following 
international instruments:

(1) 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights; 
(2) 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
Against Women; 
(3) 
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its optional protocols; 
(4) 
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers 
and Members of their Families; 
(5) 
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crimes including its 
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, 
Especially Women and Children; 
(6) 
International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 182, 
Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the 
Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

(7) 
Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of 
the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others; 
(8) 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Convention 
against Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children; 
(9) 
United Nations (UN) Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and 
Regular Migration; and 
(10) 
All other relevant and universally accepted human rights 
instruments and other international conventions to which the 
Philippines is a State Party.

In all actions concerning children, their best interests shall be the paramount 
consideration.

Section 4. Construction. These rules and regulations shall be liberally 
construed in favor of trafficked persons to promote their human dignity, ensure 
their recovery, rehabilitation and reintegration into the mainstream of society, 
eliminate TIP, and achieve the objectives of the Act.

Nothing in these rules and regulations shall be interpreted as a restriction of the 
freedom of association, freedom of religion and the right to travel for purposes 
not contrary to law as guaranteed by the Constitution.

Article 2 
Definition of Terms

Section 5. Definition of terms. As used in these rules and regulations, unless 
the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall be understood to 
mean:

(a) Act – refers to Republic Act (R.A.) No. 9208, as amended by R.A. No 
10364 and R.A. No. 11862.

(b) Child – refers to a person below eighteen (18) years of age or one who is 
over eighteen (18) but is unable to fully take care of, or protect 
himself/herself from abuse, neglect, cruelty, exploitation, or discrimination 
because of a physical or mental disability or condition.

(c) 
Child Laundering – refers to an act of stealing and selling a child to 
adopting parents under false pretenses and using schemes such as 
falsifying the child’s details or manipulating the child’s origins to make the 
child appear an orphan or foundling.

(d) Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation Material or Child Sexual Abuse 
Material (CSAEM or CSAM) – refers to photos, images, videos, 
recordings, streams, or any other representation or form of media, 
depicting acts of sexual abuse and exploitation of a child or representation 
of a child as a sexual object, whether or not generated digitally or by, 
through, and with the use of information and communications

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[3]

technology.  It shall also include materials that focus on real or simulated 
genitalia or other private body parts of a child.

(e) Children involved in Armed Conflict (CIAC) – refers to children who are 
either forcibly, compulsorily recruited, or who voluntarily joined a 
government force or any armed group in any capacity. They may 
participate directly in armed hostilities as combatants or fighters; or 
indirectly through support roles such as scouts, spies, saboteurs, decoys, 
checkpoint assistants, couriers, messengers, porters, cooks or as sexual 
objects.

(f) 
Communications – refers to any spoken or written conversations, 
exchanges, discussions, data, information, or messages for interception.

(g) Computer and Other Computer-Related Devices – refers to any device or 
group of interconnected or related devices, one or more of which, pursuant 
to a program, performs automated processing of data.  It covers any type 
of device with data processing capabilities, including computers and 
mobile phones.

(h) Computer System – refers to any device or group of interconnected or 
related devices, one or more of which, pursuant to a program, performs 
automated processing of data.  It covers any type of device with data 
processing capabilities including computers and mobile phones.  The 
device consisting of hardware and software may include input, output 
process, and storage components which may stand alone or be connected 
in a network or other similar devices.  It also includes computer data 
storage devices or media.

(i) 
Council – refers to the Inter-Agency Council Against Trafficking (IACAT) 
created under Section 20 of the Act.

(j) 
Data – refers to both: 
(1) Content Data – the substance, meaning or purport of the 
communication, or the message or information being conveyed by 
the communication, other than traffic data; and 
(2) Traffic Data or Non-Content Data – any computer data other than 
the content of the communication, including the communication’s 
origin, destination, route, time, date, size, duration, or type of 
underlying service.

(k) 
Debt Bondage –  refers to the pledging by the debtor of his/her personal 
services or labor or those of a person under his/her control as security or 
payment for a debt, when the length and nature of services is not clearly 
defined or when the value of the services, as reasonably assessed, is not 
applied toward the liquidation of the debt.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[4]

(l) 
Electronic or Digital Evidence – refers to evidence, the use of which is 
sanctioned by existing rules of evidence, in ascertaining in a judicial 
proceeding, the truth respecting a matter of fact, which evidence is 
received, recorded, transmitted, stored, processed, retrieved or produced 
electronically.

(m) Extradition – refers to the surrender of an accused or convicted person 
from one state to another state pursuant to an extradition treaty for criminal 
investigation or prosecution, imposition of penalty or service of sentence 
for an extraditable offense.

(n) Forced Labor – refers to the extraction of work or services from any person 
by means of enticement, violence, intimidation or threat, use of force or 
coercion, including deprivation of freedom, abuse of authority or moral 
ascendancy, debt-bondage or deception including any work or service 
extracted from any person under the menace of penalty.

(o) Foreign Service Post (FSPs) – refers to Philippines embassies, missions, 
consulates general and other foreign service establishments maintained 
by the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA).

(p) Information and Communications Technology (ICT) – refers to the totality 
of electronic means to access, create, collect, store, process, receive, 
transmit, present, and disseminate information.

(q) Interception – refers to the act of listening to, recording, monitoring, or 
surveillance of the content of communications, including procuring of the 
content data, either directly, through access and use of a computer 
system, or through the use of electronic eavesdropping or tapping devices, 
at the same time that the communications is occurring.

(r) 
Internet Intermediaries – refers to a natural or juridical person, or entity 
that provides infrastructure, platforms, access to host, transmit and index 
content, products and services originated by third parties on the internet.  It 
includes among others:

(1) 
Internet Service Providers (ISPs); 
(2) 
Data processing and web hosting providers, including domain 
name registrars; 
(3) 
Internet search engine and portals; 
(4) 
E-commerce intermediaries; 
(5) 
Internet payment system providers, whether supervised by the 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) or not; and 
(6) 
Participative network platform providers or social media 
intermediaries.

(s) 
Involuntary Servitude – refers to a condition of enforced and compulsory 
service induced by means of any scheme, plan or pattern, intended to

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

cause a person to believe that if he/she did not enter into or continue in 
such condition, he/she or another person would suffer serious harm or 
other forms of abuse or physical restraint, or threat of abuse or harm, or 
coercion including depriving access to travel documents and withholding 
salaries, or the abuse or threatened abuse of the legal process.

(t) 
Online Sexual Abuse and Exploitation of Children (OSAEC) – refers to the 
use of digital or analog communication and ICT as means to abuse and 
exploit children sexually, which includes cases in which contact child 
abuse or exploitation offline is combined with an online component.  This 
can also include the production, dissemination, and possession of CSAEM 
or CSAM; online grooming of children for sexual purposes; sexual 
extortion of children; sharing image-based sexual abuse; commercial 
sexual exploitation of children; exploitation of children through online 
prostitution; and live-streaming of sexual abuse, with or without the 
consent of the victim.

(u) Pornography – refers to any representation through publication, exhibition, 
cinematography, indecent shows, information technology, or by whatever 
means, of a person engaged in real or simulated explicit sexual activities 
or any representation of the sexual parts of a person primarily for sexual 
purposes; Provided, That when a child is involved, the material shall be 
considered child sexual abuse and exploitation material as defined under 
paragraph (d) of this section.

(v) 
Port of entry and exit –  refers to international airports and/or seaports 
designated by the Commissioner of Bureau of Immigration (BI), from 
among the ports of entry and exit designated by law, to be used as an 
entry point for arriving foreigners and Filipino nationals from another 
country to the Philippines and as an exit point for foreigners and Filipino 
citizens leaving the country and bound abroad.

(w) Prostitution – refers to any act, transaction, scheme or design involving 
the use of a person by another, for sexual intercourse or lascivious 
conduct in exchange for money, profit or any other consideration.

(x) 
Sex Tourism – refers to a program organized by travel and tourism-related 
establishments and individuals which consists of tourism packages or 
activities, utilizing and offering escort and sexual services as enticement 
for tourists. This includes sexual services and practices offered during rest 
and recreation periods for members of the military.

(y) 
Sexual Exploitation – refers to any means of actual or attempted abuse of 
a position of vulnerability, differential power, or trust, for sexual purposes 
or lewd designs, including profiting monetarily, socially, or politically from 
the sexual exploitation of another, regardless of whether or not consent 
was given.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[6]

(z) 
Slavery – refers to the status or condition of a person over whom any or 
all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership are exercised.

(aa) Subscriber’s or Registrant’s Information –  refers to any information 
contained in the form of computer data or other form that is held by internet 
intermediaries, relating to the subscribers or registrants who avail of 
services, other than traffic or content data, and by which any of the 
following can be established:

(1) 
The type of communication service used, the technical provisions 
taken thereto, and the period of service; 
(2) 
The subscriber’s or registrant’s identity, postal or geographic 
address, telephone and other access number, any assigned 
network address, billing, and payment information that are 
available on the basis of the service agreement or arrangement; 
or 
(3) 
Any other available information on the site of the installation of 
communication equipment that is available on the basis of the 
service agreement or arrangement.

(bb) Tourism Enterprises – refers to facilities, services, and attractions involved 
in tourism, such as travel and tour services; health, wellness, and medical 
tourism services; tourist transport services, whether for land, sea or air 
transportation; tour guides; adventure sports services involving sports, 
such as mountaineering, spelunking, scuba diving, and other sports 
activities of significant tourism potential; convention organizers; 
accommodation establishments, including hotels, resorts, apartelles, 
tourist inns, motels, pension houses, and home stay operators; and 
tourism estate management services, restaurants, shops and department 
stores, sports and recreational centers, spas, museums and galleries, 
theme parks, convention centers, and zoos.

(cc) Trafficked Person – refers to a victim of TIP under the Act. This shall also 
include persons rescued or intercepted from potential TIP situations.

(dd) Trafficking in Persons (TIP) –  refers to the recruitment, obtaining, hiring, 
providing, offering, transportation, transfer, maintaining, harboring, or 
receipt of persons, with or without the victim’s consent or knowledge, 
within or across national borders, by means of threat, or use of force, or 
other forms of coercion, abduction, fraud, deception, abuse of power or of 
position, taking advantage of the vulnerability of the person, or, the giving 
or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person 
having control over another person for the purpose of exploitation which 
includes at a minimum, the exploitation or the prostitution of others, the 
engagement of others for the production or distribution, or both, of 
materials that depict child sexual abuse or exploitation, or other forms of

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

sexual exploitation, forced labor or services, slavery, servitude or the 
removal or sale of organs.

The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harboring, adoption or receipt of 
a child for the purpose of exploitation or when the adoption is induced by 
any form of consideration for exploitative purposes shall also be 
considered as ‘trafficking in persons’ even if it does not involve any of the 
means set forth in the preceding paragraph.1

RULE II 
REPORTING, INVESTIGATION AND  
OTHER LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTION

Article 1 
Reporting of Suspected/Alleged Trafficking Incident

Section 6. Who may and where to report. Any person who has any 
knowledge or learns of facts or circumstances that give rise to a reasonable 
belief that a person will be, or suspected to be, or is in the process of being 
trafficked shall immediately report the incident, either orally, in writing or through 
other means, to barangay authorities, the Local Council for the Protection of 
Children (LCPC), local anti-trafficking committee, the local social welfare and 
development office (LSWDO), the nearest police or other law enforcement 
agencies, or any member of the Council. 
A report may also be made to the IACAT Anti-Trafficking Task Force, IACAT 
1343 Action Line, or the official social media pages or helpline of law enforcers, 
local government units (LGUs) and other Council Members. The informant and 
trafficked person’s identity shall be treated with confidentiality in accordance 
with the confidentiality requirements under R.A. No. 9208, as amended, and 
other related laws.

Section 7. Report of an international TIP case. Report of cases of alleged or 
suspected international TIP may be made to the authorities mentioned in Rule 
III herein, or to the Department of Migrant Workers (DMW) or the DFA, or to the 
Philippine FSPs or the Migrant Workers Office (MWO) which has jurisdiction 
over the place where the TIP occurred or where the trafficked person is or may 
be found.

Section 8. Receipt of a report. The person who receives the report shall act 
on it according to his/her mandate or to that of the agency or unit he/she 
represents. If the case requires urgent action, it should be immediately referred 
to the appropriate agency.

Section 9. Action on the reported TIP incident by barangay authorities and 
LSWDO. The barangay authorities or LSWDO to whom a report of a suspected

1 Under Section 4 of R.A. 11862 in the case of overseas domestic work, a “child” means a 
person below twenty-four (24) years old.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[8]

or alleged TIP incident is made shall immediately get the pertinent details of the 
TIP incident from the person who made the report, such as but not limited to 
the:

(a) 
Name, address, age, gender, nationality, ethnicity (i.e., 
Indigenous People) of the trafficked person, and whether he/she 
is with or without disability; 
(b) 
Location of the trafficked person and/or where the TIP incident 
occurred; 
(c) 
Name, address and nationality of the alleged or suspected 
recruiter or trafficker; 
(d) 
Manner of committing the alleged recruitment or TIP;  
(e) 
Names and addresses of witnesses, if any; and 
(f) 
Social media identifiers, account names and other social media 
identifiers, account user details, as applicable.

Such report and any available information obtained from the person who 
reported shall be entered in a separate logbook or blotter of the barangay.

The barangay authorities or the LSWDO shall accompany the person who 
reported or refer the case to the nearest police station.

When the alleged TIP incident has just happened and it is likely that the 
traffickers could be intercepted/arrested and/or the trafficked person could be 
rescued, the barangay authorities shall immediately coordinate with the nearest 
police authorities.

Article 2 
Law Enforcement Action 
on a Reported/Referred Case of Trafficking

Section 10. Action of law enforcement agencies on a reported case of TIP. 
Any law enforcement agency (LEA) motu proprio or within ten (10) days upon 
receipt of a report or a referral of a suspected TIP incident should gather the 
relevant information from the person who reported or the referring agency or 
organization such as, but not limited to, those enumerated in Section 9 herein.

The LEA shall initiate and enhance existing bilateral or multi-lateral agreements 
with other States, in coordination with DFA, to allow their foreign counterparts 
and/or foreign internet intermediaries to share with local authorities possible 
investigation data necessary for the case build up and/or prosecution of cases.

Section 11. Taking of statements of persons in possession of information 
about a suspected TIP incident. The concerned LEA may take the statement 
of any person who knows or who is in possession of knowledge or information 
about the reported TIP incident. The information provided shall be evaluated by 
the LEA for the purpose of determining their sufficiency to support the filing of 
a case or the conduct of the necessary law enforcement operation.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[9]

If it involves a minor, the presence of the parents, legal guardian or a registered 
and accredited social worker shall be mandatory. The conduct of the interview 
must be made in a child-friendly manner taking into the account the best interest 
of the child.

Section 12. Conduct of further investigation or intelligence gathering. 
When the information provided is not enough to warrant the filing of a case or 
undertake the necessary law enforcement operation, the LEA shall conduct 
further investigation or intelligence gathering, including investigation on the 
assets and/or properties of traffickers.

Article 3 
Conduct of Law Enforcement Operations and Protection of 
Rescued Persons During and After an Operation

Section 13. Objectives of a law enforcement operation. A law enforcement 
operation should aim to:   
(a) 
Rescue, protect and assist the trafficked person; 
(b) 
Arrest the suspects in the act of committing an offense;  
(c) 
Seize evidence, which may include objects or properties used in 
the commission of the offense, to support eventual prosecution of 
the suspects; 
(d) 
Conduct rescue of trafficked persons with the assistance of the 
Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) or an 
accredited non-government organization (NGO) that services 
trafficked persons, whenever possible; and 
(e) 
Place the trafficked person in the temporary custody of the 
LSWDO, or any accredited or licensed shelter institution devoted 
to protecting trafficked persons after the rescue.

Section 14. General guidance in the conduct of law enforcement 
operations. To obtain maximum results and achieve the objectives mentioned 
in Section 13 herein, the LEA conducting operations should: 
(a) Carry-out a pro-active investigation, in accordance with the principles of 
victim-centered approach, i.e., conduct prior intelligence work and 
information gathering, to ensure that the law enforcement operation will 
eventually result in the successful prosecution of the case and the 
protection of trafficked persons.

(b) Obtain a search warrant or other court orders unless the interest of time, 
safety of the trafficked persons and other analogous circumstances 
require otherwise.

(c) 
Obtain a cybercrime warrant or other court orders necessary for the 
interception, preservation, and seizure of electronic evidence subject to 
the exemption under Section 8(b) of the Act.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[10]

(d) Coordinate, when necessary, with other relevant agencies to facilitate the 
successful conduct of the operation.

(e) Cordon off and secure the place where exploitation occurs or where the 
trafficked persons are found to ensure the integrity of the evidence until 
the investigation has been completed.

(f) 
Inform the arrested person of the reason/s for the arrest and other rights 
prescribed under R.A No. 7438 (An Act Defining Certain Rights of Persons 
Arrested, Detained or Under Custodial Investigation as well as The Duties 
of the Arresting, Detaining and Investigating Officers, and Providing 
Penalties for Violations Thereof) or the Miranda Doctrine.

(g) In case of warrantless arrest, the arresting officer shall strictly observe the 
Rules on Warrantless Arrest as prescribed under Section 5 of Rule 113 of 
the Rules on Criminal Procedure.

Section 15. Coordination with DSWD, LSWDO, accredited NGO and other 
relevant government agencies prior to the conduct of law enforcement 
operation. The team conducting a law enforcement operation shall, as much 
as possible, coordinate with DSWD, or the LSWDO of the place where the 
operation will be conducted, or an accredited NGO that services trafficked 
persons and ensure their presence during the operation.  The DSWD, LSWDO 
or accredited NGO social worker or any registered and accredited social worker 
shall provide protection and assistance to trafficked persons as soon as they 
are in the custody of the authorities. In cases where there is a large number of 
trafficked persons to be rescued, the attending social worker may, prior to or 
after the rescue, request reinforcement from nearest DSWD Field 
Office/LSWDO/ accredited NGO.

The team may coordinate with other relevant government agencies as the situation requires.

In case of unavailability of social workers from the DSWD, LSWDO or 
accredited NGO, the law enforcement team shall continue with the operation 
and ensure the presence of social workers immediately upon their availability.

Section 16. Treatment of trafficked persons during a rescue operation. 
The members of the rescue team shall ensure the full protection and respect of 
the rights of trafficked persons, including his/her right to privacy and 
confidentiality, during an operation. Immediately after the rescue, the team shall 
separate the trafficked persons from the suspected traffickers. The rescued 
trafficked persons shall be removed from the scene and immediately endorsed 
to the care and assistance of the social workers. The treatment of the rescued 
trafficked persons shall be in accordance with the existing referral mechanisms 
and protocol.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

In the absence of a DSWD/local facility, the trafficked persons shall be turned 
over to a secure and suitable place or facility of an accredited NGO or a 
church/faith group.

Section 17. Treatment of rescued trafficked persons immediately after the 
rescue. The DSWD/LSWDO/accredited NGO shall ensure that the immediate 
needs of trafficked persons are addressed after the rescue. When they have 
stabilized and the situation has normalized, they shall be informed of the 
situation and the legal processes that will take place following the operation, 
such as the conduct of an investigation, the taking of their statements and their 
appearance before a prosecutor for inquest proceedings. They shall likewise 
be informed of the assistance and the options available to them particularly 
assistance under the Recovery and Reintegration Program for Trafficked 
Persons (RRPTP) of the DSWD, as provided in the Act.

The LEAs, in coordination with the DSWD/LSWDO/accredited NGO, shall 
likewise provide transportation and security services to the rescued trafficked 
persons during inquest proceedings and preliminary investigation, when the 
need arises.

Section 18. Temporary custody of trafficked persons. Rescued trafficked 
persons, including victims of attempted TIP, shall be immediately placed in the 
temporary custody of the IACAT Tahanan ng Inyong Pag-Asa Center (TIP 
Center), DSWD, or LSWDO, registered social worker or any accredited or 
licensed shelter institution devoted to protecting trafficked persons. These 
service providers shall give the necessary assistance to the rescued trafficked 
persons and shall be responsible for their appearance during investigation 
and/or court hearings in coordination with LEAs. 
Section 19. Taking of statement. The sworn statement of the rescued 
trafficked persons shall be taken after they have been informed about, and are 
able to understand, the legal procedures and the value of them giving the 
statement. As much as possible, the statement shall be taken in a place 
conducive for conducting interviews, in the presence of a registered social 
worker, and in a child- and gender-sensitive manner. In the absence of a 
registered social worker, any person trained in a child- and gender-sensitive, 
trauma-informed interview techniques may accompany the trafficked 
persons.  A joint interview by an investigator and a social worker should be 
explored to avoid repetitive interviews and the same may be documented by 
any available medium of recording with the consent of the trafficked persons or 
his/her guardian.

The transcript and the copy of the audio or video interview conducted by the 
investigator and/or any registered and accredited social worker who are 
specially trained to conduct such interview, concerning the personal information 
of the trafficked persons and manner by which they were trafficked can be 
utilized as evidence before the office of the prosecutor and before the court, in 
lieu of a sworn statement. The interviewer and/or the person who recorded the

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[12]

interview shall execute an affidavit stating as to the manner he/she conducted 
the interview and how the interview was recorded.

Section 20. Documentation and processing after the rescue operation. 
The rescue team shall process and prepare the following:

(a) 
For prosecutorial purposes, evidence such as, but not limited to, sworn 
statements of trafficked persons and witnesses, affidavit of arrest, when 
a suspected trafficker has been arrested, the pieces of evidence 
obtained from the crime scene, including electronic evidence; and copy 
of the video of the body worn camera or alternative recording device 
during the arrest operation pursuant to the Rules on the Use of Body-
Worn Cameras in the Execution of Warrants (Administrative Matters No. 
21-06-08-SC) of the Supreme Court.

(b) 
For reportorial purposes, reports on the rescue operation, including the 
list of the rescued trafficked persons, their gender and ages and their 
profile shall be submitted to the IACAT Secretariat within fifteen (15) 
days from rescue operation. The Council shall prescribe the standard 
reporting template.

Article 4 
Interception and Arrests at Airports and Seaports

Section 21. Who may intercept and arrest at ports. The interception of TIP 
incidents and arrest of traffickers at airports or seaports shall be the primary 
responsibility of the IACAT Task Force Against Trafficking referred to in Section 
158 herein, if present, or by any LEA assigned thereat.

Section 22. Procedure in the physical interception, arrest and 
investigation of traffickers at airport or seaport. (a) When an offense 
punishable under the Act or any other offense in relation thereto, or in 
furtherance thereof, has been committed, or is actually being committed in the 
presence of any law enforcement officer (LEO) or member of the anti-trafficking 
task force, or an immigration officer assigned at the airport or seaport, such 
officer shall immediately cause the physical interception and/or arrest of the 
persons involved.

(b)  
The LEO responsible for the arrest of the alleged trafficker shall 
investigate the case. It shall execute the proper affidavit of arrest, gather and 
conduct an inventory of the evidence obtained from the person arrested, and 
take the statement of the trafficked persons or other witnesses. As soon as the 
documentation is completed, the complaint and supporting documents and 
evidence shall be endorsed to the prosecutor for inquest.

(c)  
The LEO shall take full custody over the person arrested including 
his/her appearance during the inquest proceeding.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[13]

(d)  
If the person intercepted is a convicted pedophile or registered sex 
offender, the immigration officers assigned thereat shall automatically 
implement the exclusion with a recommendation to the Office of the 
Commissioner for blacklisting.

In the instance of an arriving or departing alien that has a standing 
warrant of arrest issued by Philippine courts for sex-related crimes, the 
immigration officers shall endorse said alien to the proper LEA for appropriate 
disposition.

Section 23. Procedure in the physical interception at seas. When a physical 
interception is done within territorial waters, the authorities concerned shall 
immediately coordinate with the IACAT Task Force for the proper turn-over of 
the intercepted persons and the rescued trafficked persons.

Article 5 
Deferred Departure of Potential Trafficked Persons

Section 24. Strict departure policy. Strict departure policy shall be 
implemented primarily to avert a potential TIP situation and protect possible 
victims of TIP from exploitation. In no case shall said policy violate the right of 
persons to travel.

The Council’s guidelines on departure formalities shall be observed at all times.

Section 25. Deferred departure reporting mechanism. The BI shall maintain 
a record of all the deferred departures in accordance with its rules and 
regulations. Such record shall be available in all international ports of entry and 
exit points. 
Article 6 
Financial Investigation and  
Asset Identification and Freezing

Section 26. Investigation on the assets and/or properties of traffickers. 
When a person is arrested/investigated in relation to a violation of the Act, a 
parallel investigation shall be conducted by the Philippine National Police 
(PNP), National Bureau of Investigation (NBI), Anti-Money Laundering Council 
(AMLC), or other agencies authorized by law in order to determine whether or 
not such assets are subject of the offense, proceeds or fruits of the offense, or 
were used in the commission of the offense. Such investigation shall include, 
but is not limited to:

(a) 
Identifying and locating the property and/or asset;

(b) 
Determining the owner or the person who has control over the 
property; or

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[14]

(c) 
Tracing other financial transactions and activities employed in 
connection with, or in furtherance of, any of the prohibited acts 
defined in the Act.

The concerned law enforcement or government agency may coordinate with the AMLC to obtain vital information or evidence.

For this purpose, LEAs, if appropriate, shall access bank information and other 
financial information in accordance with the rules and regulations issued by the 
AMLC to implement Section 9(d) of the Act.

Section 27. Requesting freeze orders through the AMLC. LEA or the other 
agencies authorized by law may transmit such relevant information and/or 
evidence to the AMLC, which include, among others:

(a) Name and address, if known, of the account holder, or the owner, 
holder or possessor of the property;

(b) Description of the monetary instrument, property or proceeds and 
its location, if known; or

(c) 
Evidence showing that the subject monetary instrument, property, 
or proceeds are in any way related to or involved in any of the 
prohibited activities defined in the Act.

The AMLC shall file the petition for the issuance of a freeze order, in accordance 
with Section 10 of R.A. No. 9160 (Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2001, as 
amended), Rule 10 of its 2018 Implementing Rules and Regulations, and the 
Rules on Civil Forfeiture.

Article 7 
Blacklisting of Recruitment Agencies  
and Illegal Recruiters

Section 28. Inclusion in the blacklist. The blacklist of recruitment agencies, 
illegal recruiters and persons who are involved in TIP under the Department of 
Migrant Workers (DMW) shall include the following:

(a) Any person or entity facing administrative, civil and/or criminal charges 
in the receiving country or in the Philippines in connection with alleged 
involvement in TIP such as:

(1) Individual persons and entities; 
(2) Philippine recruitment/manning agencies with the names of its 
corporate officers, executive officers, and employees, if known; 
(3) Foreign placement agencies with the names of its corporate 
officers, executive officers and employees, if known; and 
(4) Direct employers.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[15]

In case the direct employer is a juridical person, the names of its 
corporate officers, executive officers, and employees, if known.

(b) Any person or entity in the receiving country or in the Philippines 
identified, through a verified affidavit, by a trafficked person rescued by 
DFA or DMW.

Section 29. Who may request for blacklisting; Requirements. (a) Any 
member of the Council may request for the blacklisting of recruitment agencies, 
illegal recruiters and persons under Section 28(a) herein by attaching a copy of 
the complaint duly docketed by the court or body having jurisdiction over the 
case.

(b)   
The DFA or DMW may request for the blacklisting of recruitment 
agencies, illegal recruiters and persons under Section 28(b) herein by attaching 
the following:

(1) 
a detailed report on the rescue operations; and  
(2) 
the verified affidavit of the rescued trafficked person attesting 
to the act/s of TIP of such recruitment agencies or illegal 
recruiters involved in the trafficking of the rescued trafficked 
person, naming and describing the involvement of such 
agencies or persons.

Section 30. Posting and updating of the blacklist. The DMW shall 
disseminate the blacklist to members of the Council and other concerned 
government agencies, with advice to post the same in conspicuous places of 
their respective offices, including their regional offices and in their official 
websites. The blacklist shall likewise be posted by the DMW in its own website 
and in the shared government information system, which is mandated to be 
established under R.A. No. 8042 (Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act 
of 1995), as amended.

The DMW shall likewise update such blacklist bi-monthly. For this purpose, the 
members of the Council should continually inform DMW of the updates on the 
cases they have requested to be included in the blacklist.

Section 31. Suspension or cancellation of license. In accordance with its 
rules, the DMW may issue an Order of Preventive Suspension or Order of 
Temporary Disqualification against blacklisted licensed recruitment or manning 
agencies, and its principals or employers.

The DMW shall impose appropriate penalties including cancellation of the 
license of the recruitment or manning agency and the perpetual disqualification 
of individuals or officers of a licensed recruitment or manning agency in 
accordance with its rules.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[16]

Section 32. De-listing from the blacklist. The blacklisted recruitment 
agencies or illegal recruiters may request for their de-listing by submitting an 
order of dismissal or final order or decision exonerating them from the charges 
of the court or body where the case was filed.

Recruitment agencies or illegal recruiters blacklisted under Section 28(b) herein 
may be de-listed pursuant to the rules of DMW.

Article 8 
Application For Cybercrime Warrants

Section 33. Application for cybercrime warrants. In investigating violations 
of the Act committed by, through, or with the use of ICT, any LEO may apply 
for a cybercrime warrant and related orders involving the preservation, 
disclosure, interception, search, seizure, and/or examination, as well as the 
custody, and destruction of computer data subject of the investigation, pursuant 
to the Rule on Cybercrime Warrants (A.M. No. 17-11-03-SC).

Section 34. Preservation of Computer Data; Period to preserve. A LEO may 
request ISPs to keep, preserve, and maintain the integrity of the computer data 
subject of the investigation. 
Subscriber information and traffic data’s integrity shall be preserved by the ISP 
for a minimum of six (6) months from the date of transaction. Content data shall 
be preserved by the ISP for six (6) months from the date of receipt of the order 
from the LEOs requiring its preservation. 
LEOs may order a one-time extension for another six (6) months. If the 
computer data preserved by the ISP is used as evidence in a case, the receipt 
of the ISP of a copy of the transmittal document to the Office of the Prosecutor 
shall be deemed a notification to further preserve the computer data until the 
final termination of the case and/or as ordered by the court as the case may be.

Section 35. Types of cybercrime warrants. The different types of cybercrime 
warrants under the Rule on Cybercrime Warrants include:

(a) 
Warrant to Disclose Computer Data (WDCD). It is an order in writing 
issued in the name of the People of the Philippines, signed by a judge, 
upon application of LEOs, authorizing the latter to issue an order to 
disclose and accordingly, require any person or service provider to 
disclose or submit computer data in his/her possession or control.

(b) 
Warrant to Intercept Computer Data (WICD). It is an order in writing 
issued in the name of the People of the Philippines, signed by a judge, 
upon application of LEO, authorizing the latter to carry out any or all of 
the following activities: (a) listening to, (b) recording, (c) monitoring, or 
(d) surveillance of the content of communications, including procuring of 
the content of computer data, either directly, through access and use of 
a computer system, or indirectly, through the use of electronic

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

eavesdropping or tapping devices, at the same time that the 
communication is occurring.

(c) 
Warrant to Search, Seize and Examine Computer Data (WSSECD). It is 
an order in writing issued in the name of the People of the Philippines, 
signed by a judge, upon application of LEO, authorizing the latter to 
search the particular place for items to be seized and/ or examined.

(d) 
Warrant to Examine Computer Data (WECD). Upon acquiring 
possession of a computer device or computer system via a lawful 
warrantless arrest, or by any other lawful method, LEOs shall first apply 
for a warrant before searching the said computer device or computer 
system for the purpose of obtaining for forensic examination the 
computer data contained therein.

Article 9 
Intercepted Communications

Section 36. Application for the interception of communications; 
Requirements. Any LEO may apply for an order before the Regional Trial Court 
(RTC) to track, intercept, view, monitor, surveil, listen to, and record any 
communications, information or messages with the use of any mode, form, kind 
or type of intercepting devices mentioned in R.A. No. 4200 (An Act to Prohibit 
and Penalize Wire Tapping and Other Related Violations of the Privacy of 
Communication, and for Other Purposes).

The ex parte application, made under oath or affirmation, shall include the 
following information:

(a) The identity, such as name and address, if known, of the charged 
or suspected person whose communications are to be intercepted. 
If the person suspected of the crime is not fully known, such person 
shall be subject to continuous surveillance provided there is a 
reasonable ground to do so;

(b) Identities of the intercepting LEOs, or identities of individuals or 
juridical persons who will assist the LEA in carrying out the 
interception;

(c) 
The offense or offenses committed or being committed, or sought 
to be prevented;

(d) That there are reasonable grounds to believe that any of the crimes 
enumerated under the Act has been committed, or is being 
committed, or is about to be committed;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

(e) That there are reasonable grounds to believe that evidence that will 
be obtained is essential to the conviction of any person for, or to the 
solution of, or to the prevention of any such crimes; and

(f) 
That there are no other means readily available for obtaining such 
evidence.

Section 37. Effective period of order to intercept communications. The 
order authorizing the interception of communications shall only be effective for 
the length of time as determined by the court, which shall not exceed thirty (30) 
days from its issuance. The LEO may request for the extension of the original 
period based on the following grounds:

(a) Justifiable reasons;  
(b) Necessity in furtherance of the investigation; or 
(c) 
Public interest.

In case the original LEO is not available to file the application to extend or renew 
the order to intercept communications, any other member of the team, duly 
authorized by their superior officer, may file the application to extend or renew 
the order.

Section 38. Exception from court order to intercept communications for 
child trafficking. When the trafficked person is a child and the offense involves 
the use of computer systems and digital platforms, a court order shall not be 
required in order for a LEO, acting in an undercover capacity, to intercept 
communication with a person reasonably believed to have committed, is 
committing, or about to commit any of the violations under the Act; Provided, 
That a LEO shall not be precluded from obtaining a WICD.

Section 39. Duties of LEO. The LEO shall have the following duties when 
intercepting communication, information or messages, and in the use, custody 
and disposition thereof under Section 8 of the Act:

(a) Filing of case; Notifying the authorizing court. – The LEO shall have thirty 
(30) days after the termination of the period granted by the authorizing 
court within which to file the appropriate case before the public prosecutors 
offices for any violation of the Act. If no case is filed within the thirty (30) 
day period, the LEO shall, within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the 
order, notify the authorizing court that no case has been filed.

Failure of the LEO to notify the authorizing court within the required period 
shall be penalized by imprisonment of six (6) years and a fine of not less 
than Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00) but not more than One 
million pesos (P1,000,000.00) under Section 10 (h) of the Act.

(b) Turn-over of intercepted communications. – All tapes, discs and 
recordings obtained pursuant to the Act, including all excerpts and

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

summaries thereof as well as all written notes or memoranda made in 
connection therewith, shall be turned-over to the authorizing court or its 
appointed custodian within the following applicable period:

(1) Within forty-eight (48) hours after the expiration of the period fixed in 
the written order; or

(2) Within forty-eight (48) hours after the expiration of any extension or 
renewal.

The intercepted communications as enumerated above shall be contained 
in a sealed envelope or package and accompanied by a joint affidavit of 
the LEO and the team members. In case of death or physical incapacity 
of the applicant to execute the required affidavit, the team member who is 
next in rank to the applicant named in the written order shall, together with 
the other team members, execute the required affidavit.

The joint affidavit of the LEO and the individual team members shall state 
the following:

(1) The number of tapes, discs, and recordings that have been made, as 
well as the number of excerpts and summaries thereof, and the 
number of written notes and memoranda, if any, made in connection 
therewith;

(2) The dates and times covered by each of such tapes, discs, and 
recordings;

(3) The number of tapes, discs, and recordings, as well as the number 
of excerpts and summaries thereof and the number of written notes 
and memoranda made in connection therewith that have been 
included in the deposit;

(4) The date of the original written authorization granted by the 
Department of Justice (DOJ) to the applicant to file the ex parte 
application to conduct the interception, as well as the date of any 
extension or renewal of the original written authority granted by the 
authorizing court; and

(5) That no unauthorized duplicates or copies of the whole or any part of 
any such tapes, discs, and recordings, excerpts, summaries, written 
notes, and memoranda have been made, or if made, that all such 
duplicates and copies are included in the sealed envelope or 
package, as the case may be, deposited within the authorizing 
division of the authorizing court.

Failure to comply with this duty shall be penalized by imprisonment of six 
(6) years and a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[20]

(P500,000.00) but not more than One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) under 
Section 10 (h) of the Act.

If the LEO omits or excludes from the joint affidavit any item or portion 
thereof mentioned therein the penalty shall be imprisonment of not less 
than six (6) years and one (1) day to twelve (12) years of imprisonment 
under Section 10 (h) of the Act.

(c) 
Maintain confidentiality of deposited materials. – The LEO shall not open, 
reveal, divulge, and use the contents of the sealed envelope or package 
as evidence, which are classified information.

(d) Seek authority to copy computer data. – The LEO shall seek authority from 
the authorizing court to copy computer data that shall be utilized for case 
build-up or preliminary investigation purposes. The copy of the computer 
data may be retained by the LEOs.

Section 40. Custody of digital devices, and digital forensic examination 
report. The digital devices examined and the result of the digital forensic 
examination shall be deposited with the court that issued the court warrant, or 
in case where a criminal case is already filed in court, the court hearing the 
criminal case.

Section 41. Unauthorized act. It shall be unlawful for any person, LEO, or 
custodian to make a copy of the materials in their custody, such as tapes, discs, 
video footages and other recordings, or excerpts and summaries thereof 
including written notes and memoranda made in connection therewith, without 
court authorization. It shall be unlawful to remove, delete, expunge, incinerate, 
shred or destroy in any manner the items enumerated above in whole or in part 
under any pretext whatsoever.

Failure to comply with this duty shall be penalized by imprisonment of not less 
than six (6) years and one (1) day to twelve (12) years of imprisonment under 
Section 10 (h) of the Act.

Section 42. Contempt. Failure to timely file the returns for any of the issued 
warrants as required under the Rule on Cybercrime Warrant or to duly turn-over 
to the court's custody any of the items disclosed, intercepted, searched, seized, 
and/or examined, shall subject the responsible LEOs to an action for contempt, 
which procedures shall be governed by Rule 71 of the Rules of Civil Procedure, 
insofar as they are applicable.

Section 43. Non liability under R.A. No. 4200.  In investigating violations of 
the Act involving the use of the internet and other digital platforms, LEOs acting 
in an undercover capacity who record their communications with a person or 
persons reasonably believed to have committed, is committing, or is about to 
commit any of the violations under the Act, shall not be considered as

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[21]

wiretapping or illegal interception. LEOs shall not be liable under the provisions 
of R.A. No. 4200.

Section 44. Confidentiality of deposited material. The sealed envelope or 
package and the contents thereof, which are deposited with the authorizing 
court, and considered classified information, shall not be opened. Its contents, 
including the tapes, discs, and recordings, all the excerpts and summaries 
thereof, and the notes and memoranda made in connection therewith, shall not 
be divulged, revealed, read, replayed, or used as evidence unless authorized 
by written order of the authorizing court.

Section 45. Application to open deposited materials; Contents of 
application. The DOJ or handling prosecutor shall file a written application to 
open the sealed envelope or package before the authorizing court, with proper 
written notice to the person whose communications have been the subject of 
interception to open, reveal, divulge, and use the contents of the sealed 
envelope or package as evidence.

The written application with notice to the party concerned to open the deposited 
sealed envelope or package shall clearly state the purpose or reason:

(a) For opening the sealed envelope or package;

(b) For revealing or disclosing its classified contents;

(c) 
For replaying, divulging, or reading intercepted communications, 
including any of the excerpts and summaries thereof and any of the 
notes or memoranda made in connection therewith; and

(d) For using as evidence any of the intercepted communications, 
including any of the excerpts and summaries thereof and any of the 
notes or memoranda made in connection therewith.

Section 46. Evidentiary value of deposited materials. Intercepted 
communications, or any part or parts thereof, or any information or fact 
contained therein, including their existence, content, substance, purport, effect, 
or meaning, which have been secured in violation of the pertinent provisions of 
the Act, shall absolutely not be admissible and usable as evidence against any 
person in any judicial, quasi-judicial, legislative, or administrative investigation, 
inquiry, proceeding, or hearing.

RULE III 
RESCUE, RECOVERY AND REPATRIATION 
OF FILIPINO NATIONALS WHO ARE VICTIMS  
OF INTERNATIONAL TRAFFICKING

Article 1 
Rescue and Recovery

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[22]

Section 47. The One Country-Team Approach. The One Country-Team 
Approach (OCTA) under Executive Order No. 74, series of 1993, and as further 
enunciated in R.A. No. 8042, as amended, shall be the operational scheme 
under which FSPs shall provide protection to trafficked persons regardless of 
their immigration status. Under the OCTA, all officers, representatives and 
personnel of the Philippine government posted abroad, regardless of their 
mother agencies, shall act as a one-country team under the leadership of the 
Ambassador or the head of mission.

Section 48. Action on a report of international TIP. When a report of a TIP 
incident is received, the FSPs or the MWO which has jurisdiction over the place 
where the victim is believed to have been trafficked or located shall, in 
coordination with the authorities of the host government, ascertain the veracity 
of the report and inquire about the condition of the trafficked person. If the 
location of a trafficked person is unknown, the FSPs or the MWO shall take the 
necessary steps to verify and ascertain the location of the trafficked 
person.  The FSPs shall also request such authorities to allow the access of 
consular officers to Filipino nationals in accordance with the Vienna Convention 
on Consular Relations, and the laws and regulations of the host country.

Section 49. Special mission team.  The Council, in emergency and other 
similar cases, may dispatch an inter-agency team abroad to assess the 
situation of trafficked persons, gather information from key individuals and 
entities, for the purpose of strengthening prosecution of cases in the 
Philippines, or to coordinate the rescue of trafficked persons.

The special mission team may be dispatched only upon the issuance of a 
mission order by the Secretary of Justice, in consultation and close coordination 
with the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, defining therein the specific objectives of 
the mission and outlining the parameters of the team’s actions in the host 
country. The mission shall be conducted in accordance with existing applicable 
treaties and/or subject to the laws, rules and regulations of the host country. 
After each mission, the team shall submit a written report to the Secretary of 
Justice, copy furnished the Secretary of Foreign Affairs.

Section 50. Rescue at the country of destination. (a) All rescue operations 
shall be made through, or coordinated with the concerned police, anti-trafficking 
in persons committee and other authorities of the host country.

(b)  
In no case shall any Philippine government official conduct or participate 
in a rescue operation abroad without prior notice to the Ambassador or head of 
mission. Government officials involved in any rescue operations abroad must 
provide the Ambassador or the head of mission with timely and accurate 
information, especially after such operations.

(c) 
In countries where the foreign government requires Filipino trafficked 
persons to remain in their custody, the Ambassador or his duly authorized

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

representative shall make the necessary representation to the host country to 
secure custody of the trafficked persons, or at the very least, to ensure that the 
trafficked persons are given access to consular officers as provided under the 
Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.

Section 51. Focal Person for TIP. The FSPs or the MWO shall assign a 
Foreign Service Officer (FSO) to be its focal person for TIP. The said officer 
shall seek and maintain access and communication with Filipino trafficked 
persons subject of rescue operations, in accordance with the Vienna 
Convention on Consular Relations, and other existing diplomatic and consular 
norms and practices. The focal person shall also report to the Ambassador or 
head of mission particularly on whether the rights and best interests of the 
trafficked persons are protected and prioritized.

Section 52. Notice to Next of Kin.  When the focal person for TIP deems it 
necessary, especially if the trafficked persons consented and it would be 
beneficial for their recovery, he/she will communicate with the latter’s next of 
kin (NOK). If the NOK or family members of the trafficked persons in the 
Philippines receive threats, reprisals or intimidation, the focal person will 
coordinate with the appropriate LEA in the Philippines for further investigation 
and protection.

Section 53. Post-rescue services and assistance. In countries or areas 
where the services of the Migrant Workers Resource Center (MWRC) are not 
accessible, the FSPs or the MWO shall extend off-site services to trafficked 
persons regardless of their status in the host country, such as, but not limited 
to the following:

(a) 
Counseling;  
(b) 
Temporary Shelter;  
(c) 
Medical Services; 
(d) 
Hospital Visitation;  
(e) 
Reintegration Services;  
(f) 
Repatriation Services;  
(g) 
Legal Services to include provision of lawyers/counsel, jail visitation, 
provision of legal advice and attendance to court hearings, insurance 
claims, and compensation claims.

Article 2 
Filing of TIP cases at destination country

Section 54. Taking of sworn statement on-site.  The FSPs or the 
MWO shall take the statement, through the IACAT intake form, of the trafficked 
person, recounting among others, the people/establishment involved in the 
recruitment, transfer and deployment, the modus operandi employed to recruit, 
transport and deploy the trafficked person, and other pertinent information 
which could provide a lead in the investigation and eventual prosecution of the 
perpetrators. The statement shall be sworn to before authorized officials of the

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[24]

Ang mga sumusunod na probisyon ay itinatakda upang masiguro ang epektibong implementasyon ng batas na ito:

**Seksyon 1. Paglikha ng Inter-Agency Task Force.** – Isang Inter-Agency Task Force (IATF) ang bubuuin na pangungunahan ng Department of [Department Name]. Ang IATF ay bubuuin ng mga kinatawan mula sa mga sumusunod na ahensya ng gobyerno: [List of Agencies].  Responsible ang IATF para sa koordinasyon, pagpaplano, at pagmonitor ng implementasyon ng batas na ito.

**Seksyon 2. Mga Tungkulin ng IATF.** – Ang IATF ay may mga sumusunod na tungkulin:

(a) Bumuo ng isang komprehensibong plano ng implementasyon, kabilang ang timeframe, budgetary requirements, at key performance indicators;
(b) Mag-coordinate sa lahat ng ahensya ng gobyerno at mga pribadong sektor upang matiyak ang maayos na implementasyon ng batas na ito; 
(c) Magmonitor at mag-evaluate ng pag-usad ng implementasyon at magrekomenda ng mga kinakailangang aksyon upang matugunan ang anumang mga hamon o pagkaantala; at
(d) Isumite ang regular na ulat sa Kongreso tungkol sa status ng implementasyon ng batas na ito.

**Seksyon 3. Pondo.** – Ang mga pondo na kinakailangan para sa implementasyon ng batas na ito ay kukunin mula sa [Source of Funds], subject to the availability of funds and existing budgeting rules and regulations.  Any unutilized funds shall revert to the general fund.  We will also explore opportunities for external funding.

**Seksyon 4. Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR).** – Ang Department of [Department Name], in consultation with relevant stakeholders, shall formulate the IRR of this Act within sixty (60) days from its effectivity. The IRR shall be promulgated by the said Department and shall take effect immediately upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

FSPs or the MWO, Provided, That, the statement and other such matters 
relating to the investigation must be done consistent with full respect to the 
rights and dignity of trafficked persons, and must not impede the immediate 
assistance and delivery of mandatory services to them.

Section 55. Filing of cases in destination country.  The FSPs or the MWO 
shall extend all possible assistance, including free legal assistance, to a 
trafficked person who wishes or opts to file the case in the host country or in 
the country where he/she is found and where the laws of the country allow the 
prosecution of a TIP offense or a related or similar offense.

Section 56. Access to the Legal Assistance Fund. Trafficked persons overseas may avail of the Legal Assistance Fund created by R.A. No. 8042, as amended, and the Immediate Care and Assistance for Overseas Filipino Workers in Need (AKSYON) Fund under R.A. No. 11641 (Department of Migrant Workers Act), subject to the guidelines as provided by law as to its use and disbursement.

Article 3 
Repatriation

Section 57. Repatriation of trafficked persons. The DFA and DMW, in 
coordination with the other appropriate agencies, shall have the primary 
responsibility for the repatriation of trafficked persons.

If their repatriation shall expose them to greater risks, or shall hinder the 
prosecution of traffickers abroad, the DFA, upon the consent of the trafficked 
person, shall make representation with the host country, whenever necessary, 
for the extension of appropriate residency permits and protection, as may be 
legally permissible.

Section 58. Repatriation costs. In accordance with existing rules and 
regulations on the use and disbursement of Assistance-to-Nationals (ATN) 
Fund of DFA and the AKSYON fund of DMW for the repatriation of trafficked 
persons, the FSPs shall immediately request the DFA or DMW for allocation of 
funds for the repatriation of the trafficked persons.

Section 59. Issuance of travel document. In case the passport of the 
trafficked person is lost or confiscated by the traffickers or employers abroad 
and cannot be retrieved, the FSP shall issue a travel document to facilitate exit 
from the host country and entry into the Philippines.

Section 60. Notice of repatriation. The FSPs or the MWO concerned shall 
report to the DFA or DMW, the actual date of repatriation and other pertinent 
information.  The DFA or DMW shall refer the arrival of the trafficked persons 
to the IACAT Task Force Against Trafficking at the point of entry for arrival 
assistance and the provision of appropriate services, including referrals in 
accordance with the National Referral System.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

Section 61. Repatriation of trafficked persons with special conditions. In 
appropriate cases, especially when the trafficked person is psychologically 
challenged, has suffered physical or sexual abuse, or has received serious 
threats to his/her life and safety, the trafficked person will be met upon arrival 
in the Philippines by DSWD personnel, in coordination with the IACAT Task 
Force Against Trafficking and other government agencies such as Overseas 
Workers Welfare Administration (OWWA), BI and Department of Health (DOH). 
Where necessary, the FSPs or the MWO shall designate a duly authorized 
individual to escort said trafficked persons to the Philippines.

Section 62. Executing a sworn statement against trafficker. The trafficked 
person will be encouraged to execute a sworn statement, if he/she has not done 
so before, with the view of filing the appropriate charges against the trafficker. 
The IACAT Task Force Against Trafficking shall interview the trafficked person 
and make recommendation for investigation and filing of appropriate cases. In 
cases where licensed recruitment agencies are involved or those whose 
licenses have been cancelled or suspended, the case shall also be referred to 
the DMW for the institution of administrative proceedings or criminal action, as 
the case may be.

Section 63. Linkages with other non-state actors.  The FSPs, MWOs and 
other attached agencies posted abroad shall establish partnerships with civil 
society groups, Filipino communities, and NGOs in the host country to mobilize 
support for the rescue, protection, and delivery of services to trafficked persons.

Section 64. Documentation and referrals. All FSPs, including MWO, welfare 
officers and other officials, extending assistance to trafficked persons, shall 
document and track the delivery of service and referrals of the rescued 
trafficked person.

The concerned agencies such as DFA, DSWD and DMW shall issue 
corresponding directives to ensure uniform compliance with documentation and 
referral standards of the Council.

RULE IV
EXTRA-TERRITORIALITY AND INTERNATIONAL LEGAL COOPERATION

Article 1 
Extra-territoriality Principle

Section 65. Extra-territorial jurisdiction; Requirements.  The Philippines 
may exercise jurisdiction over any act defined and penalized under the Act, 
even if committed outside its territory and whether or not such act or acts 
constitute an offense at the place of commission, if the offense, being a 
continuing offense, was commenced in the Philippines.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[26]

The Philippines may also exercise jurisdiction over any act defined and 
penalized under the Act if committed in another country, Provided, That the 
suspect or accused:

(a) is a Filipino citizen;

(b) is a permanent resident of the Philippines; or

(c) 
has committed the act against a citizen of the Philippines.

Section 66. Prohibition. No prosecution may be commenced against a person 
under the Act if a foreign government, in accordance with jurisdiction 
recognized by the Philippines, has prosecuted or is prosecuting such person 
for the conduct constituting such offense, except upon the approval of the 
Secretary of Justice. 
Article 2 
Extradition of an Accused or Convicted 
Person for a TIP Offense

Section 67. Extradition. The extradition of an accused or a convicted person 
for a TIP offense punishable under the Act shall be pursued in accordance with 
the provisions of Presidential Decree (P.D.) No. 1069 (Philippine Extradition 
Law) and the applicable extradition treaty. Such person may only be extradited 
from a country which the Philippines has an extradition treaty, or a state party 
to a multilateral treaty in which the Philippines is also a state party, or as may 
hereafter be allowed by law.

Section 68. Who may request extradition and where the request should 
be made. A LEA, prosecution office or any interested party seeking to extradite 
a person accused or convicted for violation of the Act, including those covered 
by the application of the extra-territoriality principle, may request the extradition 
of such person through the Legal Staff (Office of the Chief State Counsel) of 
the DOJ.

Section 69. Request; form and content. The request for extradition to the 
DOJ shall be in writing, signed by the head of the requesting agency or by the 
interested party, supported by relevant documentary evidence, and as much as 
possible state therein the following information:

(a) 
The fullest particulars as to the identity, nationality and location, if 
known, of the accused or convicted person;

(b) 
Statement of facts of the offense for which extradition is requested;

(c) 
Description of the acts or omissions constituting the alleged offense, 
including an indication of the time and place of the commission of 
these acts;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[27]

(d) 
Text of the relevant provisions of the law describing the essential 
elements of the offense, prescribed penalty and any time limit on the 
prosecution or execution of punishment of the offense; and

(e) Iba pang mga dokumento o impormasyon na maaaring hilingin ng DOJ alinsunod sa batas ng extradition at mga naaangkop na tratado.

Article 3 
Requests for Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters

Section 70. Legal assistance from a foreign state. In the investigation or 
prosecution of the offenses defined under the Act, including those covered by 
the application of the extra-territoriality principle, a request for legal assistance 
may be made with a foreign State on the basis of law, treaty or reciprocity. Such 
assistance may include:

(a) 
taking of evidence or obtaining statements from persons;

(b) 
making arrangements for persons to give evidence or facilitating the 
personal appearance of witnesses;

(c) 
locating or identifying witnesses and suspects;

(d) 
effecting the temporary transfer of persons deprived of liberty to 
appear as witnesses;

(e) 
effecting service of judicial documents;

(f) 
examining objects and sites;

(g) 
providing or receiving information, original or certified true copies of 
relevant documents, evidentiary items and expert evaluations;

(h) 
executing searches and seizures;

(i) 
identifying or tracing proceeds of crime or property;

(j) 
freezing, recovery, forfeiture or confiscation of property or 
instrumentality used in the commission of a crime in accordance with 
related laws, rules and regulations;

(k) 
restraining of dealings in property or the freezing of property, 
proceeds or instrumentalities derived from the commission of an 
offense that may be recovered, forfeited or confiscated; or

(l) 
any other type of assistance consistent with the objectives of the Act 
and not contrary to Philippine laws, rules and regulations.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Section 74. Who may file a complaint. Complaints for violations of the Act 
may be filed by the following:

Section 71. Request; where to be made. Any LEA or prosecution office 
desiring to seek the assistance of a foreign state regarding the investigation or 
prosecution of an offense under the Act may submit the request through the 
Legal Staff (Office of the Chief State Counsel) of the DOJ which shall, in turn, 
make the formal request pursuant to the   law or applicable treaty, or on the 
basis of reciprocity. The request shall specifically detail the assistance to be 
requested.

Section 72. Execution of requests for assistance; Limitations. A request 
for assistance shall be executed in accordance with Philippine laws. Where the 
request for assistance is made pursuant to a treaty, the provisions of the treaty 
shall be considered in the execution of the request.

The DOJ may refuse to carry out a request for assistance if its execution would 
be inconsistent with Philippine laws or would likely prejudice the national 
interest of the Philippines.

Article 4 
Deportation, Forced Removal or Return

Section 73. Request for deportation, forced removal or return. The 
Philippines may request for the deportation, forced removal or return to the 
country of any Filipino citizen or a permanent resident of the Philippines who is 
convicted, charged or facing prosecution for a TIP offense under the Act when 
the subject is in hiding, residing or in a temporary sojourn in the territory of 
another country.

RULE V
PROSECUTION

Article 1 
Filing of Cases

Section 74. Who may file a complaint. Complaints for violations of the Act may be filed by the following:

(a) Any person, including a LEO, social worker, or representative of a 
licensed child-caring institution, who has personal knowledge of the 
commission of the offense; 
(b) The trafficked person; 
(c) 
Parents or legal guardians; 
(d) Spouse; 
(e) Siblings;  
(f) 
Children; or 
(g) At least three (3) concerned citizens who have personal knowledge of 
the violation and where the violation occurred.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[29]

Ang mga nabanggit na tao ay maaari ring humingi ng tulong sa Konseho sa paghahain ng mga reklamo.

A person who has personal knowledge of the commission of the offense may 
initiate a criminal complaint for violation of the Act by executing his/her own 
affidavit or sworn statement.

Section 75. Where to file complaint. A complaint for violation of the Act shall 
be filed where the offense was committed, or where any of its elements 
occurred, or where the trafficked person actually resides at the time of the 
commission of the offense.  For purposes of inquest or preliminary 
investigation, the complaint may be filed with the DOJ – Office of the Secretary 
of Justice Prosecution Staff (OSJPS), or Provincial/City Prosecution Office 
where the offense or any of its elements has been committed, is being 
committed, or is about to be committed.

Section 76. Commencement of the inquest proceedings. Where a person 
is lawfully arrested without a warrant, the complainant or arresting officer shall 
file a complaint with the DOJ or any local prosecution office.

The inquest proceedings shall be considered commenced upon receipt by the 
inquest prosecutor of the following documents:

(a) 
The affidavit of arrest duly subscribed and sworn to before him/her by 
the arresting officer; 
(b) 
The investigation report; 
(c) 
The sworn statements of the complainant/s and witness/es; 
(d) 
Other supporting pieces of evidence gathered by the LEOs in the 
course of their investigation of the criminal incident involving the 
arrested or detained person; and 
(e) 
Copy of the video from the body-worn camera or any video that would 
show how the respondent was arrested pursuant to the SC Rule on 
Body-Worn Cameras.

Section 77. Commencement of preliminary investigation. A preliminary 
investigation proceeding is commenced:

(a) By the filing of a complaint directly with the DOJ or any local 
prosecution office;

(b) By referral from or upon request of the LEA that investigated the 
incident involving any offense under the Act;

(c) 
Upon request of a person arrested or detained pursuant to an arrest 
without warrant who executes a waiver in accordance with the 
provisions of Article 125 of the Revised Penal Code (RPC);

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[30]

(d) By an order or upon the directive of the court or other competent 
authority; or

(e) Upon the initiative of the Council.

Section 78. Preferential attention to cases of TIP. All cases of TIP shall be 
given preferential attention and should, therefore, be investigated and resolved 
within the periods indicated in the Revised Rules on Criminal Procedures.

Section 79. Prescriptive Period. TIP cases under the Act shall prescribe in 
ten (10) years: Provided, however, That TIP cases committed by a syndicate or 
in a large scale as defined in the Act or against a child, shall prescribe in twenty 
(20) years.

The prescriptive period shall commence to run from the day on which the 
trafficked person is delivered or released from the conditions of bondage, or in 
the case of a trafficked child, from the day the child reaches the age of majority, 
Provided, That in case of trafficked overseas domestic household workers, the 
age of majority shall be twenty-four (24) years old.

The period shall be interrupted by the filing of the complaint or information and 
shall commence to run again when the proceedings terminate without the 
accused being convicted or acquitted or are unjustifiably stopped for any reason 
not imputable to the accused.

Section 80. Institution of civil action. Pursuant to the Revised Rules on 
Criminal Procedure, when a criminal action is instituted, the civil action arising 
from the offense charged shall be deemed instituted with the criminal action 
unless the trafficked person waives the civil action, reserves the right to institute 
it separately or institutes the civil action prior to the criminal action.

Section 81. Filing fees for separate civil action. When the trafficked person 
institutes a separate civil action for the recovery of civil damages, he/she shall 
be exempt from the payment of filing fees.

Section 82. Venue. The offenses punishable under the Act shall be considered 
as a continuing offense and may be filed in Court in the place where the offense 
was committed, or where any of its elements occurred, or where the trafficked 
person actually resides at the time of the commission of the offense. The court 
where the criminal action is first filed shall acquire jurisdiction to the exclusion 
of other courts.

Cases involving TIP shall be heard in the chamber of the RTC duly designated 
as Family Courts.

Section 83. Speedy disposition of TIP cases. Where practicable and unless 
special circumstance require otherwise, the procedures under SC Circular No. 
38-98 implementing the Speedy Trial Act and the Revised Guidelines for

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[31]

Continuous Trial (A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC) may apply in cases involving the trial 
of TIP cases for offenses under the Act.

Pursuant to Office of the Court Administrator (OCA) No. 151-2010 cases 
involving violation of R.A. No. 9208 shall be heard continuously with hearing 
dates spaced not more than two weeks apart.

Article 2 
Prosecution of TIP Cases

Section 84. Designation of Prosecutors. The Secretary of Justice shall 
designate prosecutors who shall investigate and prosecute TIP cases in all 
prosecution offices in the country.

Section 85. Deputation of private prosecutors. Subject to the approval of the 
court, a private prosecutor may be authorized in writing by the Prosecutor 
General, or the head of the local prosecution office where the public prosecutor 
is assigned or appearing in the family court to prosecute the case. Once so 
authorized, the private prosecutor shall continue to prosecute the case up to 
the end of the trial unless the authority is revoked or otherwise withdrawn.

The private prosecutor shall prosecute the case under the control and 
supervision of the public prosecutor assigned or appearing in the Family Court 
where the case has been raffled.

Section 86.  Cooperation with DMW in the prosecution of TIP and illegal 
recruitment cases. Pursuant to R.A. No. 8042, as amended by R.A. No. 10022 
(Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act of 1995), the DOJ prosecutors 
shall collaborate with the Migrant Workers Protection Bureau of the DMW in the 
prosecution of cases involving both illegal recruitment and TIP committed in the 
guise of, or under the pretext of overseas employment.

Article 3 
Prohibitions during Investigation and Prosecution

Section 87. Non-dismissal of TIP cases on the basis of an affidavit of 
desistance. Cases involving TIP should not be dismissed based on the affidavit 
of desistance executed by the trafficked persons or their parents or legal 
guardians. Public and private prosecutors are directed to oppose and manifest 
objections to motions for dismissal.

Section 88. Prohibition against influencing complainant to execute 
affidavit of desistance. It shall be prohibited for any person to perform an act 
involving the means provided in the Act or any attempt thereof for the purpose 
of securing an Affidavit of Desistance from the complainant.

Section 89. Prohibition against urging complainant to abandon legal 
action. It shall be prohibited for the DFA, the Department of Labor and

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[32]

Employment (DOLE), and the DMW officials, LEOs, prosecutors and judges to 
urge complainants to abandon their criminal, civil and administrative complaints 
for TIP.

Section 90. Violation of Sections 88 and 89. The acts under Sections 88 and 
89 herein which refers to Section 8(j) of the Act, as amended, shall be 
considered as acts that promote TIP under Sections 5(h) or 5(j) of the Act and 
shall be punished in accordance with the penalty prescribed for such violation.

Article 4 
Civil Forfeiture Proceedings

Section 91. Provisional remedies under the Rules on Civil Forfeiture. 
Subject to the Rules on Civil Forfeiture, Rule 10 and Rule 12 of the 2018 
Implementing Rules and Regulations of R.A. No. 9160, as amended, when 
probable cause exists that a monetary instrument or property is related to an 
activity involving any of the prohibited acts defined in the Act, the Council or the 
handling public or private prosecutor, social worker, or representative of child-
care institution, may request the assistance of the AMLC in filing:

(a) 
An application/petition for issuance of freeze order;

(b) 
An action for civil forfeiture; and/or

(c) 
A petition for the issuance of provisional asset preservation order.

Section 92. Effect of provisional asset preservation order. In accordance 
with the Rules on Civil Forfeiture, the provisional asset preservation order shall 
forbid any transaction, withdrawal, deposit, transfer, removal, conversion, 
concealment or other disposition of the subject monetary instrument, property, 
or proceeds.

Article 5 
Asset Forfeiture based on Conviction  
in a Criminal Action

Section 93. Forfeiture of the Proceeds and Instruments Derived from TIP. 
The prosecution may pursue criminal forfeiture by an allegation in the criminal 
information that it will institute a case against the subject of the offense, the 
proceeds or the fruits of the offense, or any property used as the means of 
committing an offense.

(a) 
The Rule on Asset Preservation, Seizure, and Forfeiture in Criminal 
Cases under R.A. No. 9160, as amended (A.M. No. 21-03-13-SC), 
shall govern the procedure in the criminal forfeiture of monetary 
instruments or properties related to violations of Sections 4 to 6 of 
the Act.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[33]

(b) 
The trial prosecutor may avail of the provisional remedies in criminal 
cases to ensure the confiscation, preservation and forfeiture of the 
said properties.

(c) 
If the offender is a public officer or employee, the forfeiture of his/her 
property found to be unlawfully acquired shall be governed by R.A. 
No. 1379 (An Act Declaring Forfeiture in Favor of the State Any 
Property Found to Have Been Unlawfully Acquired by Any Public 
Officer or Employee and Providing for the Proceedings Therefor).

Article 6 
Confidentiality of all Proceedings

Section 94. Confidentiality. At any stage of the investigation, rescue, 
prosecution and trial of an offense under this Act, LEOs, prosecutors, judges, 
court personnel, social workers and medical practitioners, as well as parties to 
the case, shall protect the right to privacy of the trafficked person.

The name and personal circumstances of the trafficked person or any other 
information tending to establish the identity of the trafficked person or his/her 
family, which may include the identity of the suspect, shall not be disclosed to 
the public.

Section 95. Duties of Officers. LEOs, prosecutors and judges to whom the 
complaint has been referred may, whenever necessary to ensure a fair and 
impartial proceeding, and after considering all circumstances for the best 
interest of the parties, order a closed-door investigation, prosecution or trial.

The abovementioned officers and professionals shall be trained on the 
importance of maintaining confidentiality as a means to protect the right to 
privacy of trafficked persons and to encourage trafficked persons to file 
complaints and assess validity of any waiver of confidentiality.

RULE VI 
VICTIM PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE

Article 1 
Overall Policy

Section 96. Overall policy on victim protection and assistance. Measures 
shall be established to ensure that trafficked persons are protected from further 
exploitation and harm, and shall have access to adequate physical and 
psychosocial care. Responsible agencies shall ensure that protection and 
assistance services to trafficked persons are provided in a child- and gender-
sensitive manner.

Section 97. Immediate Protection of Trafficked Persons. Trafficked persons 
of all ages shall be entitled to immediate temporary protective shelter from the

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[34]

DSWD: Provided, That if the trafficked person is located outside the Philippines, 
the relevant FSPs or MWO  shall provide the same; Provided further, That a 
LEO, on a reasonable suspicion that a person is a trafficked person shall 
immediately place that person in the temporary custody of  the LSWDO or any 
accredited licensed shelter institution devoted to protecting trafficked persons 
after the rescue. 
Trafficked children shall immediately be placed under the protective custody of 
the DSWD, pursuant to R.A. No. 7610 (Special Protection of Children Against 
Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination Act). 
Article 2 
Legal Protection for Trafficked Persons

Section 98. Non-liability of Trafficked Persons. The consent of the trafficked 
person to the intended exploitation is irrelevant. Trafficked persons shall not be 
penalized for unlawful acts committed as a direct result of, or as an incident or 
in relation to, being trafficked, or in obedience to the order made by the trafficker 
in relation to said acts.

Section 99. Repeal of Article 202 of the RPC. Section 21 of the Act repealed 
Article 202 of the RPC, as amended by R.A. No. 10158 (An Act Decriminalizing 
Vagrancy, Amending for This Purpose, Article 202 of Act No. 3815); 
accordingly, trafficked persons shall no longer be prosecuted, fined or 
penalized for prostitution and vagrancy.

Section 100. No liability for Wiretapping and/or illegal interception. 
Trafficked persons, of whatever age, shall not be liable under the provisions of 
R.A. No. 4200 or R.A. No. 10175, (Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012) if they 
record, transmit, or perform any other acts directly or indirectly related to the 
reporting of any violation of this Act committed against them.

Section 101. Right to Privacy. (a) The name and personal circumstances of 
a trafficked person or any other information tending to establish their identity 
and their families shall not be disclosed to the public. 
(b)   
All records and proceedings under this Act, from the initial contact until 
the final disposition of the case, shall be considered privileged and confidential.

Section 102. Prohibition against victim-blaming. Persons, officials, officers, 
agencies or organizations involved in the reporting, investigation, or trial of 
cases of gender- based violence shall refrain from any act or statement that 
may be construed as blaming the victim or placing responsibility for the offense 
committed against the trafficked person.

Section 103. Irrelevance of past sexual behavior. The past sexual behavior 
or the sexual predisposition of a trafficked person shall be considered 
inadmissible in evidence for the purpose of proving consent of the trafficked

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[35]

person to engage in sexual behavior, or to prove the predisposition, sexual or 
otherwise, of a trafficked person.

Article 3 
Witness Protection

Section 104. Preferential Entitlement under the Witness Protection 
Security and Benefits Program (WPSBP). Trafficked persons and their family 
members shall be entitled to protection as well as preferential entitlement to the 
rights and benefits of witnesses under R.A. No. 6981 (Witness Protection, 
Security and Benefit Act), Provided, That the trafficked person or family 
member possess all the qualifications and none of the disqualifications under 
the said law.

Section 105. Application for coverage. The LEO, service provider handling 
the case of a trafficked person, the trafficked person, a witness, or a family 
member of the trafficked person or witness, may file an application for coverage 
at the WPSBP Secretariat at the DOJ Office in Manila or the nearest local 
prosecution office through the handling prosecutor.

The handling prosecutor shall endorse the application to the WPSBP 
Secretariat, stating therein the urgency or necessity of such coverage.

Article 4 
Compensation for Trafficked Persons

Section 106.  Compensation for Trafficked Persons under R.A. No. 7309. 
A trafficked person shall also be considered as a victim of a violent crime as 
defined under Section 3 (d) of R.A. No. 7309 (An Act Creating a Board of Claims 
Under the Department of Justice for Victims of Unjust Imprisonment or 
Detention and Victim of Violent Crimes and for Other Purposes), so that the 
trafficked person may claim compensation therein.

Article 5 
Protection of Trafficked Persons who are Foreign Nationals

Section 107. Legal Protection of trafficked persons who are foreign 
nationals. Trafficked person in the Philippines who are nationals of a foreign 
country shall be entitled to appropriate protection, assistance and services 
available to trafficked person and shall be allowed continued presence in the 
Philippines for a period of fifty-nine (59) days to enable them to effect the 
prosecution of the offenders. Such period may be renewed upon showing of 
proof by the trial prosecutor that their further testimony is essential to the 
prosecution of the case. The trial prosecutor shall course the request for 
extension to the Council, which shall accordingly act upon the same. If such 
request is granted, the registration and immigration fees of such foreign

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[36]

nationals shall be waived. The Council, for this purpose, shall develop 
additional guidelines to implement this provision.

Section 108. Trafficked persons who are asylum seekers and refugees. 
Disclosure of personal data of foreign nationals who are trafficked persons in 
the Philippines and have a pending asylum application with, or have been 
recognized as refugees by, the DOJ-Refugees and Stateless Persons 
Protection Unit (RSPPU) should only be done with the trafficked person’s freely 
given, informed, and written or recorded consent. In cases when consent is not 
required or when disclosure is necessary to prevent serious, foreseeable, and 
imminent harm to trafficked person or to another person, disclosure shall be 
made only in accordance with the exception under Section 13 of R.A. No. 10173 
(Data Privacy Act of 2012).

Article 6 
Free Legal Assistance and Counsel

Section 109. Free legal services. Trafficked persons shall be provided with 
free legal services which shall include information about their rights and the 
procedure for filing complaints, claiming compensation and such other legal 
remedies available to them, in a language understood by the trafficked person.

Section 110. Establishment of free legal assistance mechanism. The DOJ 
shall establish a mechanism for free legal assistance for trafficked persons, in 
coordination with DSWD. It shall endeavor to enter into a Memorandum of 
Agreement (MOA) with the Integrated Bar of the Philippines (IBP) as well as 
with NGOS and volunteer legal groups for the provision of legal assistance to 
trafficked persons. The DOJ or the Council shall conduct a training program for 
the IBP and volunteer groups on assistance and protection of trafficked persons 
and the Act.

Section 111. Free legal assistance for Filipino trafficked persons of 
international TIP. The DFA shall provide free legal assistance and counsel to 
Filipinos trafficked overseas in order to pursue legal action against the 
traffickers, represent their interests in any criminal investigation or prosecution, 
and assist in the application for social benefits and/or regular immigration status 
as may be allowed by the host country.

Such free legal assistance shall be funded through the Legal Assistance Fund 
(LAF) established under R.A. No. 8042, as amended.

The DMW and OWWA shall extend free legal assistance to persons trafficked 
under the pretext of, or by means of recruitment for overseas employment. This 
free legal assistance shall include legal advice; assistance in the preparation 
and filing of administrative, labor and/or criminal actions; and assistance in the 
prosecution of persons who engage in, promote and facilitate TIP by means of, 
or in the guise of, recruitment for overseas employment.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[37]

Such assistance shall be coordinated with the DFA, especially when the 
trafficked persons are found in destination or transit countries.

Article 7 
Mandatory Services

Section 112. Information on available programs and services. All service 
providers shall immediately provide information to trafficked persons about their 
rights, the nature of protection and available assistance and support. Such 
information shall be provided in a language that the trafficked persons 
understand.

When the trafficked person is a child, interviews, examination and other forms 
of investigation shall be conducted by specially trained professionals in a 
suitable environment and in a language that the child uses and understands. In 
all stages of the proceedings, all officials involved shall ensure that the best 
interests of the child are upheld and protected.

As much as possible, to avoid repetitive interviews which may cause the re-
traumatization of trafficked persons, interviews of trafficked children shall be 
recorded pursuant to the requirements under the Rule on Examination of Child 
Witness (A.M. NO. 004-07-SC).

Section 113.  Mandatory Services to Trafficked Persons. To ensure 
recovery, rehabilitation and reintegration into the mainstream of society, 
concerned government agencies shall make available the following services to 
trafficked persons:

(a) 
Temporary shelter or appropriate housing. – The government shall 
ensure that trafficked persons shall have access to temporary 
shelter. The DSWD and LGUs shall provide temporary shelter to 
trafficked persons through the TIP Center or in any DSWD shelters 
or DSWD–accredited shelters. The MWO shall provide temporary 
shelter to trafficked persons located abroad.

(b) 
Counseling. – The DSWD and LGUs shall ensure that trafficked 
persons are provided with appropriate counseling services. The DOH 
shall also provide the necessary assistance to trafficked persons to 
promote their mental health by improving access to quality care and 
hasten their recovery to participate fully in society.

(c) 
Free legal services. – Trafficked persons shall be informed of their 
rights and the procedure for filing complaints, claiming compensation 
and such other legal remedies available to them, in a language 
understood by them.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[38]

(d) 
Medical or psychological services. – Trafficked persons needing 
medical and psychological or psychiatric services, particularly those 
who are assessed to be suffering from or may be vulnerable to 
psychological injury, shall be referred to appropriate agencies or 
institutions for such services. The DOH shall make available its 
resources and facilities in providing health care to trafficked persons 
which shall, at all times be held confidential.

(e) 
Livelihood and skills training. – The DOLE, DSWD, Technical 
Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA), National 
Reintegration Center for OFWs (NRCO), LGUs, and other 
government agencies shall facilitate and create access to livelihood, 
skills training and sustainable employment for trafficked persons and 
their families.

(f) 
Educational assistance to a trafficked child. – Department of 
Education (DepEd) shall provide opportunities for trafficked persons 
in the educational mainstream through the basic education and non-
formal education curricula.

Article 8 
Recovery, Rehabilitation and Reintegration Programs

Section 114. Comprehensive Healing, Recovery, Rehabilitation and 
Reintegration Program. (a) The DSWD, LGUs, NGOs and other concerned 
agencies shall develop and implement a comprehensive, child-friendly and 
gender-responsive program for the recovery, rehabilitation and reintegration of 
trafficked persons, such as educational assistance to trafficked person and their 
immediate family; support for trafficked persons as witnesses; transportation 
assistance; financial assistance for employment; and financial assistance for 
livelihood.

(b)  
The active involvement and participation of trafficked persons in the 
rehabilitation and reintegration process shall be encouraged. In order to 
empower them and to prevent their re-victimization, capability building 
programs must be provided.

(c)  
The active cooperation and coordination with NGOs and other members 
of the civil society, including the business community, tourism-related 
industries, or media in the rehabilitation and reintegration of trafficked persons 
shall be undertaken.

(d)  
The LGUs shall be responsible for the proper implementation of the 
recovery and reintegration program for trafficked persons; Provided, That the 
DSWD shall monitor and evaluate the implementation of the program and 
conduct an audit of LSWDOs.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[MOCK TRANSLATION] (a) 
The trafficked person may go or be brought to the nearest DSWD, 
LSWDO or accredited NGO for assistance;

Section 115. Case management procedures. All service providers shall be 
guided by a case management manual for trafficked persons developed by 
DSWD.

The following minimum procedures shall be observed by all service providers 
in implementing a comprehensive program for the recovery, rehabilitation and 
reintegration of trafficked persons:

The trafficked person may go to or be brought to the nearest DSWD, LSWDO or accredited NGO for assistance;

(b) 
The DSWD, LSWDO or accredited NGO social worker shall conduct 
an assessment of the psychosocial condition of the trafficked person. 
Thereafter, an intake interview and initial assessment shall be 
conducted utilizing a child- or gender-sensitive and trauma-informed 
interview method to determine the appropriate intervention. On the 
basis of such assessment, a responsive action through planning and 
intervention plan shall be prepared;

(c) 
The DSWD, LSWDO or accredited NGO social worker shall, when 
necessary, admit the trafficked person to a residential facility for 
temporary shelter. Upon admission, the head of the center or facility 
shall immediately inform the local social worker from the trafficked 
person’s origin or place of residence and invite said social worker to 
the admission conference in order to facilitate the future reintegration 
process;

(d) 
Provide comprehensive services or interventions based on the 
rehabilitation plan, in coordination with appropriate agencies, 
including temporary shelter, medical assistance, counseling, 
psychological services, legal, educational assistance, transportation 
assistance, livelihood and skills training, after-care services, and 
other appropriate services. The DSWD, LSWDO or accredited NGO 
social workers shall also monitor implementation and periodically 
evaluate or update the rehabilitation plan until the trafficked person 
has been reintegrated with their family and community.

Section 116. Case documentation and referrals. All DSWD, LSWDO or 
accredited NGO case managers or social workers shall use the National 
Recovery and Reintegration Database (NRRD) for documenting and tracking 
delivery of services to trafficked persons and the National Referral System 
(NRS) in facilitating and documenting referrals.

Section 117. Continuing capability building of service providers. (a) The 
frontline agencies and the service providers, including LEAs, social workers, 
ATN at FSPs, police and other relevant attachés, OWWA welfare officers, 
Commission on Filipinos Overseas (CFO) case officers, medical practitioners, 
must undergo training and other capability building activities to enhance their

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[40]

knowledge and skills in child and gender-sensitive and trauma-informed 
handling of TIP cases to prevent further traumatic stress and facilitate more 
effective crisis interventions, recovery and reintegration services.

(b)  
The DSWD shall likewise implement training programs for the utilization 
of the NRRD and NRS, trauma-informed care and gender-responsive case 
management by case managers and social workers, in coordination with 
RRPTP focal, LGUs and NGOs.

(c)  
DFA-foreign service institute shall integrate a module on management 
of TIP cases in the pre-departure orientation seminar for all deployable 
personnel including all relevant attachés.

Section 118. Documentation of good practices. The DSWD shall conduct 
data banking, research and documentation of good practices in rehabilitation 
and reintegration programs. It shall identify efficient and effective measures and 
services for the trafficked persons and their families. For this purpose, the 
DSWD shall convene a periodic program review and sharing sessions.

Section 119. Accreditation of residential facilities and recovery and 
reintegration program standards. The DSWD shall develop and/or 
continually evaluate accreditation and recovery and reintegration program 
standards for residential facilities catering to trafficked persons. It shall provide 
technical assistance to LGUs and NGOs with such facilities and programs to 
ensure compliance with standards.

Section 120. Harmonization of reintegration programs. The DSWD, DOLE, 
DILG, OWWA, DMW-NRCO, TESDA, LGUs and NGOs shall harmonize their 
respective reintegration programs for trafficked persons.

RULE VII 
PROTECTION FOR SERVICE PROVIDERS

Section. 121. Immunity from suit, prohibited acts and injunctive remedies. 
No action or suit shall be brought, instituted or maintained in any court or 
tribunal or before any other authority against any: (a) law enforcement officer; 
(b) social worker; or (c) person acting in compliance with a lawful order from 
any of the above, for lawful acts done or statements made during an authorized 
rescue operation, recovery or rehabilitation/intervention, or an investigation or 
prosecution of a TIP case; Provided, That such acts shall have been made in 
good faith.

Whenever a complaint is brought against any of the officers mentioned above 
the resolving investigator shall promptly resolve the complaint.

In the regular performance of this function, the DSWD shall be free from any 
administrative, civil, or criminal liability. Custody proceedings shall be in

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

accordance with the provisions of P.D. No. 603 (Child and Youth Welfare 
Code).

Section 122. Social protection. Agency heads shall take all possible 
measures to ensure protection including but not limited to hazard pay, 
insurance, psychosocial services, psychological services and/or counseling for 
job-related stress and secondary trauma and safety of service providers in the 
performance of their duties under the Act and these rules and regulations.

Section 123. Duty to disclose and act on threat against service providers. 
Service providers shall report to their superior, LEAs and other appropriate units 
any threat, harassment, or any form of danger that they may encounter in the 
course of the performance of duties.

Agency heads shall immediately take appropriate action on reports, formal or 
non-formal, written or verbal, of any threat, harassment, or any form of danger 
brought to their attention.

RULE VIII
IMPLEMENTATION MECHANISMS

Article 1 
The Inter-Agency Council Against Trafficking

Section 124. IACAT and its Composition.  The Council shall be the primary 
body 
responsible 
for 
coordinating, 
monitoring 
and 
overseeing 
the 
implementation of the Act. It shall be chaired by the Secretary of Justice and 
co-chaired by the Secretary of Social Welfare and Development. It shall have 
the following as members:

(a) 
Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs; 
(b) 
Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment; 
(c) 
Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local Government 
(d) 
Secretary, Department of Education; 
(e) 
Secretary, Department of Health; 
(f) 
Secretary, Department of Information Communications Technology;  
(g) 
Secretary, Department of Migrant Workers; 
(h) 
Secretary, Department of Tourism; 
(i) 
Secretary, Department of Transportation;  
(j) 
Administrator, Philippine Overseas Employment Administration; 
(k) 
Commissioner, Bureau of Immigration; 
(l) 
Chief, Philippine National Police; 
(m) 
Commandant, Philippine Coast Guard;  
(n) 
Chairperson, Philippine Commission on Women;   
(o) 
Chairperson, Commission on Filipinos Overseas;  
(p) 
Chairperson, National Commission on Indigenous Peoples; 
(q) 
Director, National Bureau of Investigation;  
(r) 
Executive Director, Philippine Center for Transnational Crimes;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[42]

(s) 
Executive Director, Council for the Welfare of Children;  
(t) 
Executive Director, National Authority for Child Care;  
(u) 
Executive Director, Anti-Money Laundering Council;  
(v) 
President of the League Provinces of the Philippines;  
(w) 
President of the League Municipalities of the Philippines; 
(x) 
President of the League Cities of the Philippines; 
(y) 
One (1) representative from an NGO representing the women sector; 
(z) 
One (1) representative from an NGO representing the overseas 
Filipinos sector; and 
(aa) 
One (1) representative from an NGO representing the children 
sector.

The members of the Council may designate their permanent representatives 
who shall have a rank not lower than an assistant secretary or its equivalent to 
meetings, and shall receive emoluments as may be determined by the Council

Section 125. Qualifications, Selection and Appointment of NGO and its 
Representatives. (a) The minimum qualifications of the NGO members are the 
following:

(1) Duly licensed and registered non-stock, non-profit, and non-
government organization in the Philippines and accredited by the 
DSWD listed in its Registry of Social Welfare Development 
Agencies in the Philippines;

(2) Has a proven track record of implementing anti-trafficking programs 
or services nationwide for at least five (5) years;

(3) Majority of its clients/beneficiaries belong to the sector it seeks to 
represent; and

(4) Has no pending criminal, civil, or administrative cases or 
investigation before any office, court or tribunal.

If the NGO is a member of a national or international coalition or federation, a 
significant segment of its network is composed of organizations and individuals 
belonging to the sector it represents.

(b)  
The NGO shall be represented by its head or managing officer, who shall 
have the following qualifications:

(1) Has been involved in anti-trafficking work for at least two (2) years; 
and

(2) Has no pending criminal, civil, or administrative cases or 
investigation before any office, court or tribunal.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[43]

(c)  
The NGO and its representative shall be nominated by any government 
agency Council member. The Council shall, by a majority vote, select the NGO 
and its representative for endorsement to the President of the Philippines.

(d)  
The President shall appoint the NGO and its representatives for a term 
of three (3) years, and may be re-appointed for another three-year term. Until 
the President of the Philippines appoints new NGO members, the existing NGO 
members shall seat in a hold-over capacity in the Council.

(e)  
The Council, through a resolution adopted unanimously, may 
recommend to the President the revocation of the appointment of the NGO and 
its representative, when the NGO and its representative failed to comply with 
the minimum requirements or qualifications of a sectoral representative, or for 
justifiable grounds.

Section 126. Functions of the Council. The Council shall have the following 
powers and functions:

(a) Formulate a comprehensive and integrated program to prevent and 
suppress TIP, utilizing a multi-disciplinary and collaborative approach 
in the service delivery to, and case management of, trafficked persons 
and their families, including livelihood opportunities, and the 
development of school-based and community-based TIP preventive 
education programs, and psychosocial interventions by a multi-
disciplinary team for the trafficked person and their families;

(b) Promulgate rules and regulations as may be necessary for the effective implementation of the Act;

(c) 
Monitor and oversee the strict implementation of the Act;

(d) Coordinate the programs and projects of the various member agencies 
to effectively address the issues and problems attendant to TIP;

(e) Coordinate the conduct of massive information dissemination and 
campaign on the law, the various issues and emerging trends of TIP;

(f) 
Direct other agencies to immediately respond to the problems brought 
to their attention and report to the Council on action taken;

(g) Assist in filing of cases against individuals, agencies, institutions or 
establishments that violate the provisions of the Act;

(h) Strengthen existing programs for the reintegration of trafficked persons 
in cooperation with DOLE, DSWD, DMW, TESDA, Commission on 
Higher Education (CHED), LGUs and NGOs;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[44]

(i) 
Secure from any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality 
of the government or from NGOs and other civic organizations such 
assistance as may be needed to effectively implement the Act;

(j) 
Complement the shared government information system for migration 
established under R. A. No. 8042, as amended, with data on TIP cases 
and ensure that the proper agencies conduct a continuing research 
and study on the patterns and scheme of TIP which shall form the basis 
for policy formulation and program direction;

(k) 
Strengthen mechanisms to ensure the timely, coordinated, and 
effective response to TIP cases;

(l) 
Develop measures to enhance cooperative efforts and mutual 
assistance among foreign countries through bilateral and/or 
multilateral arrangements to prevent and suppress international TIP;

(m) Coordinate with the Department of Information and Communications 
Technology (DICT), Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), and other 
NGOs in monitoring the promotion of advertisements that tend to 
promote TIP;

(n) Adopt measures and policies to protect the rights and needs of 
trafficked persons who are foreign nationals in the Philippines;

(o) Initiate training programs in identifying and providing the necessary 
intervention or assistance to trafficked persons;

(p) Regularly assess current data collection on, and the reporting and 
monitoring system for, TIP, and identify gaps in implementation;

(q) Develop an effective referral system which concerned government 
agencies and NGOs can use to coordinate the provision of the 
necessary intervention or assistance that can be provided to trafficked 
persons;

(r) 
Conduct periodic studies with other stakeholders, such as LGUs, civil 
society, and the academe to build more empirical evidence on TIP 
cases;

(s) 
Develop an integrated case management system or TIP data sets to 
facilitate the coordination and monitoring among the members of the 
Council and ensure the proper recovery and reintegration of the 
trafficked persons;

(t) 
Impose administrative sanctions on the violations of the Act and its 
implementing rules and regulations as well as its order and resolutions; 
and

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[45]

**Memorandum Circular No. 2023-08**

**TO** : All Heads of Departments, Agencies, Bureaus, and Offices of the Executive Branch;
Provincial Governors, City Mayors, and Municipal Mayors;
All Others Concerned

**SUBJECT** : Adoption of the Philippine Qualifications Framework (PQF) as Basis for Hiring, Promotion, and Training and Development of Government Personnel

WHEREAS, the 1987 Constitution mandates the State to provide equal access to opportunities for public service and to merit and equality in employment; WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 83, series of 2012, adopted the Philippine Qualifications Framework (PQF) as the national framework for recognizing, articulating, and certifying qualifications based on competencies, knowledge, skills, and attitudes; WHEREAS, the Civil Service Commission (CSC) and the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) jointly issued Resolution No. 2018-01, prescribing the implementation of the PQF in the civil service; WHEREAS, there is a need to ensure that the hiring, promotion, and training and development of government personnel are aligned with the PQF to enhance the quality of public service and promote career progression; NOW, THEREFORE, the President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in him by law, hereby orders:

**SECTION 1. Adoption of the PQF.** – All departments, agencies, bureaus, and offices of the Executive Branch, including Local Government Units (LGUs), are hereby directed to adopt the PQF as the basis for hiring, promotion, and training and development of government personnel.

**SECTION 2. Responsibilities of Government Agencies.** – Each government agency shall:

a. Review and update its job descriptions and qualification standards to align with the PQF levels;
b. Utilize the PQF levels in the screening, evaluation, and selection of applicants for vacant positions;
c. Incorporate the PQF levels in the performance evaluation system to assess the competencies of government personnel;
d. Design and implement training and development programs that are aligned with the PQF levels to enhance the skills and knowledge of government personnel;
e. Submit an annual report to the Civil Service Commission (CSC) on the implementation of the PQF, including the number of personnel assessed and trained based on the PQF.

**SECTION 3. Role of the Civil Service Commission.** – The CSC shall provide technical assistance and guidance to government agencies in the implementation of the PQF, including the development of competency-based assessment tools and training programs.

**SECTION 4. Effectivity.** – This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

(u) Exercise all the powers and perform such other functions necessary to 
attain the purposes and objectives of the Act.

Section 127. Reportorial Function. The Council shall submit to the Office of 
the President of the Philippines an annual comprehensive report on the actions 
and programs taken by the Council relative to, and concerning, the 
implementation of the Act every 15th   of January of each year.

Each Member of the Council shall submit a quarterly report to the IACAT 
Secretariat on the anti-trafficking programs and initiatives taken by their 
respective agencies or organizations for consolidation to the report to submitted 
to the President.

Section 128. Meetings of the Council. The Council shall meet regularly at 
least once every quarter. Special meetings may be called by the Chair as the 
need arises. Majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum 
to transact business.

Section 129. Honoraria or Emoluments. The Members of the Council or their 
designated permanent representatives shall receive honoraria or emoluments 
as may be determined by the Council in accordance with existing budget and 
accounting rules and regulations.

Article 2 
Secretariat

Section 130. Organization. The Secretariat for the Council is established in 
accordance with Section 22 of the Act. To ensure the effective operation and 
implementation of its functions and the efficient delivery of services, the 
Secretariat shall be composed of the Operations Division and Policy and 
Program Division, comprising various operational sections, such as, the 
Training Section, Public Information and Communications Section, Case 
Monitoring and Task Force Section, Planning Section and External Affairs 
Section.

The Secretary of Justice shall review the organizational structure of the 
Secretariat vis-a-vis its functions for the purpose of increasing the staff. Such 
organizational structure and staffing pattern shall be submitted to the 
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) for its approval.

Section 131. Functions. The IACAT Secretariat shall provide support for the 
functions and projects of the Council and shall have the following functions:

(a) Coordinate and monitor the implementation of the policies and 
guidelines promulgated by the Council;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

(b) Oversee the various programs and projects initiated and funded by the 
Council or in partnership with other government agencies and NGOs;

(c) 
Maintain and manage a central database on TIP;

(d) Prepare an annual report on TIP and such other reports as may be 
required by the Council;

(e) Organize forum to share the report among policy makers and other key 
stakeholders to generate recommendations for policy reform and 
program development or enhancement;

(f) 
Update manuals, guidelines and other similar instruments as may be 
necessary to enhance victim identification procedures, protection and 
assistance to trafficked persons, and investigation and prosecution of 
cases, and strengthen inter-agency collaboration.

(g) Assist in developing a child- age- and gender-sensitive integrated 
human resource development program for all government officials and 
personnel dealing with the issue of TIP;

(h) Provide secretariat, record- keeping and other services to the Council; 
and

(i) 
Perform such other functions as may be directed by the Council.

Section 132. Head of the Secretariat. The Secretariat shall be headed by an 
Executive Director and shall be appointed by the Secretary of Justice, upon the 
recommendation of the Council. The Executive Director shall be under the 
direct supervision of the Secretary of Justice.

He shall be assisted by two (2) Deputy Executive Directors for each division.

Section 133. Qualifications of the Executive Director. The Executive 
Director must have adequate knowledge on TIP and sufficient education, 
training and experience in the field of law, law enforcement, social work, 
criminology or psychology.

Section 134. Functions of the Executive Director. The Executive Director 
shall perform the following functions:

(a) Act as secretary of the Council and shall be the technical and 
administrative head of its Secretariat;

(b) Advise and assist the Chairperson in formulating and implementing the 
policies, plans and programs of the Council, including mobilization of 
the member agencies of the Council as well as other relevant 
government offices, task forces, and organizations;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[47]

(c) 
Serve as principal assistant to the Chairperson in the overall 
supervision of Council’s administrative business;

(d) Oversee and supervise all operations and activities of the Secretariat;

(e) Propose effective allocation and mobilization of resources, including 
the annual budget for anti-trafficking plans and programs;

(f) 
Prepare and submit annual and other periodic reports to the Council, 
the President and Congress on the state of the anti-trafficking 
campaign in the country; and

(g) Perform such other duties as the Council may assign.

Section 135. Special units established by the Council. The operations of 
the special units of the Council shall be supervised by the Secretariat, including 
the following:

(a) IACAT Operation Center (OpCen);
(b) Home of Your Hope (TIP Center);
(c) Advocacy and Communications Committee (ADVOCOM);
(d) IACAT Cyber-Trafficking in Persons Unit (ICTU); and
(e) Victim-Witness Coordinator (VWC) Program.

Article 3 
The Philippine Anti-Trafficking Database

Section 136. Review and full implementation of the Philippine Anti-
Trafficking in Persons Database (PATD). The Council shall review the PATD 
for the purpose of enhancing its features. The process shall also include the 
review of the existing data bases, such as but not limited to, NRRD, Integrated 
Case Management System (ICMS) and the Prosecutor’s TIP Case 
Management System (PTCMS). The PATD shall serve as the central anti-
trafficking database referred to in Section 16-A of the Act. For this purpose, the 
IACAT Secretariat shall develop the operations manual of the PATD that will 
include requirements for authorizing and monitoring access to the database.

The IACAT Secretariat shall be the administrator of the PATD.

Section 137. Harmonization and standardization of databases. To ensure 
efficient data collection, the Council, through the Secretariat, shall undertake 
measures to harmonize and standardize relevant databases, especially as 
regards minimum data requirements, definitions, reporting formats, data 
collection systems, and data verification systems. It shall make sure that such 
databases shall have, at the minimum, the following information:

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[48]

(a) The number of cases of TIP, sorted according to status of cases, 
including the number of cases being investigated, submitted for 
prosecution, dropped, and filed and/or pending before the courts and 
the number of convictions and acquittals;

(b) The profile/information on each case;

(c) 
The number of trafficked persons referred to the agency disaggregated 
by destination countries/areas and by area of origin; and

(d) Data 
on 
trafficked 
persons 
and 
the 
accused/defendants, 
disaggregated by age, sex, ethnicity, and type of disability, if any.

Section 138. Agency-based monitoring and data collection system. All 
government agencies tasked under the law to undertake programs and render 
assistance to address TIP shall develop their respective monitoring and data 
collection systems and databases, for purposes of ensuring efficient collection 
and storage of data on TIP cases handled by their respective offices. Such data 
shall be submitted to the Council for integration.

Article 4 
Roles and Responsibilities of Relevant Agencies

Section 139. Common roles and responsibilities of Council member 
agencies. All member government agencies of the Council shall have the 
following common roles and responsibilities:

(a) 
Develop the necessary agency child- and gender-sensitive policies 
and programs supportive and consistent with the objectives of the 
Act;

(b) 
Enhance the capability of its officers and personnel involved in TIP 
issues and concerns, particularly on emerging trends of TIP through 
appropriate training and staff support programs;

(c) 
Undertake information, education and advocacy campaigns against 
TIP, in consultation with the Council and the Secretariat to achieve 
efficiency and greater impact;

(d) 
Maintain a database on TIP, disaggregated by age, sex, ethnicity, 
and type of disability, if any, to be shared among relevant agencies 
and complement the central database to be established by the 
Council;

(e) 
Document good practices as bases for policy formulation and 
program development;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

(f) 
Undertake regular monitoring and evaluation of their anti-trafficking 
programs, and submit annual reports for consolidation of the IACAT 
Secretariat; and

(g) 
Ensure to provide or include in their annual budget/appropriation 
funds for the implementation of anti-trafficking programs and 
initiatives.

Section 140. Specific Roles and Responsibilities of Council Member 
Agencies. The following national government agencies shall have, but not 
limited to, the following roles and responsibilities in the prevention and 
suppression of TIP and the protection and assistance of trafficked persons:

Agency 
Roles and Responsibilities 
(a) Department 
of 
Justice (DOJ)

(1) Ensure the prosecution of persons accused of TIP.

(2) Designate and train special prosecutors who shall handle 
and prosecute TIP cases.

(3) Provide legal and technical advice to the LEAs.

(4) Facilitate international and mutual legal assistance on the 
preservation and production of computer data and collection 
of electronic evidence.

(5) Establish a mechanism for free legal assistance for trafficked 
persons, in coordination with the DSWD, IBP and other 
NGOs and volunteer groups.

(6) Conduct trainings and continuous education programs on 
investigation and prosecution for TIP and other related 
offenses for prosecutors and LEOs.

(7) Make or process requests for mutual legal assistance or 
extradition.

(8) Coordinate 
with 
international 
law 
enforcement 
and 
prosecution authorities for the prosecution of human 
traffickers with a cross-border element.

(9) Institutionalize, in coordination with BI, border control 
mechanisms to enforce the provisions of this Act.

(10) Coordinate with and provide assistance to AMLC on cases 
of TIP with possible money laundry underpinnings.

(11) Review and recommend policies and measures to enhance 
protection against TIP.

(12) Negotiate mutual legal assistance and extradition treaties 
with other countries in coordination with the DFA.

(b) Department 
of 
Social 
Welfare 
and 
(1) Develop 
gender-responsive 
and 
trauma-informed 
counseling, rehabilitative, and protective programs for 
trafficked persons including prevention, rehabilitation, and

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[50]

Development 
(DSWD) 
reintegration programs for children, taking into consideration 
the unique needs and requirements to enable them to cope 
with the trauma that they have suffered on account of TIP.

(2) Ensure that the national recovery and reintegration database 
is updated and maintained, and that the national referral 
system which shall coincide with the local referral system, 
shall be implemented.

(3) Establish free temporary shelters for the protection and 
housing of trafficked persons for the provision of 
psychological support and counseling, 24-hour call center for 
crisis calls and technology-based counseling and referral 
system.

(4) Conduct information campaigns in communities and schools, 
teaching parents and families that receiving consideration in 
exchange for adoption is punishable under the law.

(5) Conduct information campaigns to educate and enjoin 
parents not to give their children up for adoption in exchange 
for any consideration.

(6) Develop a system for accreditation among NGOs for 
purposes of establishing centers and programs for 
intervention in various levels of the community.

(7) Develop and implement a healing, recovery and reintegration 
program for trafficked persons under Section 24 of the Act.

(c) Department 
of 
Foreign 
Affairs 
(DFA 
(1) Make available its resources and facilities for trafficked 
persons regardless of their manner of entry to the receiving 
country.

(2) Explore means to further enhance its assistance in 
eliminating TIP activities through closer networking with 
government agencies in the country and overseas.

(3) Provide Filipino trafficked persons overseas with free legal 
assistance and counsel to pursue legal action against his/her 
traffickers, who shall represent his/her interests in any 
criminal investigation or prosecution.

(4) Assist the trafficked persons in the application for social 
benefits and/or regular immigration status as may be allowed 
or provided for by the host country.

(5) Repatriate trafficked persons with their consent of the 
victims, and assist in the prosecution of their traffickers.

(6) Take necessary measures for the efficient implementation of 
the e-passporting system.

(7) In coordination with DMW, shall provide free temporary 
shelters and other services to Filipino trafficked persons 
overseas through the MWO.

(8) In coordination with the BI and the DOJ, shall:

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[51] Ang Komisyon ay magbibigay ng sapat na notice sa lahat ng partido sa kaso hinggil sa petsa, oras, at lugar ng pagdinig. Ang notice na ito ay ihahatid sa pamamagitan ng personal na paghahatid, rehistradong koreo, o iba pang paraan na nakasaad sa mga patakaran ng Komisyon.

The Commission shall provide adequate notice to all parties in the case regarding the date, time, and place of the hearing. This notice shall be served by personal delivery, registered mail, or other means as provided in the rules of the Commission.

(i) Ensure, as far as practicable, that all convicted sex 
offenders in all jurisdictions, or those listed in the registry 
of sex offenders in their own countries shall not be 
allowed entry in the Philippines;

(ii) Develop mechanisms to ensure the timely, coordinated, 
and effective response to cross-border TIP cases;

(iii) Provide immediate protection, repatriation, or both, to 
Filipino trafficked persons overseas;

(iv) Recommend measure and undertake joint activities to 
enhance cooperative efforts and mutual assistance 
among foreign countries through bilateral or multi-lateral 
arrangements to promote the registration of TIP and sex 
offenders and their notification to persons concerned;

(v) Adopt measures and policies to protect the rights and 
needs of trafficked persons who are foreign nationals or 
asylum seekers, refugees, stateless applicants and 
stateless persons in the Philippines; and foreign NGOs 
caring for and protecting trafficked persons; and

(vi) Initiate training programs to capacitate government 
agents and NGOs in identifying and providing the 
necessary measures for intervention or assistance to 
trafficked persons.

(9) Ensure that all responsible officers in the Foreign Service 
shall advise the DMW, through the fastest means of 
communication available, the discovery and other relevant 
information on said trafficked migrant workers.

(d) Department 
of 
Labor 
and 
Employment 
(DOLE) 
(1) Ensure the strict implementation and compliance with the 
rules and guidelines relative to standard labor conditions and 
the employment of persons locally and across all sectors.

(2) Monitor, document and report TIP cases involving employers 
and formal and informal labor recruiters across all sectors.

(3) Provide employment facilitation and livelihood opportunities 
to trafficked persons.

(4) Assist in the prosecution of employers hiring trafficked 
foreign nationals.

(5) In coordination with DFA and DMW, it shall provide free 
temporary shelters and other services to Filipino trafficked 
persons.

(6) Provide reintegration support to trafficked persons upon their 
repatriation.

(e) Department 
of 
the Interior and 
Local 
(1) Institute a systematic information and prevention campaign 
in coordination with pertinent agencies of government.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

Government
(DILG)

(2) Provide capacity-building trainings and awareness-raising 
programs to LGUs, in coordination with their local anti-
trafficking in persons committees or councils to support the 
effective implementation of a community-based TIP 
education program and to ensure wide understanding and 
application of the Act at the local level.

(3) Include in the LGU accreditation and local permit processing 
of tourism enterprises a protocol that shall emphasize anti-
trafficking objectives, the various forms by which TIP is 
committed, and the concomitant responsibility of tourism 
enterprises to report actual and possible acts of TIP to the 
authorities, in coordination with the leagues of provinces, 
cities and municipalities.

(4) Mandate LGUs to pass an ordinance to combat TIP and 
other forms of exploitation at the local level.

(5) Develop and implement a TIP preventive education program 
aimed at educating and orienting the public about the crime, 
how it is perpetrated in current society, and the services 
available for trafficked persons.

(6) Investigate LGUs for non-compliance with its mandates 
under the Act and relevant rules issued by the Council or the 
DILG and recommend the appropriate filing of an 
administrative case against erring public officials to the 
Ombudsman.

(f) Department 
of 
Education 
(DepEd)

(1) Provide measures, including the conduct of information 
campaigns, to prevent TIP and other exploitative acts, such 
as OSAEC in educational institution.

(2) Establish reporting mechanisms in the school system 
consistent with its child protection and gender and 
development programs.

(3) Develop a teacher training manual and modules or 
curriculum for students aimed at raising their awareness on 
the perils of TIP and the prevention of TIP and other 
exploitative forms of behavior.

(4) Implement 
a 
school-based 
anti-trafficking 
preventive 
education program, in coordination with the Council, the 
CHED, the TESDA, and civil society.

(5) Provide 
opportunities 
for 
trafficked 
persons 
in 
the 
educational mainstream through the basic education and 
non-formal education curricula.

(6) Conduct information campaign to parents about TIP, 
including OSAEC, and the dangers it poses to their 
children/students.

(g) Department 
of 
Health (DOH)

(1) Make available resources and facilities in providing health 
care to trafficked persons, which shall at all times be held 
confidential.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

(2) Develop a comprehensive program to prevent the TIP for the 
removal or sale of organs for implementation by the local 
health offices.

(3) Assist, including technical assistance and providing 
expertise, in the investigation and prosecution of the TIP for 
the removal or sale of organs.

(4) Undertake and sustain activities to increase public 
awareness on TIP for the removal or sale of organs, which 
may include awareness among medical practitioner, family 
and patient information and education, public education, and 
advocacy campaigns

(5) Assist in the investigation and prosecution of traffickers of 
infants born in health facilities.

(h) Department 
of 
Information and 
Communications 
Technology 
(DICT)

(1) Formulate policies, rules, and regulations to ensure that 
internet intermediaries will comply with their duties to notify, 
preserve, and disclose data, as well as install available 
technology to block or filter any form of child trafficking, child 
sexual abuse, or CSAEM or CSAM, in coordination with 
Cybercrime Investigation and Coordinating Council (CICL), 
National 
Privacy 
Commission 
(NPC) 
and 
National 
Telecommunications Commission (NTC).

(2) Extend immediate assistance for the prevention of the 
commission of cybercrime offenses related to TIP, 
particularly online exploitation of children.

(3) Assist LEAs and prosecution agencies in the investigation of 
TIP committed through the use of information and 
communications technology.

(i) Department 
of 
Migrant Workers 
(DMW) 
(1) Provide free legal assistance and counsel to trafficked Migrant 
Workers (MWs) to pursue legal action against their offenders 
and represent their interests in any criminal investigation or 
prosecution.

(2) Repatriate trafficked MWs, with their consent and assist in the 
prosecution of their traffickers

(3) Establish a mechanism with all responsible officers in the 
Foreign Service to ensure coordination, through the fastest 
means of communication available, the discovery and other 
relevant information on said trafficked MW.

(4) Subsume the functions of the POEA pursuant to R.A. No.

(j) Department 
of 
Tourism (DOT)

(1) Formulate and implement preventive measures against sex 
tourism packages and the use of tourism enterprises as situs 
or location of TIP, in coordination with the Council and other 
relevant government agencies.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[54] Bilang pagtalima sa itinakdang mga alituntunin at pamamaraan ng Komisyon sa Serbisyo Sibil (CSC), at upang matiyak ang transparency at pantay na pagkakataon sa lahat ng aplikante, ang lahat ng aplikasyon para sa posisyon ay dapat isumite sa pamamagitan ng online recruitment system ng ahensya.  Ang mga aplikasyon na isusumite sa pamamagitan ng iba pang paraan ay hindi tatanggapin.  In accordance with the established rules and procedures of the Civil Service Commission (CSC), and to ensure transparency and equal opportunity for all applicants, all applications for the position must be submitted through the agency’s online recruitment system. Applications submitted through other means will not be accepted.

Sinusuri ng Komite sa Pagpili (Selection Committee) ang lahat ng aplikasyong natanggap batay sa mga kwalipikasyon at karanasan na nakasaad sa Job Description (JD) at Statement of Duties and Responsibilities (SDR). The Selection Committee screens all received applications based on the qualifications and experience stated in the Job Description (JD) and Statement of Duties and Responsibilities (SDR).

Ang mga aplikanteng nakapasa sa initial screening ay maaaring tawagan para sa isang interview.  Ang mga interview, kung kinakailangan, ay isasagawa sa pamamagitan ng personal, video conference, o anumang iba pang paraan na itatakda ng Komite. Applicants who pass the initial screening may be called for an interview. Interviews, if necessary, will be conducted either personally, via video conference, or any other mode as determined by the Committee.

Ang Komite ay magsasagawa ng mga karagdagang hakbang tulad ng skills demonstration, psychological/psychometric test, at iba pang angkop na assessment upang matukoy ang pinaka-kwalipikadong aplikante. The Committee may conduct additional steps such as skills demonstration, psychological/psychometric test, and other appropriate assessments to determine the most qualified applicant.

Ang listahan ng mga aplikanteng karapat-dapat ay ilalathala sa website ng ahensya.  Ang pagpili ng matatalagang kawani ay nakabatay sa merito at kakayahan.  The list of qualified applicants will be posted on the agency’s website. Selection of staff to be appointed shall be based on merit and competence.

(2) Develop a comprehensive program, including policies and 
guidelines, to address and prevent TIP in the travel and 
tourism industry and in places of amusement.

(3) Develop a set of criteria as basis for accreditation of tourism 
enterprises by its local tourism offices, such as enactment of 
a local tourism child protection policy in partnership with an 
NGO that is involved in preventing sexual exploitation of 
children in the travel and tourism industry.

(4) Ensure that all anti-trafficking safeguards, and relevant 
national and local labor standards and practices are being 
followed, adopted and implemented in all tourism enterprises, 
the travel and tourism industry and in places of amusement.

(5) Provide training to tourist security officers on surveillance, 
investigation and rescue operation strategies.

(6) Develop a system of coordination with LEAs/LGUs in 
reporting actual and possible acts of TIP to the authorities of 
TIP cases.

(7) Educate and train communities, including tourist workers, 
about TIP and on how to report TIP cases.

(k) Department 
of 
Transportation 
(DOTr)

(1) Develop a comprehensive program and awareness campaign 
to assist all transportation sectors, including Transport 
Network Vehicle Services (TNVS), and transportation 
personnel, such as airline flight attendants, airport agents, taxi 
and bus drivers, and passenger boat crew in victim 
identification and reporting incidents of TIP.

(2) Provide guidelines for the land, sea and air transport providers 
to train their personnel in TIP.

(3) Standardize guidelines for monitoring TIP in every port.

(l) Philippine 
Overseas 
Employment 
Administration 
(POEA)

(1) Implement pre-employment orientation seminars (PEOS) and 
accredit NGOs and other service providers conducting PEOS.

(2) Formulate a system of providing free legal assistance to 
trafficked persons especially those involving TIP in the guise 
of overseas employment.

(3) Create a blacklist of recruitment agencies, illegal recruiters 
and persons facing administrative, civil and criminal 
complaints for TIP filed in the receiving country and/or in the 
Philippines and those agencies, illegal recruiters and persons 
involved in TIP cases.

(4) To transfer the operation and/or implementation of the 
programs and responsibilities herein to the DMW who shall 
assume and perform all their powers and functions pursuant 
to R.A. No. 11641.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[55]

(m) Bureau of 
Immigration 
(BI)

(1) Administer and enforce immigration and alien administration 
laws.

(2) Disallow entry of foreign nationals who have been blacklisted 
or placed in watchlist status for having committed sex 
offenses against women and children, or similar activities as 
TIP and OSAEC in any jurisdiction.

(3) Adopt measures for the apprehension of suspected traffickers 
both at the place of arrival and departure.

(4) Ensure stronger border protection against TIP including the 
regulation of visa upon arrivals.

(5) Ensure compliance by the Filipino fiancés/fiancées and 
spouses of foreign nationals with the guidance and counseling 
requirement as provided for in this Act.

(6) Train immigration officers in detecting or preventing TIP at the 
borders.

(n) Philippine Coast 
Guard (PCG)

(1) Conduct regular inspections, surveillance, investigation, and 
arrest of individuals or persons suspected to be engaged in 
TIP at sea.

(2) Coordinate with other LEAs to secure concerted efforts for 
effective investigation and apprehension of suspected 
traffickers.

(3) Establish a system to receive complaints and calls to assist 
trafficked persons and conduct rescue operations.

(4) Provide capacity-building programs to its regional, city, and 
municipal units, in coordination with other concerned 
agencies, in ensuring wide understanding and application of 
the Act at the local level.

(5) Encourage and support anti-trafficking initiatives from the 
national to the local levels.

(o) Philippine 
National Police 
(PNP)

(1) Investigate reports involving TIP, including alleged TIP 
activities in different airports and seaports through its aviation 
security group and maritime group.

(2) Conduct surveillance, investigation and arrest of individuals or 
persons suspected to be engaged in TIP.

(3) Coordinate closely with other LEAs to secure concerted 
efforts for effective investigation and apprehension of 
suspected traffickers.

(4) Coordinate with other government agencies which may have 
initially processed complaints for TIP.

(5) Establish a system to receive complaints and calls to assist 
trafficked persons and conduct rescue operations.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[56]

(6) Ensure that deployed personnel to the office of the police 
attaché are capable of investigating TIP cases in a child and 
gender sensitive manner.

(7) Strengthen the anti-trafficking section under the Women and 
Children Protection Desks (WCPD) nationwide.

(8) Integrate in the program of instruction a comprehensive child 
and gender sensitive management of TIP cases in the PNP 
training school and other schools operated and managed by 
the PNP.

(9) Provide capacity building to the senior cadets of the Philippine 
National Police Academy in coordination with Council.

(10) Enter into international arrangements with counterpart 
foreign law enforcement units.

(11) Conduct joint investigations with counterpart foreign law 
enforcement units.

(p) Philippine 
Commission on 
Women (PCW) 
(1) Participate and coordinate in the formulation and monitoring 
of policies addressing the issue of TIP in coordination with 
relevant government agencies.

(2) Advocate for the inclusion of the issue of TIP in both its local 
and international advocacy for women’s issues.

(3) Actively advocate and participate in international and regional 
discussion and initiatives in TIP in women and include the 
same in all of its international commitments and policy 
pronouncements. Where possible and appropriate, provide 
inputs to bilateral and multilateral collaborative projects on 
TIP.

(4) Assist the Council in the formulating and monitoring policies 
addressing the issue of TIP in coordination with relevant 
government agencies.

(5) Assist the Council in the conduct of information dissemination 
and training on gender-responsive case management, 
treatment and reporting of trafficked persons to frontline 
government agencies, NGOs and the general public.

(6) Assist the Council in the development of gender responsive 
documentation system in coordination with other agencies 
through its monitoring of the situation of women particularly on 
violence against women.

(q) Commission on 
Filipinos 
Overseas (CFO) 
(1) Provide pre-departure registration services for Filipino 
emigrants, including Filipino spouses and other partners of 
foreign nationals.

(2) Conduct pre-departure counseling services for Filipinos in 
intermarriages and bi-national couples including orientation 
on TIP and other forms of exploitation and reporting 
mechanisms and services available to the trafficked persons.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[57]

(3) Maintain a watch list database of foreign nationals with a 
history of domestic violence, involvement in TIP, mail-order-
bride schemes, child abuse, and sexual abuse.

(4) Develop a system of accreditation of NGOs that may be 
mobilized 
for 
purposes 
of 
conducting 
pre-departure 
counseling services for Filipinos in intermarriages and bi-
national couples.

(5) Ensure that the counselors shall have the minimum 
qualifications and training of guidance counselors as provided 
for by law.

(6) Supervise the operation of a 24/7 hotline facility, 1343 
Actionline, against TIP that responds to emergency or crisis 
calls from trafficked persons, their families, and the general 
public, in coordination with the Council.

(7) Assist in the conduct of information campaigns against TIP in 
coordination with LGUs, the Philippine Information Agency 
(PIA), and NGOs.

(r) National 
Commission on 
Indigenous 
Peoples (NCIP) 
(1) Develop a program for the prevention of TIP of indigenous 
persons and in indigenous cultural communities, in 
coordination with the Council.

(2) Educate and train indigenous persons and in indigenous 
cultural communities about TIP, which cannot be the subject 
of settlement in accordance with tribal customs.

(s) National Bureau 
of Investigation 
(NBI) 
(1) Investigate reports involving TIP.

(2) Undertake surveillance, investigation and arrest of individuals 
or persons suspected to be engaged in TIP.

(3) Closely coordinate with other LEAs to secure concerted 
efforts for effective investigation and apprehension of 
suspected traffickers.

(4) Establish a system to receive complaints and calls to assist 
trafficked persons and conduct rescue operations.

(5) Establish an anti-trafficking section.

(6) Enter into international arrangements with foreign law 
enforcement counterparts.

(7) Conduct joint investigations with counterpart foreign law 
enforcement units.

(t) Philippine 
Center on 
Transnational 
Crime (PCTC)

(1) Undertake strategic research on the structure and dynamics 
of TIP with transnational crime dimension, predict trends and 
analyze given factors for the formulation of individual and 
collective strategies for the prevention and detection of TIP 
and the apprehension of criminal elements involved.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[58]

(2) Strengthen information exchange on TIP between and among 
government agencies, foreign counterparts and international 
organizations.

(3) Serve as the focal point in international enforcement 
coordination on TIP particularly with the International Criminal 
Police Organization (INTERPOL) and cooperation with 
regional and international foreign counterparts.

(4) Promote the development of training courses in relation to 
combating TIP.

(5) Enter into international arrangements on transnational 
organized crimes, including TIP.

(u) Council for the 
Welfare of 
Children (CWC)

(1) Integrate in its development and strategic frameworks issues 
and concerns affecting TIP in children and ensure the 
adoption of such frameworks by the LGUs and other 
stakeholders.

(2) Advocate against the trafficking of children.

(3) Improve data on TIP in children through integration of critical 
and relevant indicators into the monitoring system for children.

(4) Adopt policies and measures that will protect and promote the 
rights and welfare of trafficked children and coordinate and 
monitor their implementation.

(5) Implement policies and program interventions to address 
issues on trafficking of children.

(v) National 
Authority for 
Child Care 
(NACC) 
(1) Advocate for the rights of children under alternative child care 
programs and/or adoption against TIP.

(2) Train NACC Social Workers and develop capable, responsive 
and trauma-informed counseling, rehabilitative, and protective 
programs for trafficked children under the jurisdiction of the 
NACC.

(3) Extend training and programs to the representatives and/or 
social workers of child caring agencies or other facilities 
extending care to children, including local, city, and municipal 
social workers.

(4) Conduct information dissemination programs to educate the 
public on the legal process of adoption/alternative child care 
programs.

(5) Develop and implement a comprehensive updated database 
of all children under the jurisdiction of the NACC, the 
prospective adoptive parents, adoptive parents, and/or foster 
parents.

(6) Include current issues concerning children under the 
jurisdiction of the NACC in developing guidelines and 
frameworks for effective and efficient processes and further 
implement policies to protect the rights of children under the

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

jurisdiction of the NACC and the adoptive or foster parents, as 
applicable.

(w) Anti-Money 
Laundering 
Council (AMLC) 
(1) Assist in the financial investigation of TIP cases as a predicate 
offense of money laundering.

(2) Act on request for issuance of freeze orders and institution on 
civil forfeiture proceedings against the assets of the 
traffickers.

(3) Assist the Council and LEAs in building their capacities to 
conduct parallel financial investigation on the proceeds and 
instruments of TIP.

(4) Promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to monitor the 
reporting of financial intermediaries in relation to TIP-related 
activity or transaction which shall include among others the 
guidelines to determine suspicious activity and indicators that 
TIP- related activities are being conducted.

Section 141. Roles and Responsibilities of NGO Council members. The 
NGO members of the Council shall have the following roles and responsibilities: 
(a) 
Assist government agencies in formulating and implementing 
policies, programs and information, education and communication 
(IEC) campaign against TIP;

(b) 
Assist in capability building activities of government personnel and 
share their experiences and expertise in handling TIP cases;

(c) 
Coordinate with concerned government agencies, LGUs and other 
NGOs in reporting alleged perpetrators, rescuing trafficked persons, 
and cooperate in conducting investigation/ surveillance, if indicated;

(d) 
Undertake programs and activities for the prevention of TIP, rescue, 
recovery and reintegration of trafficked persons and other support 
services for their families;

(e) 
Document and/or assist in the documentation of TIP cases, including 
submission of data to the NRRD;

(f) 
Disseminate guidelines to all its network members, local and 
international, on policies and programs addressing issues on TIP;

(g) 
Formulate educational module to address the demand side of TIP;

(h) 
Consult and coordinate anti-trafficking efforts of other NGOs and civil 
society organizations (CSOs) in accordance with the sector they 
represent (i.e. children, women, and OFWs) and report the same to 
the Council through the Secretariat; and

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[60]

(i) 
Perform such other tasks as may be agreed upon by the Council.

Section 142. Roles and responsibilities of other relevant national 
government agencies. Consistent with their mandates under existing laws, 
the following agencies shall integrate TIP issues in their strategy and program 
formulation and implement programs and services for the prevention and 
suppression of TIP and for the protection of trafficked persons. 
Agency  
Roles and Responsibilities 
(a) Overseas 
Workers Welfare 
Administration 
(OWWA)

(1) Conduct pre-departure orientation seminars (PDOS) and 
accredit NGOs and other service providers conducting PDOS.

(2) Formulate a system of providing free legal assistance to 
trafficked persons, in coordination with DFA.

(3) Repatriation of trafficked OWWA members.

(4) Provision of psychosocial and other reintegration and other 
services to its members.

(5) Provide airport assistance to all trafficked OWWA members.

(b) Commission on 
Human Rights 
(CHR) 
(1) Conduct advocacy and training programs relating to anti-
trafficking.

(2) Investigate and recommend for prosecution violations of the 
Act.

(3) Provide legal and financial assistance to trafficked persons.

(4) Integrate anti-trafficking efforts in the Barangay Human Rights 
Action Center (BHRAC).

(5) Monitor government compliance to international human rights 
treaty obligations related to the suppression/elimination of 
TIP.

(c) Department of 
Agriculture (DA) 
and Bureau of 
Fisheries and 
Aquatic 
Resources 
(BFAR)

(1) Institute a systematic information and prevention campaign in 
coordination with the agencies of government as provided for 
in this Act.

(2) Provide capacity-building programs to its regional, city, and 
municipal units, in coordination with the Council and other 
concerned agencies, to ensure wide understanding and 
application of this Act, including the local agriculture and 
fisheries sector.

(3) Encourage and support anti-trafficking initiatives in the 
national and local levels.

(4) Establish a system for receiving complaints and calls of 
assisting trafficked persons, and facilitating the referral of 
these complaints to the appropriate agency, particularly TIP 
committed in the agriculture and fisheries sectors.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

(d) National Council on Disability Affairs (NCDA)

(1) Develop programs for the prevention of TIP with disability 
(PWDs); and

(2) Provide assistance to PWDs who are trafficked persons.

(e) Philippine 
Amusement and 
Gaming 
Corporation 
(PAGCOR) 
(1) Develop guidelines to monitor Philippine Off-Shore Gaming 
Operator establishments to ensure compliance with the 
provisions if this Act, in coordination with the Council and the 
DOLE.

(2) Monitor gaming and amusement venues to prevent TIP and 
prosecute violators.

(f) Philippine Ports 
Authority (PPA) 
(1) Enhance its security measures and undertake regular 
inspections of the country’s ports and harbors.

(2) Coordinate with other LEAs for effective investigation and 
apprehension of suspected traffickers.

(3) Develop programs to address and prevent TIP committed 
within the ports under their jurisdiction.

(g) Philippine 
Information 
Agency (PIA) 
(1) Enhance public awareness on TIP, pertinent laws and 
possible actions to prevent victimization and re-victimization 
by developing public advocacy program as well as printing 
and distributing appropriate information materials.

(h) Office of Civil 
Defense-
National 
Disaster Risk 
Reduction and 
Management 
Council (OCD-
NDRRMC)

(1) Develop guidelines for the prevention of TIP in emergency, 
disaster, pandemic and crisis situations.

(2) Direct Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Office 
(LDRRMO) and Council (LDRRMC) to develop programs to 
prevent and protect survivors of disaster or conflict from 
perpetrators of TIP.

Section 143. Assistance of other agencies and institutions. In 
implementing the Act and these rules and regulations, the agencies concerned 
may seek and enlist the assistance of NGOs, people’s organizations (POs), 
civic organizations and other volunteer groups, which will all likewise be 
encouraged to assume the same roles and responsibilities enumerated in 
Section 142.

Section 144. Roles and Responsibilities of Local Government Units 
(LGUs). LGUs shall develop and implement programs to prevent TIP, monitor 
and document TIP cases, and provide support to trafficked persons including 
their subsequent rehabilitation and reintegration. To this end, they shall:

(a) 
Ensure that the Violence Against Women and Children desks in all 
barangays are activated and staffed by trained personnel who are

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

able to provide immediate and appropriate support to trafficked 
persons;

(b) 
Organize and ensure the smooth functioning of a sub-committee on 
TIP as an integral part of the local anti-trafficking in persons council 
that shall recommend policies and programs aimed at ensuring the 
protection of children against TIP and grant honoraria to local anti-
trafficking in persons committees or council members to ensure total 
active participation;

(c) 
Document and monitor cases of TIP in their respective areas of 
jurisdiction, effect the cancellation of licenses of establishments 
which violate the provisions of the Act, ensure effective prosecution 
of TIP cases, and prescribe compliance with the Act as requisite for 
the issuance and renewal of licenses and permits to establishments 
within their respective jurisdictions, including internet service 
providers, internet content hosts, internet cafes and establishments 
offering Wi-Fi services, tourism enterprises and malls, transportation 
services, and financial intermediaries;

(d) 
Ensure the provision of necessary services to trafficked persons, 
such as temporary shelter, board and lodging, transportation, 
counseling and documentation, among others;

(e) 
Coordinate with, refer, and endorse to the DSWD all TIP cases;

(f) 
Undertake an information campaign against TIP through the 
establishment of the Migrants Advisory and Information Network 
(MAIN) desks in municipalities or provinces in coordination with the 
DILG, PIA, CFO, NGOs and other concerned agencies. They shall 
develop a system for accreditation among NGOs for purposes of 
establishing centers and programs for intervention in various levels 
of the community;

(g) 
Encourage and support community-based initiatives which address 
the TIP;

(h) 
Enact ordinances to localize and strengthen the implementation of 
the Act by providing local services and programs to trafficked persons 
and other exploitative behavior;

(i) 
Develop a system for accreditation of NGOs and CSOs for purposes 
of establishing centers and programs for interventions in the 
community;

(j) 
Submit regular reports to the Council on TIP cases and programs 
undertaken to prevent and address TIP; and

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[63]

(k) 
Provide livelihood grants to support the economic empowerment of 
poor households, in order to increase their financial capacities and 
address household crises which force them to engage in TIP.

The Leagues of Provinces, Municipalities and Cities shall recommend 
measures and ensure the implementation of the LGUs’ roles and 
responsibilities.  LGUs may seek and enlist the assistance of NGOs, POs, civic 
organizations and other volunteer groups and ensure to provide or include in 
their annual budget/appropriation funds for the implementation of anti-TIP 
programs and initiatives.

The DILG shall ensure compliance by LGUs of this provision, investigate 
violations thereof, and recommend the appropriate filing of an administrative 
case against erring public officials to the Ombudsman.

Any act or omission in violation of this provision, and which is defined and 
penalized under the RPC or any special law, shall be prosecuted and punished 
under the applicable law.

Article 5 
Duties and Responsibilities of the Private Sector

Section 145. Duties of Internet Intermediaries. Internet intermediaries, 
including ISPs, internet content hosts, participative network platform providers, 
financial intermediaries, and electronic money issuers, shall:

(a) 
Adopt in their terms of services or service agreements with third-party 
users or creators of contents, products, and services the prohibition 
of any form of child trafficking, CSAEM or CSAM, or exhibition of any 
form of sexual exploitation of children in their facilities, infrastructure, 
server and 
platforms; 
Provided, That for foreign 
internet 
intermediaries, the terms of service or service agreements of which, 
whether for one or more contents, products, or services, already 
incorporate a substantially similar prohibition shall be deemed 
compliant with this provision; Provided, further, That this requirement 
applies to terms of service or service agreements with third-party 
users or creators of contents, products, and services for, or 
applicable to, products and services accessible from the Philippines.

(b) 
Cooperate, as far as practicable, with LEAs for the prosecution of 
offenders and the preservation of evidence, including the provision of 
subscriber information, traffic data, or both, of any person or 
subscriber who has committed, is committing or is attempting to 
commit any violation of the Act upon formal request of duly 
authorized LEAs, with no need of warrant, and in accordance with 
due process, pursuant to   Section 9 of the Act.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[64]

(c) 
Compile and maintain a comprehensive list of child trafficking, 
CSAEM or CSAM, or any form of sexual exploitation of children-
related Uniform Resource Locators (URLs); Provided, That the list is 
updated regularly by partnering or coordinating with, or obtaining 
memberships in, widely-recognized organizations and coalitions that 
maintain a comprehensive list of child abuse image content, URL list 
and image hashes, among others.

(d) 
Preserve and protect the integrity of all subscribers or registration 
information and traffic data in its control and possession relating to 
communication services provided by an internet intermediary, within 
one (1) year from the date of the transaction for the purpose of the 
investigation and prosecution of all forms of TIP.

Provided, That, upon notice by the DOJ, PNP, NBI, or the DICT- 
CICC, the preservation of such relevant evidence shall be extended 
for another year as may be deemed necessary. Provided however, 
That the relevant evidence that needs preservation shall be expressly 
identified and specified.

For the purpose of extending the preservation of subscriber’s or 
registrant’s information and traffic data, the DOJ, PNP, NBI or the 
DICT-CICC shall coordinate with the internet intermediary.

(e) 
Immediately block access to, remove, or take down the internet 
address, URL website, or any content thereof, containing all forms of 
TIP, CSAEM or CSAM, or any form of sexual exploitation of children, 
within twenty four (24) hours from notice of the DOJ, PNP, NBI, or 
the DICT-CICC, or upon knowledge of the existence of an attempt to 
commit or an actual act of TIP being committed within their control; 
Provided, That the provision in the preceding paragraph on 
preservation of subscriber data shall apply and shall be extended as 
may be deemed necessary by the DOJ, PNP, NBI, or the DICT-
CICC.

“Notice” herein shall mean written notice from the DOJ, PNP, NBI, or 
DICT-CICC, which states among others:

(1) 
that it is issued pursuant to Section 9(a)(5) of the Act and 
Section 145(e) of this IRR;  
(2) 
the name of the issuing agency (i.e. DOJ, PNP, NBI, or the 
DICT-CICC); 
(3) 
the name and signature of the authorized official in 
accordance with the rules of the agency;  
(4) 
the date on which it was signed;  
(5) 
the reference to the specific provision of the Act alleged to be 
violated;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

(6) 
the specific internet address, URL, website, or any content to 
be blocked/removed/taken down; and  
(7) 
such other facts as may be necessary to show the relevance 
of the request to the prosecution/investigation.

“Knowledge” shall mean actual knowledge of the existence of an 
attempt to commit or an actual act of TIP being committed within their 
control, which may include the receipt of reports containing the 
specific internet address, URL, website, or any content to be 
blocked/removed/taken down, legal basis for alleged violation with 
reference to the specific provision of the Act alleged to be violated, 
and all other facts that  the internet intermediaries may deem 
necessary for them to facilitate a full review of the report. The reports 
should clearly and distinctly state the facts from which it is apparent 
that the internet address, URL, website, or any content thereof, 
contains any form of TIP, CSAEM or CSAM, or any form of sexual 
exploitation of children.

(f) 
Report to the DOJ, PNP, NBI, or the DICT-CICC the internet 
addresses or websites blocked, removed, or taken down, or any form 
of unusual content or traffic data involving all forms of TIP, child 
pornography, or any form of sexual exploitation of children that is 
within three (3) days of the blocking, removal, or taking down of the 
same; Provided, That in case a foreign internet intermediary is 
prohibited by its country to share data, the reports filed by such 
foreign internet intermediary to the corresponding entity tasked by its 
government to receive cybercrime reports shall be deemed in 
compliance with this provision;   Provided, however, That the said 
foreign internet intermediary shall inform the DOJ, PNP, NBI,  or the 
DICT-CICC of such reporting; Provided further, That whatever 
relevant data said foreign internet intermediary is not prohibited to 
share shall nevertheless be reported to the DOJ, PNP, NBI, or the 
DICT-CICC; Provided finally, That no internet intermediary shall be 
held civilly liable for damages on account of any notice given in good 
faith in compliance with this section.

(g) 
Upon request and notwithstanding the provisions of R.A. No. 10175, 
and in accordance with R.A. No. 10173, provide the DOJ, PNP, NBI 
or the DICT-CICC the subscriber information of any person who 
gained or attempted to gain access to an internet site or internet 
application which contains any form of  child trafficking, CSAEM or 
CSAM, or any form of sexual exploitation of children; Provided, That 
the request must particularly describe the information asked for and 
indicate the relevancy of such information to such case.

The request, which shall be in writing, must:

(1) 
Be addressed to the custodian of the data;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

(2) 
State that it is issued pursuant to Section 9 (a)(6) of the Act 
and Section 145(f) of this IRR;  
(3) 
State the name of the issuing agency (i.e. DOJ, PNP, NBI, or 
the DICT-CICC);  
(4) 
State the name and signature of the authorized official in 
accordance with the rules of the agency;  
(5) 
State the date of the request;  
(6) 
State that it is issued pursuant to the prosecution/investigation 
of a person who is alleged to have committed, is committing, 
or is attempting to commit a violation of the Act and provide 
the provision that is alleged to have been violated;  
(7) 
State the specific subscriber or account subject of the 
prosecution/investigation, by indicating the relevant URL or 
user ID used to identify the particular subscriber or account;  
(8) 
State that the request is for subscriber information;  
(9) 
State the facts necessary to show the relevance of the request 
to the prosecution/investigation;  
(10) 
Provide the relevant report identification number, if the 
investigation/prosecution is connected to a report made to an 
organization tasked by its government to receive cybercrime 
reports; and  
(11) 
Be submitted pursuant to the process established by the 
internet intermediary for submitting such requests.  
(12) 
The internet intermediary shall respond to the request in 
writing including through electronic means.

Nothing in this section may be construed to require internet intermediaries to 
engage in the monitoring of any user, subscriber, or customer, or the content of 
any communication of any such person.  
These duties and obligations shall be without prejudice to other duties and 
obligations that may be imposed in other laws, particularly when the violations 
involve OSAEC.

Any person who violates this Section, which is penalized under Section 9 of the 
Act, shall suffer the penalty of a fine of not less than Two million pesos 
(2,000,000.00) but not more than Five million pesos (5,000,000.00) for the first 
offense. In case of subsequent offense, the penalty of a fine of not less than 
Two million pesos (2,000,000.00) but not more than Ten million pesos 
(10,000,000.00) and revocation of franchise and license to operate. Without 
prejudice to the criminal liability of the person or persons willfully refusing to 
perform the responsibilities under Section 9 of the Act, juridical persons owning 
or managing the aforementioned enterprises shall be subsidiarily liable and 
their license or permit to operate may be revoked.

Willful and intentional violations of the duties and responsibilities prescribed 
herein and under Section 9 of the Act are punishable by six (6) years 
imprisonment and a fine of not less than five hundred thousand pesos 
(P500,000.00) as provided under Section 10(f) of the Act.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[67]

Section 146. Duties of Owners and Operators of Internet Café, Hotspots 
and Kiosks, Money Transfer and Remittance Centers, Transport Services, 
Tourism Enterprises, Malls, and Other Business Establishments Open 
and Catering to the Public. (a) Owners and operators of internet cafes, 
hotspots, kiosk, money transfer and remittance centers, transport services, 
tourism enterprises, malls, and other business establishments open and 
catering to the public are required to notify the PNP or NBI within forty-eight 
(48) hours from obtaining facts and circumstances that violations of the Act are 
taking place within their premises, or that their facilities and services are being 
used to commit violations of the Act; Provided, That public display of any form 
of CSAEM or CSAM within their premises is a conclusive presumption of the 
knowledge of the owners, operators, or lessors of business establishments of 
the violation of the Act.

(b)  
Establishments shall promote awareness against TIP through clear and 
visible signages in both English and the local dialect, with local and national 
hotlines posted within a conspicuous place in their facilities.

(c)  
Money transfer and remittance centers shall require individuals 
transacting with them to present valid government identification cards.

Any person who violates this Section, which is penalized under Section 9 of the 
Act, shall suffer the penalty of a fine of not less than Two million pesos 
(2,000,000.00) but not more than Five million pesos (5,000,000.00) for the first 
offense. In case of subsequent offense, the penalty of a fine of not less than 
Two million pesos (2,000,000.00) but not more than Ten million pesos 
(10,000,000.00) and revocation of franchise and license to operate. Without 
prejudice to the criminal liability of the person or persons willfully refusing to 
perform the responsibilities under Section 9 of the Act, juridical persons owning 
or managing the aforementioned enterprises shall be subsidiarily liable and 
their license or permit to operate may be revoked.

Willful and intentional violations of the duties and responsibilities prescribed 
herein and under Section 9 of the Act are punishable by six (6) years 
imprisonment and a fine of not less than five hundred thousand pesos 
(P500,000.00) as provided under Section 10(f) of the Act.

Section 147. Responsibilities of Tourism Enterprises. (a) All tourism 
enterprises shall notify the DSWD, DOJ, DOLE, PNP, or the NBI within forty-
eight (48) hours from obtaining facts and circumstances that TIP, including child 
trafficking or sexual exploitation of children, is being committed in their 
premises; Provided, That public display of any form of CSAEM or CSAM within 
their premises is a conclusive presumption of the knowledge of the owners, 
operators, or lessors of business establishments of the violation of the Act.

(b)   
All tourism enterprises shall post a notice containing the contact details 
of TIP hotlines, both national and local, in a conspicuous place near the public

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

entrance, inside rest rooms, elevators, parking areas of the establishment, and 
in other conspicuous locations where similar notices are customarily posted in 
clear view of the public and employees. They shall likewise engage in anti-
trafficking advocacy as part of their corporate responsibility. For this purpose, 
the Council shall develop a model notice that complies with the requirements of 
this section and make it available for downloading in its internet website, and 
for posting of LGUs and tourism enterprises.

(c)  
All tourism enterprises shall develop their own anti-trafficking tourism 
policy in accordance with guidelines from Council and the DOT. They shall also, 
in cooperation with the Council, DSWD, or a reputable NGO focused on anti-
trafficking in persons, train their employees who are likely to interact or come 
into contact with trafficked persons in recognizing the signs of TIP and how to 
report suspected TIP activity to the appropriate LEA. The Council shall, together 
with the DSWD, develop a training curriculum or program and make the same 
available for downloading in its internet website.

The preceding responsibilities of tourism enterprises shall be made part of the 
requirements for accreditation by the local government and for the issuance of 
the business permit to operate.

Any person who violates this Section, which is penalized under Section 9 of the 
Act, shall suffer the penalty of a fine of not less than Two million pesos 
(2,000,000.00) but not more than Five million pesos (5,000,000.00) for the first 
offense. In case of subsequent offense, the penalty of a fine of not less than 
Two million pesos (2,000,000.00) but not more than Ten million pesos 
(10,000,000.00) and revocation of franchise and license to operate. Without 
prejudice to the criminal liability of the person or persons willfully refusing to 
perform the responsibilities under Section 9 of the Act, juridical persons owning 
or managing the aforementioned enterprises shall be subsidiarily liable and 
their license or permit to operate may be revoked.

Willful and intentional violations of the duties and responsibilities prescribed 
herein and under Section 9 of the Act are punishable by six (6) years 
imprisonment and a fine of not less than five hundred thousand pesos 
(P500,000.00) as provided under Section 10(f) of the Act.

Section 148. Responsibilities of Financial Intermediaries. Any financial 
intermediary or person working for, related to, or who has direct knowledge of 
any TIP-related financial activity or transaction conducted through a financial 
intermediary, shall have the duty to report any suspected TIP-related activity or 
transaction to the concerned LEAs. Likewise, financial intermediaries shall have 
the duty to report these activities to the AMLC in accordance with the suspicious 
transaction reporting mechanism under R.A. No. 9160, as amended.

The AMLC shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the 
implementation of this provision which shall include, among others, the 
guidelines to determine suspicious activity and indicators that TIP-related

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[69]

activities are being conducted. The AMLC shall provide the necessary 
guidelines with regard to this provision within three (3) months from the 
effectivity of the Act.

Notwithstanding the provisions of R.A. No. 1405, as amended (An Act 
Prohibiting Disclosure of or Inquiry Into, Deposits With Any Banking Institution, 
And Providing Penalty Therefor), R.A. No. 6426 as amended, (Foreign 
Currency Deposit Act of the Philippines), R.A. No. 8791 (The General Banking 
Law of 2000), and other pertinent laws, the LEAs investigating TIP cases may 
inquire into or examine any particular deposit or investment, including related 
accounts, with any banking institution or non-bank financial institution; or 
require financial intermediaries, internet payment system providers, and other 
financial facilitators to provide financial documents and information, upon order 
of any competent court based on ex parte application in cases of violations of 
the Act, when it has been established that there is reasonable ground to believe 
that the deposit or investments, including related accounts involved, are related 
to TIP and violations of the Act.

Any person who violates this Section, which is penalized under Section 9 of the 
Act, shall suffer the penalty of a fine of not less than Two million pesos 
(2,000,000.00) but not more than Five million pesos (5,000,000.00) for the first 
offense. In case of subsequent offense, the penalty of a fine of not less than 
Two million pesos (2,000,000.00) but not more than Ten million pesos 
(10,000,000.00) and revocation of franchise and license to operate. Without 
prejudice to the criminal liability of the person or persons willfully refusing to 
perform the responsibilities under Section 9 of the Act, juridical persons owning 
or managing the aforementioned enterprises shall be subsidiarily liable and 
their license or permit to operate may be revoked.

Willful and intentional violations of the duties and responsibilities prescribed 
herein and under Section 9 of the Act are punishable by six (6) years 
imprisonment and a fine of not less than five hundred thousand pesos 
(P500,000.00) as provided under Section 10(f) of the Act.

Section 149. Hotels, Transient and Residential Houses, Condominium, 
Dormitories and Apartments or any Analogous Living Spaces. – All 
owners, lessors, sub-lessors, operators of hotels, residential homes and 
dwellings offered for transient use, condominiums, dormitories, apartments, or 
any analogous living spaces shall notify the PNP or the NBI immediately but 
not later than forty- eight (48) hours from obtaining facts and circumstances that 
TIP activities or OSAEC activities are being committed within their premises; 
Provided, That actual knowledge by the owners, lessors, sub lessors, 
operators, or owners, lessors, or sub lessors of other business establishments 
is required for prosecution under the Act. Provided, further, That the receipt of 
information that TIP activity has taken place in the premises also gives rise to 
the duty to notify the PNP or the NBI.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[70]

Any person who violates this Section, which is penalized under Section 9 of the 
Act, shall suffer the penalty of a fine of not less than Two million pesos 
(2,000,000.00) but not more than Five million pesos (5,000,000.00) for the first 
offense. In case of subsequent offense, the penalty of a fine of not less than 
Two million pesos (2,000,000.00) but not more than Ten million pesos 
(10,000,000.00) and revocation of franchise and license to operate. Without 
prejudice to the criminal liability of the person or persons willfully refusing to 
perform the responsibilities under Section 9 of the Act, juridical persons owning 
or managing the aforementioned enterprises shall be subsidiarily liable and 
their license or permit to operate may be revoked.

Willful and intentional violations of the duties and responsibilities prescribed 
herein and under Section 9 of the Act are punishable by six (6) years 
imprisonment and a fine of not less than five hundred thousand pesos 
(P500,000.00) as provided under Section 10(f) of the Act.

Section 150. Non-violation of R.A. No. 10175 and R.A. No. 10173. The duties 
and obligations of the above entities as stated herein, when requested by law 
enforcers, prosecutors, and other investigative bodies through proper 
processes and done in good faith, shall not be construed as a violation of R.A. 
No. 10175 and R.A.  No. 10173.

Article 6 
Sub-national structures against TIP

Section 151. Existing sub-national structures. The existing Regional Inter-
Agency Committee Against Trafficking in Persons and Violence Against 
Women and Children (RIACAT-VAWC), as well as the Local Committee against 
Trafficking in Persons and Violence against Women and Children (LCAT-
VAWC) established at the provincial and city/municipality levels pursuant to the 
Joint Resolution of the Inter-Agency Council Against Trafficking (IACAT) and 
the Inter-Agency Council on Violence Against Women and Their Children (IAC-
VAWC) adopted by Council on June 14, 2006 and by IAC-VAWC on June 20, 
2006 shall continue to exist and function.  
As originally contemplated, it shall serve as the policy and program coordinating 
and monitoring body of anti-trafficking efforts at the local level. 
Section 152. Additional function of LCAT-VAWC. The LCAT-VAWC, through 
the local social workers and in coordination with the barangay officials, shall 
identify communities and families that are vulnerable to TIP for purposes of 
providing appropriate interventions. They shall also recommend ordinance to 
implement local programs and interventions on anti-trafficking in persons.

Section 153. Preparation and submission of reports. The existing sub-
national structures shall prepare and submit annual reports on local initiatives 
according to the following schedule:

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

(a) 
Every 15th of November – from municipal/component city to 
provincial local anti-trafficking committee, if present; or from 
municipal/component city social welfare and development office to 
provincial social welfare and development office; 
(b) 
Every 30th of November – from provincial/highly urbanized cities 
(HUC) provincial social welfare and development committee to 
DSWD Field Office;  
(c) 
Every 15th of December - from DSWD Field Office to IACAT 
Secretariat.

The Council in coordination with the IACVAWC shall develop standard annual 
report templates and additional guidelines to ensure timely compliance.

Section 154. Technical assistance and functionality of local structures. 
The DSWD and DILG shall provide technical assistance to LGUs in organizing 
or strengthening the LCAT-VAWC. They shall likewise develop templates for 
local policies and standards on the functionality of these structures in 
addressing TIP. They shall also promote the utilization of the NRS and the 
PATD. They shall regularly report to the Council the number of organized local 
structures and the activities undertaken by the local structures for inclusion in 
the annual and other reports of the Council.

Section 155. Assistance of other Council member agencies and NGOs. 
The other member agencies of the Council including other NGOs shall likewise 
extend assistance to local LGUs in organizing local IAC-VAWCs, especially in 
building local capacity on developing TIP prevention programs and protection, 
recovery and reintegration programs for trafficked. They shall report to the 
Council such assistance and support to LGUs for inclusion in the annual and 
other reports of the Council and ensure to provide or include in their annual 
budget/appropriation funds for the implementation of anti-trafficking programs 
and initiatives.

Article 7 
Anti-Trafficking Task Forces 
and Special Law Enforcement Units

Section 156. Specialized anti-trafficking task forces and/or units. (a) 
Members of the Council may establish specialized anti-trafficking task-forces or 
units to implement its mandate under the Act. These specialized units shall: 
(1) 
Exclusively handle cases or reports involving TIP;

(2) 
Develop expertise of its respective members through the conduct 
of capacity-building and continuous review and updating of 
training programs for its members;

(3) 
Coordinate with the other task forces;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[72]

(4) 
Ensure 
the 
implementation 
of 
the 
specific 
roles 
and 
responsibilities of the member agency concerned under the Act 
and these rules and regulations;

(5) 
Assist in the establishment of similar units in local areas, as may 
be necessary, and coordinate with these local task forces.

(b)  
The existing specialized task forces and units shall continue in its 
operations in accordance with its respective mandates under the Act and 
relevant Council Guidelines. These specialized task forces and units include:

(1) 
Under the DOJ, the National Inter-Agency Law Enforcement Task 
Force Against Trafficking in Persons (NIATFAT) and the Regional 
Anti-Trafficking Task Forces (RATTF) established at various 
airports and seaports including land-based task forces.

(2) 
Under the PNP, the Women and Children Protection 
Centers/Desks (WCPDs) nationwide, and a separate and 
dedicated anti-trafficking in person unit (ATIP Unit) at the national 
and regional levels.

(3) 
Under the NBI, Anti-Human Trafficking Division (AHTRAD).

(c)  
The member agencies shall continually assess and review the 
operations of these task-forces. The amount necessary for the operations of 
these specialized units shall be funded by the concerned member agencies and 
may be supplemented by the Council.

Section 157. Sharing of information and conduct of typology workshops. 
These specialized task forces and units shall periodically conduct sharing of 
information sessions, typology workshops and similar activities to allow the 
exchange of experiences and practices in the conduct of surveillance, 
interdiction, arrest, investigation and prosecution of TIP cases among the 
members of various task forces, specialist units and prosecutors toward 
enhancing strategies and mechanisms to combat TIP.

Article 8 
Capacity Building

Section 158. Capacity building framework and human resource 
development program. The Council, in consultation with member agencies 
and other stakeholders, shall develop and implement an integrated human 
resource development program for all government officials and personnel 
dealing with the issue of TIP. Such plan shall be pursued within the human 
rights based approach and in a child- and gender-sensitive framework. For this 
purpose, the Council and its member agencies shall allocate resources to 
implement the program.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[73]

Section 159. Continuous development and updating of manuals, 
guidelines and other similar instruments. The Council shall continuously 
develop manuals, guidelines and other similar instruments as may be 
necessary to enhance victim identification procedures, protection and 
assistance to trafficked persons, and investigation and prosecution of cases, 
and strengthen inter-agency collaboration.

RULE IX 
PROHIBITED ACTS AND PENALTIES

Article 1 
Prohibited Acts and Penalties

Section 160. Prohibited Acts and its penalties under R.A. 9208, as 
amended. The following acts are prohibited under R.A. 9208, as amended:

(a) 
Acts of trafficking in persons. Section 4 of the Act prohibits any person 
to commit, by means of a threat, or use of force, or other forms of coercion, or 
through abduction, fraud, deception, abuse of power or of position, or through 
taking advantage of the vulnerability of the person, or by giving or receiving of 
payment or benefit to obtain the consent of a person having control over another 
person, the following acts:

(1) 
To recruit, obtain, hire, provide, offer, transport, transfer, maintain, 
harbor, or receive a person by any means, including those done 
under the pretext of domestic or overseas employment or training or 
apprenticeship, for the purpose of prostitution, pornography, sexual 
abuse or sexual exploitation, production, creation, or distribution of 
CSAEM or CSAM, forced labor, slavery, involuntary servitude, or 
debt bondage;

(2) 
To introduce or match for money, profit, or material, economic or 
other consideration, any person or, as provided for under R.A. No. 
10906 (Anti-Mail Order Spouse Act), any Filipino to a foreign national, 
for marriage for the purpose of acquiring, buying, offering, selling or 
trading him/her to engage in prostitution, pornography, sexual 
exploitation, forced labor, slavery, involuntary servitude or debt 
bondage;

(3) 
To offer or contract marriage, real or simulated, for the purpose of 
acquiring, buying, offering, selling, or trading them to engage in 
prostitution, pornography, sexual exploitation, forced labor or slavery, 
involuntary servitude or debt bondage;

(4) 
To undertake or organize tours and travel plans consisting of tourism 
packages or activities for the purpose of utilizing and offering persons 
for prostitution, pornography or sexual exploitation;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[74]

(5) 
To maintain or hire a person to engage in prostitution or pornography;

(6) 
To adopt persons by any form of consideration for exploitative 
purposes or to facilitate the same for purposes of prostitution, 
pornography, sexual exploitation, forced labor, slavery, involuntary 
servitude or debt bondage;

(7) 
To adopt or facilitate the adoption of persons, with or without 
consideration, for the purpose of prostitution, pornography, sexual 
exploitation, forced labor, slavery, involuntary servitude or debt 
bondage or to facilitate illegal child adoptions or child-laundering, or 
for other exploitative purposes;

(8) 
To recruit, hire, adopt, transport, transfer, obtain, harbor, maintain, 
provide, offer, receive or abduct a person, for the purpose of removal 
or sale of organs of said person;

(9) 
To recruit, transport, obtain, transfer, harbor, maintain, offer, hire, 
provide, receive or adopt a child to engage in armed activities or 
participate in activities in the context of an armed conflict in the 
Philippines or abroad;

(10) 
To recruit, transport, transfer, harbor, obtain, maintain, offer, hire, 
provide or receive a person by means defined in Section 3 of the Act 
for purposes of forced labor, slavery, debt bondage and involuntary 
servitude, including a scheme, plan, or pattern intended to cause the 
person either:

(i) 
To believe that if the person did not perform such labor or 
services, he/she or another person would suffer serious harm or 
physical restraint; or

(ii) 
To abuse or threaten the use of law or the legal processes;

(11) 
To recruit, transport, harbor, obtain, transfer, maintain, hire, offer, 
provide, adopt or receive a child for purposes of exploitation or 
trading them, including the act of buying or selling a child, or both, for 
any consideration or barter for purposes of exploitation. TIP for 
purposes 
of 
exploitation 
of 
children 
shall 
include:

(i) 
All forms of slavery or practices similar to slavery, involuntary 
servitude, debt bondage and forced labor, including recruitment 
of children for use in armed conflict;

(ii) 
The use, procuring or offering of a child for prostitution, for the 
production CSAEM, or CSAM, for pornographic performances;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[75]

(iii) The use, procuring or offering of a child for the production and 
trafficking of drugs; and 
(iv) The use, procuring or offering of a child for illegal activities or 
work which, by its nature or the circumstances in which it is 
carried out, is likely to harm their health, safety or morals; and

(12) 
To organize, provide financial support, or direct other persons to 
commit the offenses defined as acts of TIP under the Act.

(13) 
To recruit, transport, obtain, transfer, harbor, maintain, offer, hire, 
provide, receive, or adopt a child for deployment abroad as migrant 
worker.

Provided, That when the victim is a child, the means to commit these unlawful 
acts as enumerated in the first paragraph of this section shall not be necessary; 
Provided further, That in the case of overseas domestic work, a “child” means 
a person below twenty-four (24) years old. 
Under Section 10(a) of the Act, any person found guilty of committing any of 
these acts shall suffer the penalty of imprisonment of twenty (20) years and a 
fine of not less than One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) but not more than Two 
million pesos (P2,000,000.00). 
(b) 
Acts that promote trafficking in persons. Section 5 of the Act prohibits 
any person to commit the following acts which promote or facilitate TIP:

(1) 
To knowingly lease or sublease, use or allow to be used any house, 
building, tourism enterprise, or any similar establishment; or any 
vehicle or carrier by land, sea, and air; or any of their computer 
system or computer hardware, other computer-related devices, or 
any digital platform and application, for the purpose of promoting TIP;

(2) 
To produce, print and issue or distribute unissued, tampered or fake 
passports, birth certificates, affidavits of delayed registration of births, 
foundling certificates, travel clearances, counseling certificates, 
registration stickers, overseas employment certificates or other 
certificates of any government agency which issues these 
certificates, decals and such other markers as proof of compliance 
with government regulatory and pre-departure requirements for the 
purpose of promoting TIP;

(3) 
To advertise, publish, print, broadcast or distribute, or cause the 
advertisement, publication, printing, broadcasting or distribution by 
any means, including the use of information technology and the 
internet, of any brochure, flyer, or any propaganda material that 
promotes TIP;

(4) 
To assist in the conduct of misrepresentation or fraud for purposes of 
facilitating the acquisition of clearances and necessary exit

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[76]

documents from government agencies that are mandated to provide 
pre-departure registration and services for departing persons for the 
purpose of promoting TIP;

(5) 
To facilitate, assist or help in the exit and entry of persons from/to the 
country at international and local airports, territorial boundaries and 
seaports, knowing they are not in possession of required travel 
documents, or in possession of tampered, fake, or fraudulently 
acquired travel documents, for the purpose of promoting TIP;

(6) 
To confiscate, conceal, or destroy the passport, travel documents, or 
personal documents or belongings of trafficked persons in 
furtherance of TIP or to prevent them from leaving the country or 
seeking redress from the government or appropriate agencies;

(7) 
To knowingly benefit from, financial or otherwise, or make use of, the 
labor or services of a person held to a condition of involuntary 
servitude, forced labor, or slavery;

(8) 
To tamper with, destroy, or cause the destruction of evidence, or to 
influence or attempt to influence witnesses, in an investigation or 
prosecution of a case under the Act;

(9) 
To destroy, conceal, remove, confiscate or possess, or attempt to 
destroy, conceal, remove, confiscate or possess, any actual or 
purported passport or other travel, immigration or working permit or 
document, or any other actual or purported government identification, 
of any person in order to prevent or restrict, or attempt to prevent or 
restrict, without lawful authority, the person’s liberty to move or travel 
in order to maintain the labor or services of that person;

(10) 
To utilize his or her office to impede the investigation, prosecution or 
execution of lawful orders in a case under the Act;

(11) 
For internet intermediaries to knowingly or by gross negligence allow 
their internet infrastructure to be used for the purpose of promoting 
TIP;

(12) 
For internet cafes, kiosks, and hotspots, including establishments 
offering Wi-Fi access services to the public, to knowingly or by gross 
negligence allow their facilities to be used for the purpose of 
promoting TIP;

(13) 
For financial intermediaries, including banks and credit card 
companies and money transfer or remittance centers, to knowingly 
or by gross negligence allow their services, online platform and 
applications, among others, to be used for the purpose of promoting 
TIP;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[77]

**Memorandum Circular No. 2023-08**

**TO** : All Heads of Departments, Agencies, Bureaus, and Offices of the Executive Branch; Local Government Units; and All Others Concerned

**SUBJECT** : Adoption of the Philippine Qualifications Framework (PQF) as Basis for Hiring, Promotion, and Training and Development of Government Personnel

**DATE** : August 18, 2023

WHEREAS, the 1987 Constitution mandates the State to promote a just and dynamic social order that will ensure the prosperity and independence of the nation and free the people from poverty through policies that provide adequate social and economic measures;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 83, series of 2012, established the Philippine Qualifications Framework (PQF) as the national framework for recognizing, validating, and articulating qualifications based on competencies, knowledge, skills, and attitudes;

WHEREAS, the PQF aims to provide a common reference point for all qualifications, regardless of the mode of delivery, and to ensure that qualifications are internationally recognized;

WHEREAS, there is a need to ensure that the hiring, promotion, and training and development of government personnel are aligned with the PQF to enhance the quality of public service and promote national development;

NOW, THEREFORE, the President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in him by law, hereby orders:

**SECTION 1. Adoption of the PQF.** – All departments, agencies, bureaus, and offices of the Executive Branch, including Local Government Units (LGUs), are hereby directed to adopt the PQF as the basis for hiring, promotion, and training and development of government personnel.  This includes, but is not limited to, the determination of qualification standards for positions, the assessment of employee competencies, and the design of training programs.

**SECTION 2. Responsibilities of Government Agencies.** – Each government agency shall:

(a) Review and update its qualification standards for all positions, aligning them with the levels and qualifications defined in the PQF.  *Dapat tiyakin na ang mga qualification standards ay naaayon sa mga pangangailangan ng posisyon at sa mga competencies na kinakailangan para sa epektibong pagganap ng tungkulin.*

(b) Develop and implement competency-based assessment tools and procedures to evaluate the skills and knowledge of government personnel. *Siguraduhin na ang mga assessment tools ay valid, reliable, at fair.*

(c) Design and deliver training and development programs that are aligned with the PQF and address the identified competency gaps of government personnel. *Ang mga training programs ay dapat nakatuon sa pagpapaunlad ng mga kinakailangang competencies para sa pagganap ng tungkulin.*

(d) Regularly monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of its hiring, promotion, and training and development processes in relation to the PQF. *Magkaroon ng sistema para sa regular na pagsubaybay at pagsusuri ng mga proseso.*

**SECTION 3. Role of the Civil Service Commission (CSC).** – The Civil Service Commission (CSC) shall provide technical assistance and guidance to government agencies in the implementation of this Memorandum Circular. The CSC shall also develop guidelines and standards for the adoption of the PQF in the civil service. *Magbibigay ang CSC ng suporta sa mga ahensya ng gobyerno.*

**SECTION 4. Reporting.** – All government agencies are required to submit an annual report to the Office of the President, through the Civil Service Commission, on their progress in adopting the PQF. The report shall include information on the number of positions with updated qualification standards, the number of personnel assessed using competency-based tools, and the number of training programs aligned with the PQF.

**SECTION 5. Effectivity.** – This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President,

[Signature]

**VICTOR D. RODRIGUEZ**
Executive Secretary

(14) 
To knowingly or by gross negligence facilitate, assist, or help in the 
entry into the country of persons who are convicted sex offenders 
whether at international and local airports, territorial boundaries, and 
seaports for the purpose of promoting TIP; or

(15) 
To arrange, facilitate, expedite, or cause the introduction or 
encounter of persons who are suspected or convicted sex offenders 
in any jurisdiction, to a child.  The actual introduction or encounter 
need not occur to be liable under this provision.  It is enough that 
there is a deliberate attempt to cause the introduction or encounter.

Under Section 10(d) of the Act, any person found guilty of committing any of 
these acts shall suffer the penalty of imprisonment of fifteen (15) years and a 
fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00) but not more 
than One million pesos (P1,000,000.00).

Any person who violates Section 161(13), which is prohibited under Section 
5(m) of the Act, shall be deemed to have committed unlawful activities and shall 
be penalized for money laundering as defined in R.A. No. 9160, as amended.

(c) 
Violation of Confidentiality. Section 7 of the Act prohibits:

(1) 
Any editor, publisher, and reporter or columnist in case of printed 
materials, announcer or producer in case of television and radio, 
producer and director of a film in case of the movie industry, or any 
person utilizing tri-media facilities or electronic information 
technology to cause publicity of the name, personal circumstances, 
or any information tending to establish the identity of the trafficked 
person except when the trafficked person in a written statement duly 
notarized 
knowingly, 
voluntarily 
and 
willingly 
waives 
said 
confidentiality.

(2) 
Any law enforcement officers, prosecutors, judges, court personnel, 
social workers and medical practitioners to whom the complaint has 
been referred to disclose to the public the name and personal 
circumstances of the trafficked person or any other information 
tending to establish the identity of the trafficked person and his/her 
family shall not be disclosed to the public.

Under Section 10(f) of the Act, any person found guilty of committing any of 
these acts shall suffer the penalty of imprisonment of six (6) years and a fine of 
not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00) but not more than 
One million pesos (P1,000,000.00).

(d) 
Use of trafficked persons. Section 11 of the Act prohibits any person 
to buy or engage the services of a trafficked person for prostitution.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[78]

Provided, That P.D. No. 968 (Probation Law) shall not apply, any person found 
guilty of this act shall suffer the penalty of:

(1) 
Prision Correccional in its maximum period to prision mayor or six 
(6) years to twelve (12) years imprisonment and a fine of not less 
than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00) but not more than One 
hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00); Provided, however, That 
the following acts shall be exempted thereto:

(2) 
If the offense under involves sexual intercourse or lascivious 
conduct with a child, the penalty shall be reclusion temporal in its 
medium period to reclusion perpetua or seventeen (17) years to 
forty (40) years imprisonment and a fine of not less than Five 
hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00) but not more than One 
million pesos (P1,000,000.00);

(3) 
If it involves carnal knowledge of, or sexual intercourse with, a male 
or female trafficking victim and also involves the use of force or 
intimidation, to a victim deprived of reason or to an unconscious 
victim, or a victim under twelve (12) years of age, instead of the 
penalty prescribed in the subparagraph above the penalty shall be 
a fine of not less than One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) but not 
more than Five million pesos (P5,000,000.00) and imprisonment of 
reclusion perpetua or forty (40) years imprisonment with no 
possibility of parole; except that if the offender knows the person 
that provided prostitution services is in fact a trafficked person, the 
offender shall be penalized under Section 10 as a person violating 
Section 4 of the Act; and if in committing such an offense, the 
offender also knows a qualifying circumstance for trafficking, the 
offender shall be penalized under Section 10 for qualified 
trafficking. If in violating this section the offender also violates 
Section 4, the offender shall be penalized under Section 10 and, if 
applicable, for qualified trafficking instead of under this section;

(e) 
Deportation.  If a foreigner commits any offense described by paragraph 
(1) or (2) of this Section or violates any pertinent provision of the Act as an 
accomplice or accessory to, or by attempting any such offense, he/she shall be 
immediately deported after serving his or her sentence and be barred 
permanently from entering the country; and

(f) 
Public official. – If the offender is a public official, he or she shall be 
dismissed from service and shall suffer perpetual absolute disqualification to 
hold public office, in addition to any imprisonment or fine received pursuant to 
any other provision of the Act.

Section 161. Attempted Trafficking in Persons. Section 4(b) of the Act 
prohibits the attempt to commit any of the offenses enumerated in Section 4 
thereof. Where there are acts to initiate the commission of a TIP offense but the

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[79]

offender failed to or did not execute all the elements of the crime, by accident 
or by reason of some cause other than voluntary desistance, such overt acts 
shall be deemed as an attempt to commit an act of TIP.

In cases where the victim is a child, any of the following acts shall also be 
deemed as attempted trafficking in persons:

(a) 
Facilitating the travel of a child who travels alone to a foreign country 
or territory without valid reason therefor and without the required 
clearance or permit from the DSWD, or a written permit or justification 
from the child’s parent or legal guardian;

(b) 
Executing, for a consideration, an affidavit of consent or a written 
consent for adoption;

(c) 
Recruiting a woman to bear a child for the purpose of selling the child;

(d) 
Simulating a birth for the purpose of selling the child; and

(e) 
Soliciting a child and acquiring the custody thereof through any 
means from among hospitals, clinics, nurseries, daycare centers, 
refugee or evacuation centers, and low-income families, for the 
purpose of selling the child.

Under Section 10 (b) of the Act, any person found guilty of committing 
attempted trafficking in persons shall suffer the penalty of imprisonment of 
fifteen (15) years and a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos 
(P500,000.00) but not more than One million pesos (P1,000,000.00).

Section 162. Accomplice Liability. – Section 4(b) of the Act prohibits any 
person who knowingly aids, abets, cooperates in the execution of any of the 
offenses defined in the Act by previous or simultaneous acts shall be punished 
as an accomplice under Section 10(c) of the Act shall suffer the penalty of 
imprisonment of fifteen (15) years and a fine of not less than Five hundred 
thousand pesos (P500,000.00) but not more than One million pesos 
(P1,000,000.00).

Section 163. Accessory. – Whoever has the knowledge of the commission of 
the crime, and without having participated therein, either as principal or as 
accomplice, take part in its commission in any of the following manners:

(a) 
By profiting himself/herself for assisting the offender to profit by the 
effects of the crime;

(b) 
By concealing or destroying the body of the crime or effects or 
instruments thereof, in order to prevent its discovery; or

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[80]

(c) 
By harboring, concealing or assisting in the escape of the principal of 
the crime, provided the accessory acts with abuse of his or her public 
functions or is known to be habitually guilty of some other crime.

Under Section 10(d) of the Act, any person found guilty of committing any of 
these shall suffer the penalty of imprisonment of fifteen (15) years and a fine of 
not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00) but not more than 
One million pesos (P1,000,000.00).

Section 164. Qualified Trafficking in Persons. – The acts of trafficking in 
persons under Section 6 of the Act shall be considered as qualified trafficking:

(a) 
When the trafficked person is a child; Provided, That acts of OSAEC 
shall be without prejudice to appropriate investigation and 
prosecution under other related laws;

(b) 
When the adoption is effected through R.A. No. 8043 (Inter-Country 
Adoption Act of 1995) and said adoption is for the purpose of 
prostitution, pornography, sexual exploitation, forced labor, slavery, 
involuntary servitude or debt bondage;

(c) 
When the crime is committed by a syndicate, or in large scale. 
Trafficking is deemed committed by a syndicate if carried out by a 
group of three (3) or more persons conspiring or confederating with 
one another. It is deemed committed in large scale if committed 
against three (3) or more persons, individually or as a group;

(d) 
When the offender is a spouse, an ascendant, parent, sibling, 
guardian or a person who exercises authority over the trafficked 
person or when the offense is committed by a public officer or 
employee;

(e) 
When the trafficked person is recruited to engage in prostitution with 
any member of the military or law enforcement agencies;

(f) 
When the offender is a member of the military or law enforcement 
agencies;

(g) 
When by reason or on occasion of the act of TIP, the offended party 
dies, becomes insane, suffers mutilation or is afflicted with Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) or the Acquired Immune Deficiency 
Syndrome (AIDS);

(h) 
When the offender, commits one or more acts of trafficking under 
Section 4 of the Act over a period of at least sixty (60) days, whether 
those days are continuous or not;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[MOCK TRANSLATION] The Trust Fund may also be used to support the operations of the Secretariat.

(i) 
When the offender or through another, directs or manages the 
actions of a victim in carrying out the exploitative purpose of TIP;

(j) 
When the crime is committed during a crisis, disaster, public health 
concern, pandemic, a humanitarian conflict, or emergency situation, 
or when the trafficked person is a survivor of a disaster or a human-
induced conflict;

(k) 
When the trafficked person belongs to an indigenous community or 
religious minority and is considered a member of the same;

(l) 
When the trafficked person is a person with disability (PWD);

(m) 
 When the crime has resulted in pregnancy;

(n) 
When the trafficked person suffered mental or emotional disorder as 
a result of being victim of TIP; or

(o) 
When the act is committed by or through the use of ICT or any 
computer system.

Under Section 10(e) of the Act, any person found guilty of qualified trafficking 
shall suffer the penalty of life imprisonment and a fine of not less than Two 
million pesos (P2,000,000.00) but not more than Five million pesos 
(P5,000,000.00).

Article 2 
Application of Penalties and Other Sanctions

Section 165. Application of Penalties and Other Sanctions. (a) In every 
case, conviction shall cause and carry the automatic revocation of the license 
or registration of the recruitment agency involved in TIP. When the trafficked 
person is a child, the license of a recruitment or manning agency shall be 
automatically revoked and shall be penalized with a fine of not less than One 
million pesos (P1,000,000.00) but not more than Three million pesos 
(P3,000,000.00) per recruited underage migrant worker. All fees pertinent to 
the processing of papers or documents in the recruitment or deployment of the 
underage migrant worker shall be refunded by the responsible recruitment or 
manning agency, without need of notice, to the underage migrant worker or to 
the latter’s parent or guardian. The refund shall be independent of and in 
addition to the indemnification or damages sustained by the underage migrant 
worker. The refund shall be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the 
mandatory repatriation.

(b)  
Any person who files a complaint against another for violations of the Act 
and such complaint has been found to be with malice and solely for the purpose 
of harassing, persecuting or subjecting the latter to unwarranted surveillance or 
wire-tapping, or both, shall suffer the penalty of imprisonment of not more than

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[82]

one (1) year and a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos 
(P500,000.00) but not more than One million pesos (P1,000,000.00).

(c) 
If the offender is a corporation, partnership association, club, 
establishment or any juridical person, the penalty shall be imposed upon the 
owner, president, partner, manager, or any responsible officer, or any two (2) 
or more of them, who participated in the commission of the crime or who shall 
have permitted or knowingly failed to prevent its commission;

(d)  
The registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) or 
the DTI and license to operate of the erring agency, corporation, association, 
religious group, tour or travel agent, club or establishment, any place of 
entertainment, or any of the enumerated entities under Section 9 of the Act, 
shall be cancelled and revoked permanently. The owner, president, partner or 
manager thereof shall not be allowed to operate similar establishments in a 
different name;

(e)  
If the offender is a foreigner, he/she shall be immediately deported after 
serving his/her sentence and be barred permanently from entering the country.

(f)   
Any employee or official of government agencies who shall issue or 
approve the issuance of travel exit clearances, passports, registration 
certificates, counselling certificates, marriage license, and other similar 
documents to persons, whether juridical or natural, recruitment agencies, 
establishments or other individuals or groups, who fail to observe the prescribed 
procedures and the requirement as provided for by laws, rules and regulations, 
shall be held administratively liable, without prejudice to criminal liability under 
the Act. The concerned government officials or employees shall, upon 
conviction, be dismissed from the service and be barred permanently to hold 
public office and their retirement and other benefits shall likewise be forfeited;

(g)  
Public or government officials and employees who are found guilty of 
any violation of this Act shall be punished with dismissal or removal from office 
after due notice and hearing by the appropriate agency. In addition, such official 
or employee shall suffer perpetual absolute disqualification to hold public office 
and forfeiture of all retirement and other benefits; and

(h)  
Conviction by final judgment of the adopter for any offense under the Act 
shall result in the immediate rescission of the decree of adoption.

Section 166.  Confiscation and Forfeiture of the Proceeds and 
Instruments Derived from TIP. In addition to the penalty imposed for the 
violation of the Act, the court shall order the confiscation and forfeiture, in favor 
of the government, of all the proceeds and properties derived from the 
commission of the crime, unless they are the property of a third person not liable 
for the unlawful act; Provided, however, that all awards for damages shall be 
taken from the personal and separate properties of the offender; Provided,

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

[83]

further, That if such properties are insufficient, the balance shall be taken from 
the confiscated and forfeited properties.

When the proceeds, properties and instruments of the offense have been 
destroyed, diminished in value or otherwise rendered worthless by any act or 
omission, directly or indirectly, of the offender, or it has been concealed, 
removed, converted or transferred to prevent the same from being found or to 
avoid forfeiture or confiscation, the offender shall be ordered to pay the amount 
equal to the value of the proceeds, property or instruments of the offense.

RULE X 
FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 1 
Appropriations and Other Funding Sources

Section 167. Funding. The amount necessary to implement the provisions of 
the Act shall be charged against the current year’s appropriations of the Council 
under the budget of the DOJ and the appropriations of the other concerned 
departments. 
Thereafter, 
such 
sums 
necessary 
for 
the 
continued 
implementation of the Act shall be included in the annual General 
Appropriations Act.

Section 168. Additional funds for the Council. The amount collected from 
every penalty, fine or asset derived from any violation of the Act shall be 
earmarked as additional funds for the use of the Council. The fund may be 
augmented by grants, donations and endowment from various sources, 
domestic or foreign, for purposes related to their functions, subject to the 
existing accepted rules and regulations of the Commission on Audit.

Section 169. Establishment of a Trust Fund; Sources. The Council shall 
establish and manage a Trust Fund which shall be sourced from all fines 
imposed under the Act and the proceeds and properties forfeited and 
confiscated pursuant to Section 14 of the Act, as well as those collected by the 
AMLC shall accrue to a Trust Fund to be administered and managed by the 
Council to be used exclusively for programs that will prevent acts of TIP and 
protect, rehabilitate, reintegrate trafficked persons into the mainstream of 
society.

Section 170. Utilization. The Trust Fund shall be used exclusively for 
programs that will prevent acts of TIP and assist, protect, rehabilitate, 
reintegrate trafficked persons into the mainstream of society. Such programs 
shall include, but not limited to the following:

(a) 
Provision for mandatory services set forth in Section 23 of the Act;

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

(b) 
Sponsorship of a national research program on TIP and 
establishment of a data collection system for monitoring and 
evaluation purposes;

(c) 
Provision of necessary technical and material support services to 
appropriate government agencies and NGOs;

(d) 
Sponsorship of conferences and seminars to provide venue for 
consensus building among the public, the academe, government, 
NGOs and international organizations; and

(e) 
Promotion of information and education campaign on TIP.

Ang Trust Fund ay maaari ding gamitin upang suportahan ang operasyon ng Secretariat.

Section 171. Augmentation of agency funds. Subject to existing government 
accounting and auditing rules and regulations, the Council may augment 
agency and member-NGO funds for implementation of special programs and 
services for trafficked persons.

Section 172. Use and Disbursement of Trust Fund. The use and 
disbursement of the Trust Fund shall be subject to the approval of at least two-
thirds (2/3) of the members of the Council and shall be governed by existing 
government accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

Section 173. Inclusion in Agency Appropriations. The heads of department, 
agencies concerned and LGUs shall include in their annual appropriations the 
funding necessary to implement programs and services required by the Act and 
these rules and regulations.

National government agencies and LGUs may include the programs, projects 
and activities required to carry out their mandate under the Act and these rules 
and regulations in their annual Gender and Development (GAD) Plan and 
Budget, in accordance with the GAD Planning and Budgeting Guidelines issued 
by the PCW.

Article 2 
Miscellaneous

Section 174. Saving Clause. The provisions of R.A. No. 7610 remain 
applicable and shall not in any way be amended or repealed by the provisions 
of the Act.  
Section 175. Amendment. This Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) 
maybe amended, modified or supplemented by the Council when necessary for 
effective implementation and enforcement of R.A. No. 9208, as amended.

2022 Revised Rules and Regulations Implementing R.A. No. 9208, as amended

Section 176. Separability Clause. The declaration of invalidity of any part of 
the rules and regulations or part thereof shall not affect the validity of the 
remaining provisions.

Section 177. Repealing Clause. Pertinent provisions of rules, regulations, and 
resolutions contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of the Act and this 
IRR are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 178. Effectivity. These rules and regulations shall take effect fifteen 
(15) days after its complete publication in the Official Gazette.  
 ********************** 
--END--