/ IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF



PHILIPPINES BY ENHANCING THE TEACHER EDUCATION COUNCIL,
ESTABLISHING A SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM FOR STUDENTS IN THE
TEACHER EDUCATION PROGRAM, INSTITUTIONALIZING THE NATIONAL
EDUCATORS ACADEMY OF THE PHILIPPINES, AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO.
7784, ENTITLED ‘AN ACT TO STRENGTHEN TEACHER EDUCATION IN THE
PHILIPPINES BY ESTABLISHING CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE, CREATING A
TEACHER EDUCATION COUNCIL FOR THE PURPOSE, APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES’ ”

The Department of Education (DepEd), Commission on Higher Education
(CHED), Technical ‘Education and Skilis Development Authority (TESDA),
National Commission for Culture and the Arts (NCCA), and Professional
Regulation Commission (PRC), in consultation with other relevant stakeholders,
hereby issue the following rules and regulations to effectively implement the

be ; U.P. LAW CENTER
provisions of the Act: OHICE of ste NATIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE REGISTE!

Acministrative tvies ond Regulations

(a

Wy
RULE I. PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS k MAY 31 2023
bE

SECTION 1. Title. oe ts 5
BY:

TIME:
These rules and regulations shall be referred to as the implode Rules

and Regulations (IRR) of the Republic Act No. (RA) 11713, otherwise known as
the “Excellence in Teacher Education Act”.

SECTION 2. Scope and Application.

These IRR shall apply to teachers and school leaders in all public and
private basic education institutions, and to all public and private Teacher
Education Institutions (TEIs).

SECTION. 3. Declaration of Policy.

These IRR shall be interpreted in light of the Declaration of Policy found in
Section 2 of the Act.

“It is the declared policy of the State to protect and promote the right of all
citizens to quality education at all levels and to take appropriate steps to make
such education accessible and relevant to all. It is likewise universally recognized
that the teacher is the key to effective teaching-learning processes by drawing
out and nurturing the best in the learner as a human being and a worthy
member of society. Further, the State recognizes the role of school leaders in
supporting teachers by fostering an environment for effective teaching and a
school culture that develops enthusiastic and independent learners who are
committed to lifelong learning.”

“Towards this end, the State shall ensure and enhance the quality

education and training of teachers nationwide by establishing a scholarship
program for deserving students pursuing teacher education degree programs,

and for teachers and school leaders pursuing graduate degree programs, and
providing a dynamic, modern, and equitable education system through the
national leadership of the Teacher Education Council, hereinafter referred to as
the Council, which is mandated to carry out this vision through the development
of teachers and school leaders who are of unquestionable integrity and
competence, and who are committed to the pursuit of their continuing
professional growth and obligation to help learners grow as responsible,
competent and productive individuals and citizens of the Philippines and of the

world.

SECTION 4. Definition of Terms.

The following terms shall mean or be understood as follows:

4.1

4.2

4.3

4.4

4.5

4.6

4.7

Administration of Licensure Examination refers to the
examination cycle which covers the preparatory, conduct, and post-
activity phases that the PRC needs to complete to ensure the
successful administration of the licensure examinations. The pre-
examination phase includes the crafting of the Table of Specifications
(TOS) based on the CHED Policies, Standards, and Guidelines
(PSGs), formulation of test questions, conduct of peer review and
editing, encoding into the test question databank and random
extraction of test items. Once completed, the licensure examination
shall then be conducted. The post-examination phase includes the
correction, item analysis, rating, and ends with the release of the
examination results;

Assessment refers to a systematic collection, review, and use of
information about wide variety of methods or tools that educators
use to evaluate, measure, and document the academic readiness,
learning progress, skill acquisition, or educational needs of students
and for the purpose of improving their learning and development;

Council refers to the Teacher Education Council as institutionalized
in the Act;

Excellence refers to the efficient, effective, and innovative delivery of
relevant, functional, and quality programs in teacher education,

- training, curriculum development, instruction, research, and

extension services;

Formal Education refers to the systematic and deliberate process of
hierarchically structured and sequential academic learning from
kindergarten to graduate education;

In-service Education refers to any professional development
training given to education personnel, which include formal and
informal activities that develop an individual's skills, knowledge, and
expertise in the teaching profession;

Nonformal Education refers to any organized and systematic
educational activity undertaken outside the framework of the formal
education system to provide selected types of learning to a segment of
the population;

4.8

4.9

4.10

4.12

4.13

4.14

Other Teaching-Related Personnel refer to those who perform
teaching-related functions such as guidance counselors and
librarians, and other personnel to be determined by the Council;

Para-Teachers refer to those who have taken the licensure
examination for teachers but were unable to qualify and have been
issued by the PRC through its Board for Professional Teachers a
special permit indicating their area of assignment where there is a
shortage or absence of a professional teacher;

Pre-Service Teacher Education Programs refer to undergraduate
degrees and certificates of teaching covering mandatory curriculum
and practicum specifications;

Pre-Service Teachers refer to students enrolled in a teacher
education degree program offered by Teacher Education Institutions
(TEIs);

Professional Standards refer to the set of standards established and
used by the DepEd and other standards that set out expectations of
professional practice for teachers and school leaders across their
respective career stages. It shall be the basis for all learning and
development programs for teachers and school leaders, as well as the
benchmark for their selection and promotion. The integrity of these
standards shall be ensured by the Council through rigorous reviews
after five (5) years from the effectivity of the Act and every five (5) years
thereafter, or within a shorter period, as the Council deems it
necessary;

Roadmap refers to a strategic plan that defines the Council’s goal and
desired outcome within a certain period which includes all of the
major steps and milestones of the Council in collaboration with the
different education agencies and stakeholders;

School Leaders refer to officials in the public school system who
perform managerial and supervisory roles in their respective levels of
governance, such as head teachers, department heads, principals and
assistant principals, schools district supervisors, education program

: supervisors and chief education supervisors at the schools division

4.15

4.16

4.17

and regional offices, schools division superintendents, regional
directors and assistant regional directors, and their equivalent
positions in the private school system;

Teacher refers to a person qualified to practice teaching under the
law and engaged in the teaching of any subject, including technical-
vocational (Tech-Voc), at the basic education level in all private or
public basic education institutions. This may include teachers who
may not actually be employed as such;

Teacher Education refers to formal pre-service and in-service
education and training, including graduate education, in various
areas of specialization undertaken by pre-service teachers and
teachers;

Teacher Education Center of Excellence (Teacher Education-
COE) refers to a public or private college, institute, school or agency,

which satisfy to the criteria for COEs and may exist by itself or within
a university or college, that is engaged in providing academic training
for both formal and nonformal pre-service and continuing education
of students, teachers, school leaders, and teacher educators, that has
established and continues to maintain an excellent track record in
teacher education, instruction, faculty qualifications, research,
extension services, linkages, ability to produce top caliber graduates,
and others as specified in the criteria for identifying Teacher
Education-COEs as provided for under the Act;

4.18 Teacher Education Institutions (TEIs) refer to higher education
institutions (HEIs) recognized by the CHED offering teacher education
degree programs and certificates in teaching programs or their
equivalent, as may be approved by the CHED;

4.19 Teacher Education Programs refer to recognized academic
programs, such as undergraduate and graduate degree programs,
including certificate of teaching education or its equivalent, that
enable pre-service teachers to meet the requirements for entry into
the teaching profession and provide in-service teachers with the
knowledge, skills and practical experience to strengthen their
professional practice;

4.20 Teacher Educators refer to those in the education sector who educate
pre-service and in-service teachers.

RULE II. TEACHER EDUCATION CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE
SECTION 5. Teacher Education-COE.

There shall be identified, designated, established, or developed in strategic
places in each of the regions of the country, one or more Teacher Education-
COEs based on the criteria listed hereunder, assessed and adjudged by the
Council.

Should the need arise, certain Teacher Education-COEs at the provincial level may later be established, identified, or developed.

At least one (1) TEI from Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao, and in Metro
Manila, Metro Cebu and Metro Davao shali be established as a Center of
Excellence in Special Needs Education.

For the purposes of these IRR, the Council shall provide details for the
following criteria in identifying schools and colleges as Teacher Education-COEs:

5.1 highly educated, professionally qualified and experienced faculty
recognized in their fields of study, exhibiting best practices in
excellence in the education sector, integrity, commitment, promotes
Filipino culture, and dedicated to the philosophy, mission, vision
and goals of the institution and education;

5.2. well-selected students who manifest the talent and commitment for
teaching;

5.3 adequate library, research and study facilities;
5.4 competent administrative and support staff;

5.5 innovative, well-planned, and relevant curriculum development,
instruction, mentoring, and research programs;

5.6 adequate student services and development programs,
5.7. relevant extension services, linkages, and outreach programs;

5.8 percentage of graduates who pass the licensure examination for
teachers and pursue a career in teaching;

5.9 graduates who become professionals in the education training and
development sector, or leaders in the education sector or both; and

5.10 such other criteria as may be established and operationalized by the
Council.

The Teacher Education Council shall form a Teacher Education-COEs
national network which in turn shall engage with elementary schools, high
schools and/or a part thereof for laboratory school purposes while developing a
shared vision, commitment, and mutual respect for each other’s expertise.

Any designated Teacher Education-COE shall be reviewed and evaluated
every three (3) years to ensure that it continues to possess the criteria prescribed
under the Act.

SECTION 6. Objectives and Functions of a Teacher Education-COE.
The objectives and functions of a Teacher Education-COE shall be to:

6.1. Conduct innovative and relevant pre-service and in-service teacher
education and/or NEAP recognized training programs, including
alternative delivery programs, to ensure access to education,
continuity of learning, and resilience of the education system that
shall develop and produce teachers who shall provide quality
education to learners;

6.2. Organize and coordinate collaborative research on identified areas
for systematic investigation in teacher education as basis for
improving teacher education programs, policies, standards and
guidelines;

6.3. Serve as teacher resource center for the development of curricular
or instructional materials, or both;

6.4. Act as the central learning hub for networking specific disciplines in
teacher education in the region;

6.5. Provide professional assistance to TEIs as the need arises, including
mentoring them in preparing for and pursuing appropriate

6.6.

6.7.

6.8.

pathways for quality assurance, and accelerating accreditation
among TEls;

Encourage mutual support among TEIs in the region for upgrading
and improving their programs;

Develop high standards of conduct in the field of research and
innovation on teacher education, publish research papers thereon
in local or international refereed journals and/or indexed journals,
and facilitate their accessibility for knowledge creation and
dissemination to TEIs and concerned agencies. Provided that, such
local or international refereed journals or indexed journals are those
with International Standard Serial Number (ISSN); and

Participate in the development and implementation of a national
agenda for research in teacher education that should cover priority
areas for the continuous enhancement of teacher education,
training, and development for purposes of local and international
research and publication.

For purposes of these IRR, the Council will take the lead in the national
agenda for research in teacher education together with the representatives from
the different educational institutions and heads of the COEs.

RULE III. TEACHER EDUCATION COUNCIL AND SECRETARIAT

SECTION 7. Teacher Education Council; Composition.

The Council shall be composed of nine (9) members. The Council, along
with its Secretariat, shall be attached to the DepEd solely for budgetary
coordination and related purposes.

It shall be composed of the following:

7.1

7.2

The following members of the Council shall serve in an ex officio
member capacity by virtue of their respective offices:

7.1.1 Secretary of the DepEd, as Chairperson;

7.1.2 Chairperson of the CHED as Vice-Chairperson;

7.1.3 Director-General of the Technical Education and Skills
Development Authority (TESDA);

7.1.4 Executive Director of the National Commission for Culture
and the Arts (NCCA); and

7.1.5 Chairperson of the Professional Regulation Commission
(PRC).

The following regular members shall be appointed by the President
of the Republic of the Philippines based on their integrity,
willingness to serve, and relevant expertise and experience in the
education sector:

7.2.1 A teacher representative from a public basic education
institution who is experienced and recognized as an expert
nationally and internationally and whose personal and

professional integrity as well as commitment to service are
proven or well-accepted;

7.2.2 A representative from an organization of deans of colleges of
education, professional teachers and educators;

7.2.3 A representative from a national organization of private basic
education institutions; and

7.2.4 A representative from a national organization composed of
school leaders from public or private basic education
institutions.

The members of the Council shall serve without any compensation but
shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred by them in
carrying out their duties under the Act.

The Council shall meet at least four (4) times a year and hold such other
meetings at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of the Council's members.

For purposes of these IRR, the ex officio may designate an authorized
representative to attend the quarterly meetings of the Council provided that said
representative must be occupying a certain position that would enable the
Council to convene meetings, discuss policy, and act on issues based on its
powers and functions. The level of representation shall be at least
Undersecretary level, or its equivalent.

All regular members of the Council shall hold office for a period of three
(3) years and may be reappointed once for another three (3) years.

SECTION 8. Powers and Functions of the Council.

The Council shall implement the provisions of the Act and shall continue
to exercise the following powers and functions:

8.1 Establish a roadmap for teacher education which shall serve as
: guide for designing, delivering, monitoring, and evaluating relevant,
responsive, innovative, creative, and collaborative program and
policy development initiatives. Such roadmap shall, as far as
practicable, be crafted with reference to similar roadmaps of other
agencies related to teacher education and development.

Provided that, this roadmap shall be submitted to the CHED for
inclusion in the national higher education roadmap that serves as
the human resource development plan for national development;

8.2 Strengthen the link between pre-service and in-service teacher
education programs by collaborating with relevant government
agencies and stakeholders, including the National Educators'
Academy of the Philippines (NEAP);

8.3. Set and mandate basic requirements for teacher education
programs, monitor and quality assure compliance therewith to
ensure a strong and transparent link between the outcomes of

8.4.

8.5.

8.6.

8.7.

8.8.

8.9.

teacher education programs and the professional standards for
teachers and school leaders, research, and international best
practices. It shall likewise ensure that such minimum requirements
are reasonably and effectively implemented by the CHED.

For purposes of these IRR, the TEIs shall train the Pre-service
Teachers (PSTs) on Professional Standards before graduating from
TEIs;

Identify and designate among existing private and public TEIs
Teacher Education-COEs for the CHED's supervision, monitoring,
and regulation.

Formulate a strategic plan to proactively develop Teacher
Education-COEs in every region and province.

Uphold and maintain the integrity of professional standards for
teachers and school leaders by formulating evidence-based policies
and standards that shall strengthen and improve the system of
teacher education and training both in pre-service and in-service,
including prescribing a national examination to determine the
eligibility for admission into a recognized TEI pre-service program,
and any successive pre-qualifying examination thereafter, in order
to determine whether the level of knowledge, skills, and readiness
prior to taking the licensure examination for teachers are being
met.

For purposes of these IRR, the Council shall formulate and issue
guidelines that will ensure the validity and incorporating the
professional standards in connection to the conduct of the national
screening for teachers and school leaders such as but not limited
to the filing and submission of requirements, schedules, and fees
thereof.

Further, in collaboration with TESDA, the practice teaching of pre-
service teachers under the Tech-Voc programs may be conducted
in the Technical Vocational Institutions (TVI) to ensure the
development of necessary skills required by the program;

Establish policies to implement a system of recognition affirming
the career stages achieved by teachers and school leaders based on
professional standards, including the institution, organization, and
maintenance of a pool of national assessors for such recognition;

Support the teachers and school leaders through the setting and
monitoring of systematic requirements to assure quality and
uniformity of all career-stage recognition processes being
implemented, and linking professional standards across their
professional life;

Establish a policy on an effective system of incentives such as
scholarships, grants-in-aid, loan programs, subsidies, stipends
and other similar benefits and incentives, to be implemented by the
Unified Student Financial Assistance System for Tertiary Education
(UniFAST) Board, in order to attract and encourage outstanding
basic education graduates both from public and private schools,

and tertiary-level students in programs other than education, to
pursue teacher education, as well as to encourage teachers to
pursue graduate degrees in teacher education. Applicants who have
benefitted from other incentives under existing laws shall be
ineligible to avail of the incentives under the Act;

Systematically monitor, evaluate, and report on the implementation
of the professional standards, including professional development
programs offered by the NEAP or other providers, to promote
exemplary practices of teachers and school leaders and thereby
contribute to the enhancement of the standing of the profession in
the community;

Ensure that the system to professionalize teachers aligns with the
professional standards and the Philippine Qualifications
Framework, incorporates feedback mechanisms to stakeholders for
the enhancement of pre-service teacher education in TEIs, and
involves comprehensive analysis of factors affecting the
performance of graduates in such professionalization. The conduct
of a licensure examination shall guarantee transparency through
the release of the most recent licensure examination questions and
corresponding answers immediately after their administration by
the PRC as well as the results of item analyses and other relevant
test statistics to the Council.

Provided, that such licensure examination questions, and
corresponding answers shall be released by the PRC immediately
after the completion of the examination cycle as herein defined
which is upon the release of the examination results. Provided
further, that the examination questions and corresponding
answers, results of the item analysis, and test statistics submitted
by the PRC shall be used for policy formulation, research, conduct
of constructive feedback on the licensure examination, and for such
other purposes the Council may deem it necessary. Provided finally,
that a system for feedback mechanism to examinees shall be
developed as a basis for the identification and analysis of the factors
that affect the performance of graduates in the licensure
examinations;

Recommend strategies to TEIs and HEIs for the implementation of
programs under Republic Act No. 10647, otherwise known as the
“Ladderized Education Act of 2014", to provide opportunities for
educational and career advancement for pre-service and in-service
teachers, including para-teachers and learning support aides.
Learning support aides shall be persons who work together in
collaboration with teachers and contribute to the provision of
learning opportunities that promote achievement and progression
of learners;

Recommend to the DepEd and the CHED strategies and policies
related to attracting and recruiting outstanding high school
graduates to pursue an education degree, and to ensure a seamless
transition from higher education to employment in teaching. Other
qualified professionals from different fields may also be recruited
into the teaching profession, subject to existing laws, rules, and
regulations;

8.14. Undertake, apply, and share research related to teaching and
school leadership that shall serve as a central repository of
literature on teacher education, and conduct, by itself or through
third parties, relevant studies needed in the formulation of policies
and in the planning and successful implementation of plans,
programs and projects required in attaining the purposes of the Act;

8.15. Create, reorganize or abolish offices under the Secretariat which
shall provide administrative and technical support to the Council
in executing its policies and programs and form committees which
shall render advice or assistance to the Council in connection with
any of the functions stated in this section;

8.16. Encourage the establishment of consortia and other cooperative
arrangements among public and private TEIs for greater efficiency
and economy in the use of resources and to strengthen the
complementary role of the public and private sectors in teacher
education, learning, and development;

8.17. Review existing policies and recommend new legislation and
policies in order to continuously improve, enhance and strengthen
teacher education and promote the welfare of teachers and school
leaders.

8.18. Call upon any department, bureau, office, or government
corporation, local government unit and other concerned agencies
for assistance in areas falling within their mandate;

8.19. Maintain a list of all TEIs in coordination with the CHED; and

8.20. Promulgate rules and regulations and exercise such other powers
and functions as may be necessary to effectively carry out the
purpose and objectives of the Act.

SECTION 9. Advisor to the Council.

The Philippine Normal University, the designated National Center for
Teacher Education under Republic Act No. 9647, shall serve as the advisor to
the Council by providing research-based, strategic, and innovative
recommendations and technical support on teacher education.

For purposes of these IRR, the Advisor shall conduct high-impact and
applied research. .In addition, the Council shall provide evidence-based policy
advice and technical assistance on teacher education.

' Notwithstanding that, the designation of the Advisor shall not prevent the
Council to identify and commission other qualified individuals or organizations
on an advisory or consultative capacity as it may deem necessary. Provided that,
such designation of the qualified individuals or organizations shall be for the
purpose of providing additional support in developing the priorities of the
Council.

SECTION 10. Secretariat.

A Secretariat is hereby organized to assist the Council in executing its
policies and programs and provide the necessary administrative and technical
support.

The Secretariat shall be headed by an Executive Director who shall
exercise general supervision and control over the technical and administrative
personnel of the offices under the Secretariat. The Executive Director shall be
assisted by a Deputy Executive Director who shall coordinate and oversee the
regional operations.

The Council shall fix the staffing pattern of the Secretariat and determine
the qualifications, functions, and compensation scheme for the positions to be
created. The Council shall further prepare the necessary budget for the
operationalization of the Secretariat.

The Secretariat shall initially be composed of the following offices, each to
be headed by a Director:

10.1 Quality Pre-service Teacher Education Office. The Quality Pre-
service Teacher Education Office shall perform the following
functions:

10.1.1 Coordinate with the various TEIs for cooperative arrangement
in the sharing of resources, best practices, research and
other similar undertakings that will improve their
respective teacher education programs;

10.1.2 Conduct study and evaluation for the intelligent assessment
of the Council of the content of the licensure examination
for teachers; and

10.1.3 Other functions as may be assigned by the Council through
the Executive Director.

10.2 Quality Teaching Office. The Quality Teaching Office shall ensure
that the professional standards for teachers and school leaders are
applied fairly and consistently across the country and shall perform
the following functions:

10.2.1 Formulate and recommend policies to the Council for the
institution and continuing enhancement of a National
Career Assessment Program for teachers and _ school
leaders;

10.2.2 Assist the Council in the evaluation of teacher proficiency
and in certifying the appropriate career stages achieved by
teachers and school leaders;

10.2.3 Coordinate research studies and the development of
proficiency-enhancing materials for teachers and school
leaders; and

10.2.4 Other functions as may be assigned by the Council through
the Executive Director.

10.3 Finance and Administration Office. The Finance and Administration Office shall oversee financial functions and operations, and human-resource related functions. It may perform other functions as may be assigned by the Council through the Executive Director.

RULE IV. TEACHER EDUCATION SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM
SECTION 11. Establishment of a Teacher Education Scholarship Program.
A Teacher Education Scholarship Program (TESP) shall be established
under the Act, for deserving basic education graduates both from public and
private schools, and tertiary level students to pursue undergraduate teacher
education degree program, in all Teacher Education-COEs which shall be
implemented by the UniFAST Board.

The financial assistance under the TESP shall include the following,
depending on the needs of the student grantee:

11.1. Free tuition and other school fees;

11.2. Allowance for prescribed books, supplies and learning materials;
11.3. Research support grant;

11.4. Clothing or uniform allowance;

11.5. Allowance for dormitory or boarding house accommodation;
11.6. Transportation allowance;

11.7. Thesis/dissertation/project allowance;

11.8. Research publication fee, if applicable;

11.9. Licensure examination review fees;

11.10. Licensure fees; and

11.11. Other education-related miscellaneous subsistence or living
allowances.

The TESP and the eligibility criteria and conditions for the acceptance and
disqualification thereto, in addition to the minimum requirements and
conditions prescribed by the UniFAST Board, shall be determined and
incorporated by the Council in its policy on an effective system of incentives.
Grantees of other incentives under existing laws shall be prohibited from availing
of the incentives under the TESP.

SECTION 12. Student Incentives Support Office.

A Student Incentives Support Office shall be established to create and
implement programs that shall attract and encourage top caliber students to the
teaching profession and shall establish a scholarship program for qualified
students which the UniFAST Board shall implement. Its functions shall include
the following:

12.1. In coordination with the DepEd, develop an annual implementation
plan which shall include a thorough teacher demand analysis and

recruitment campaign to attract incoming undergraduate students
and program shifters to take on a teaching education program;

12.2. Establish a partnership program with private and public basic
education schools for an annual career talk to orient and encourage
top caliber students to join the teaching profession;

12.3. Provide screening guidelines for highly competent faculty and
professionals from the TEIS who will qualify and serve as mentors
for the pre-service teachers; and

12.4. Establish and maintain a scholarship program for deserving
students pursuing undergraduate teacher education degree
program:

12.4.1. Develop and conduct an annual competitive examination
and qualification standards for incoming undergraduate
students who may be granted full benefits of the TESP;

12.4.2. Monitor and ensure that TESP scholars complete their
course only in private or public TEIs designated as COEs;

12.4.3. Coordinate with regional offices to ensure regional support
and coordination in the implementation of the TESP;

12.4.4. Ensure that TESP scholars shall be mentored by highly
competent faculty and professionals throughout the course
of their study; and

12.4.5. Promulgate and periodically review for approval of the
Council the qualification criteria for scholars and mentors.

RULE V. APPOINTMENT /SELECTION OF OFFICERS OF
THE TEACHER EDUCATION COUNCIL SECRETARIAT

SECTION 13. Appointments.

The Executive Director of the Secretariat shall be appointed by the
Chairperson of the Council, upon the concurrence of the members. The
Executive Director shall have a fixed term of five (5) years, unless sooner removed
by the concurrence of the Council, and shall not be eligible for reappointment.
The Executive Director must be engaged in the practice of teaching for at least
ten (10) years, holder of at least a master's degree in education or any related
field and has contributed to the improvement of teacher quality or teacher
education in the country. The Executive Director shall have the rank, privileges,
and emoluments of an Executive Director V.

The selection of Deputy Executive Director and the Directors shall be done
by the Council in accordance with the relevant rules, standards and procedures
on the selection and classification of members of the career executive services.
Said positions shall be in accordance with the Compensation and Position
Classification System subject to the review and approval of the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM).

RULE VI. REVIEW AND ASSESSMENT OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF
POLICIES ON TEACHER EDUCATION

SECTION 14. Policy Implementation Review and Assessment.

For the purpose of fully optimizing policy development on teacher
education and reinforcing the role of the Council in linking pre-service and in-
service education and training, the Secretary of the DepEd, the Chairperson of
the CHED and the President of the Advisor to the Council shall conduct a
comprehensive review and assessment of the DepEd and the CHED's
implementation of policies on teacher education every five (5) years, in
consultation with the teachers, school leaders and other stakeholders.

RULE VII. COORDINATION WITH OTHER GOVERNMENT AGENCIES
INVOLVED IN EDUCATION PROGRAMS

SECTION 15. Coordination with Other Government Agencies.

The Council shall closely coordinate with other agencies and stakeholders
with regards to rights and welfare of the teachers including the following agencies
involved in education programs for effective implementation of its powers and
functions:

15.1 DepEd - shall provide the Council an annual report on the following
areas:

15.1.1. Development and needs of learners in the basic education
level;

15.1.2. Competencies and areas of learning that need to be given
attention;

15.1.3. Performance of learners in international assessments;

15.1.4. Hiring and performance of teachers;

15.1.5. Training and career development of teachers;

15.1.6. Evaluation on the quality of professional learning courses
for teachers; and

15.1.7. Other matters that the Council may need information on.

15.2 CHED - shall provide the Council an annual report on the status
and performance of all TEIs in the implementation of the teacher
education program, including the development of curriculum for
teacher education programs, admission and performance of
students in TEIs, potential TEIs which the Council may designate as
Teacher Education-COE, performance of faculty members,
researches conducted and published, institutions applying for
recognition, non-performing TEIs, and other matters regarding

i teacher education that must be brought to the attention of the
Council;

15.3 PRC - shall provide the Council an annual report and analysis of the
professionalization of teachers, including the content and result of
the licensure examination and periodic merit examination for
teachers, the passing rate of TEIs, and other matters, as may be
requested by the Council, that may be relevant to the improvement
and development of the teacher education programs;

15.4 TESDA - shail provide the Council an annual report on the
development of the Tech-Voc programs and Tech-Voc industries,
status and performance of public and private TESDA-accredited
institutions, performance and employability of learners in senior
high school in the Tech-Voc track, and such other information as
may be required by the Council;

15.5 NCCA - shall provide the Council an annual report and update on
the development in the creative industries, indigenous industries,
and other matters relevant in the study of social sciences and
history, national heritage, and creative arts, in aid of ensuring the
teachers are provided with knowledge on the said subject areas,
pursuant to its relevant policies and programs; and

15.6 UniFAST Board - shall, in coordination with the CHED and the
Council, implement the TESP. It shall also provide the Council an
annual report on the scholarships and other financial assistance
made available, the number of beneficiaries and Teacher Education-
COEs involved, and other relevant information as the Council may
require.

RULE VIII. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENT OF TEACHER
EDUCATION BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS

SECTION 16. Active Participation of Local Government Units.

Local government units shall include in their plans, programs, and
projects the development and improvement of teacher education through the
Teacher Education-COEs in their respective regions.

For purposes of these IRR, to facilitate this provision, the Council shall
coordinate with any Local Government Units with identified Teacher Education-
COEs as well as public and private basic education institutions.

RULE [X. NATIONAL EDUCATORS’ ACADEMY OF THE PHILIPPINES

SECTION 17. Institutionalizing the National Educators' Academy of the
Philippines.

Pursuant to the State mandate to enhance the right of teachers to
professional advancement and to protect and promote the right of all citizens to
quality education, the NEAP is hereby institutionalized to provide quality
professional development programs on teacher education to in-service teachers,
school leaders, and other teaching-related personnel in all public and private
basic education institutions. It shall employ a world-class approach to
professional development that is based on strong evidence and research.

The NEAP shall be a component unit of the DepEd. It shall be headed by
an Executive Director to be appointed by the President, upon the
recommendation of the Secretary of the DepEd.

The Secretary of the DepEd shall establish the organizational structure of
the NEAP, fix the staffing pattern, and determine the qualifications, functions,
and compensation for the positions to be created.

SECTION 18. Powers and Functions of the NEAP.

For the continuing professional development of in-service teachers, school
leaders, and other teaching-related personnel in all basic education institutions,
the NEAP shall:

Collaborate with the Council to promote coherence and continuity
between pre-service and in-service education and training;

Design, develop, and implement professional development programs
to improve teaching expertise and effective school leadership over the
course of a career in accordance with the professional standards and
other potential partners and relevant stakeholders.

Coordinate, oversee and monitor the conduct of NEAP-recognized
courses, seminars, workshops and other professional development
programs provided by other DepEd bureaus, services or units, and
public or private universities, colleges, and training institutions;

Conduct research and evaluation of the effectiveness of the
professional development programs provided under sub-paragraph

Ensure equitable access to these professional development programs
for teachers and school leaders;

For purposes of these IRR, NEAP shall formulate in coordination with
other relevant stakeholders the policy to ensure that all teachers and
school leaders will be able to have equal access and opportunity to
participate in professional development programs and courses;

Provide scholarships and fellowships for in-service teachers, school
leaders, and other teaching-related personnel in public basic
education institutions to pursue advanced studies in specialized
fields subject to corresponding service obligations;

Ensure an effective link between the professional development of

: teachers, school leaders, and other teaching-related personnel with

their career progression. For this purpose, the NEAP shall develop
and maintain a professional development information system which
shall contain the professional development programs recognized by
the NEAP, the providers thereof, and the list of in-service teachers,
school leaders, and other teaching-related personnel in attendance
with their corresponding professional development credit units
earned;

Strengthen collaboration with learning service providers and other
stakeholders in providing professional development programs;

Coordinate with the PRC for the recognition or accreditation of its

programs in compliance with the requirements for continuing
professional development;

18.10. Collaborate with TEIs in the delivery of their professional
development programs for teachers, school leaders, and other
teaching-related personnel;

18.11. Charge reasonable fees for the use of its facilities and for
participation in professional development programs not adequately
funded from the DepEd budget, receive in trust legacies, gifts, and
donations of real and personal properties of all kinds, and record
such fees, legacies, gifts and donations as a special account or fund
other than the general fund, to be known as the NEAP Fund, and
administer the same exclusively for the benefit of the NEAP or for aid
to teachers, school leaders, and other teaching-related personnel for
their in-service professional development, subject to guidelines
issued by the DepEd and other applicable rules or regulations;

18.12. Manage the amount to be received from the DepEd's appropriated
budget, which shall be necessary to carry out its objectives,
functions, operation, improvement, programs, projects, and
activities; and

18.13. Exercise such other powers and functions as may be necessary to
effectively implement the purpose and objectives of the Act.

NEAP shall provide access to professional development programs for
private school teachers, school leaders, and other teaching-related personnel. It
may extend scholarships and fellowships as may be deemed necessary, subject
to guidelines to be issued by the DepEd.

For purposes of these IRR, NEAP shall collaborate with relevant units or
offices in DepEd and other private education organizations, and/or institutions
in the design and delivery of professional development programs for private
school teachers and school leaders including applicable scholarships, if any.

RULE X. ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF
THE TEACHER EDUCATION COUNCIL

SECTION 19. Creation of New Items and Transitory Provisions.

The personnel of the existing Council shall, in a holdover capacity,
continue to perform their respective duties and responsibilities until such time
that the organizational structure and staffing pattern of the Secretariat shall
have been approved: Provided, That the preparation and approval of the new
organizational structure and staffing pattern shall, as far as practicable, respect
and ensure the security of tenure and seniority rights of affected government
employees.

Within three (3) months after the effectivity of the Act, the President shall,
in consultation with the Secretary of the DepEd, appoint the regular members of
the Council. The existing members of the Council shall serve in a holdover
capacity until a full and permanent Council is constituted and functioning.

Within three (3) months after the appointment of the regular members of
the Council, the Chairperson of the Council shall, upon the concurrence of the
other members, appoint the Executive Director of the Secretariat.

Within three (3) months after the effectivity of the Act, the Council shall
submit the organizational structure, staffing pattern, and compensation
schedule of the Secretariat to the DBM for funding.

The existing personnel in the NEAP shall be transitioned to the
organizational structure to be created by the Secretary of the DepEd. New items
shall be created to augment the personnel complement of the NEAP, in
coordination with the DBM.

The recruitment, selection, and hiring of new personnel shall be in
accordance with Civil Service Commission rules and regulations on personnel
action.

Within six (6) months after the effectivity of the Act, the PRC under Section
8.11 of this IRR, shall implement the immediate release of the most recent
licensure examination questions and answers after the administration by the
PRC of said examination.

RULE XI. ANNUAL REPORT ON THE STATUS AND PROGRESS OF
TEACHER EDUCATION AND TEACHER QUALITY

SECTION 20. Report to Congress.

The Council shall submit to Congress, on or before the fifteenth day of
June of every year, its report on the status and progress of teacher education
and teacher quality in the country, as well as its recommendations in promoting
quality education through teacher education.

The report shall include the following topics pursuant to Section 20 of the
Act:

21.1 Roadmap for teacher education and the regular progress thereon;

21.2 Issues and problems on teacher education and the solutions
provided by the Council; and

21.3 Professionalization of the practice of teaching and the Council's
initiatives to improve the same.

The, submission of the annual report required under this section shall
commence three (3) years from the constitution of the Council.

RULE XII. JOINT CONGRESSIONAL OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE
_ ON TEACHER EDUCATION

SECTION 21. Joint Congressional Oversight Committee on Teacher
Education.

There is hereby created a Joint Congressional Oversight Committee
(JCOC} on Teacher Education to oversee, monitor, and evaluate the
implementation of the Act. The JCOC shall be composed of five (5) members each
from the Senate and the House of Representatives with the Chairpersons of the
Committees on Basic Education of both houses as Co-Chairpersons. The
Chairpersons of the Committees on Higher and Technical Education of both
Houses shall likewise be designated as members of the JCOC. The Speaker of
the House of Representatives and the President of the Senate shall designate the

other three (3) members of the JCOC of the House and the Senate, respectively,
from among the members of the Committees on Basic Education, one (1) member
of which shall be from the Minority.

RULE XIII. FINAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 22. Appropriations.

The Secretary of Education shall immediately include in the DepEd's
budget the amount necessary for the effective implementation of the Act:
Provided, that on the second year of implementation, and thereafter, the Council
along with its Secretariat shall have its own budget in the annual General
Appropriations Act, as an attached agency of the DepEd.

The budget of the NEAP shall continue to be part of the budget of the
DepEd.

For purposes of these IRR, the transfer of funds to the UniFAST Board for
the implementation of TESP shall be governed by the relevant guidelines to be
issued by the Council.

SECTION 23. Additional Implementing Details/Policies and Guidelines.

DepEd, the CHED, the TESDA, the NCCA, and the PRC shall, in
consultation with relevant stakeholders, issue the necessary rules and
regulations for its effective implementation. The IRR issued pursuant to this
section shall take effect thirty (30) days after its publication in a newspaper of
general circulation.

SECTION 24. Amendments.

Amendments to these IRR shall be issued by DepEd, CHED, TESDA,
NCCA, and the PRC, in consultation with relevant stakeholders.

SECTION 25. Separability Clause.

If any provision or part of the Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional,
the remaining parts not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 26. Repealing Clause.

Republic Act No. 7784 and all other laws, executive orders, presidential
decrees, administrative orders, rules and regulations, issuances, or parts thereof
inconsistent with or contrary to the provisions of the Act are hereby repealed or
amended accordingly.

i

SECTION 27. Effectivity.

These IRR shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the
Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

These IRR shall be registered with the Office of the National Administrative
Register (ONAR), University of the Philippines Law Center, UP Diliman, Quezon
City.

Done this day of May, 2023.

Republic Act 11713 - Implementing Rules and Regulations

CONFORME:

Puna LA

ON. SARA Z. DUTERT oy
Secretary, Department of Educdtion
TEC Ex-officio Chairman

(

HON. J. PROSPERO E. DE VERA III
Chairperson, C ission on Higher Education
TEC Ex-officio Vice-Chairman

Tali Ko Due

HON. DANILO P. CRUZ HON. RITO A. ZAMORA HON. Osc. Ge SAYSAY
Director General, TESDA Chairperson, PRC Executive Director, NCCA
TEC Ex-officio Member TEC Ex-officio Member TEC Ex-officio Member

of May, 2023 at Pasig City, Philippines.

Signed in the presence of:

—

ry Aes
P. ESPIQUE DR. NIP. BABIA DR. ANNABEL J. CASUMPA
eprpsentative Visayas Representative Mindanao Representative
TEC Regular Member TEC Regular Member TEC Regular Member
DR. THOMAS EDISON x DELA CRUZ DR. Te i 1
Science Representative Mathematics Representative
TEC Regular Member TEC Regular Member
DR. ARCHIE B. RESOS
Social Studies Representative Language Representative
TEC Regular Member TEC Regular Member

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES )
CITYOF  pasig CITY ) ss.

BEFORE ME, a Notary Public, for and in the above jurisdiction, personally
appeared the following:

Name Gov’t. Issued ID No. Date/Place Issued
Passport No:
Dr Annabel _J-casurnpa Lousy d2-24-2008 / 0fh_ Davao
PRC 1D No. .
PRO 1D No.-

septa taki me | vse anad LP a

are known to me as the same persons who executed the foregoing instrument and
acknowledged to me that the same are their own free will and voluntary act and deed.

This instrument consists of twenty-two (22) pages including this page wherein this
acknowledgment is written, and is signed by the parties and their instrumental
witnesses on each and every page hereof.

MAY 26 2028
WITNESS MY HAND AND SEAL, this day of , 20___ at Pasig
City, Philippines.
. 7,
JATTY: LOLITA W. MCDONOUGH-LIM/

Doe. No. : F- Notary Public Until Dec, 31, 2024

Page No. : [ Pasig City, San Juan, & Pateros M. M.

Book No. ; _C*5*V/ Appointment No, 49 (2023-2024)

Series of 2023 PTA No. 0139412/Jan, 03, 2023

IBP No. 173491/ 10-22-2022 for the year 2023/ R524
““"WCLE Exemption Na, VOlIPDOGOOS 1
‘Roll Re. 444243
2nd Flr, Armal Center Velasco Ave.
" Maltaao, Pasig City