rere eer arc mer WN RY CNMI SCR TPP A NERA SP

 

8. No. 1725
H. No. 7529

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila 4

Nineteenth Congress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[Repusiic Act No. 12226 ]

AN ACT DECLARING A PARCEL OF LAND LOCATED IN
THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN ANDRES IN THE
PROVINCE OF QUEZON, A PROTECTED AREA
WITH THE CATEGORY OF PROTECTED
LANDSCAPE AND SEASCAPE UNDER THE
NATIONAL INTEGRATED PROTECTED AREAS
SYSTEM, TO BE REFERRED TO AS THE
ALIBIJABAN PROTECTED LANDSCAPE AND
SEASCAPE, PROVIDING FOR ITS MANAGEMENT,

. AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 1. Short Title..—- This Act shall be known as
the “Alibijaban Protected Landscape and Seascape Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. ~ Cognizant of the
profound impact of human activity on all components of the
natural environment, it is hereby declared the policy of the
State to secure for the Filipino people of present and future
generations, the perpetual existence of all native plants and
animals through the declaration of protected areas under the
National Integrated Protected Areas System (NIPAS) within
the classification of national park as provided in the
Constitution.

In recognition of the richness of biological resources, both
flora and fauna, that are native and distinct to the Alibijaban
Wilderness Area, as well as their aesthetic and ecological
importance, a parcel of land located in the Municipality of San
Andres, Province of Quezon, is hereby declared a protected area
under the category of protected landscape and seascape, and
shall hereinafter be referred to as the Alibijaban Protected
Landscape and Seascape (APLS). As such, the State shall
ensure the conservation, protection, management, and
rehabilitation of the area. It is likewise recognized that effective
administration of this area is possible only through cooperation
among the national government, local government units
(LGUs), concerned non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
private entities, and local communities. The use and
enjoyment of this area must be consistent with the principles
of biological diversity and sustainable development.

Towards this end, the State shall ensure the full
implementation of this Act, the mobilization of resources for
the institutional mechanisms herein established, and the full
scientific and technical support needed for the conservation of
biodiversity and the integrity of the ecosystems, and cultural
and indigenous practices.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(a) Buffer zones refer to identified areas outside the
boundaries of and immediately adjacent to designated protected
areas that need special development control in order to avoid
or minimize harm to the protected area;

(b) Conservation refers to any act or acts of preservation
and sustainable utilization of wildlife or maintenance,
restoration, and enhancement of habitats;

(c) Indigenous cultural communities/Indigenous peoples
(ICCs/IPs) refer to groups of people sharing common bonds
of language, customs, traditions, and other distinctive cultural
traits, and who have, since time immemorial occupied,
possessed, and utilized a territory;

(a) National park refers to land of the public domain
classified as such in the Constitution which. includes all areas
under the NIPAS, primarily designated for the conservation
of native plants and animals, their associated habitats and
cultural diversity;

(e) Protected area refers to an‘ identified portion of land
and water set aside by reason ‘of its unique physical and
biological significance, managed to enhance biological diversity,
and protected against destructive human exploitation;

(2) Protected landscape and/or seascape refers to an area
of national significance which is characterized by the
harmonious interaction of human and land and water while
providing opportunities for public enjoyment through recreation,
tourism, and other economic activities; and

(g) Tenured migrants refer to protected area occupants
who are presently occupying, and have been actually and
continuously occupying, a portion of the protected area for
five (5) years before the same was established by proclamation
or law as a protected area, and are solely dependent therein
for subsistence.

SEC. 4. Classification as a National Park. - The APLS
is comprised of a parcel of land of the public domain located
in the Municipality of San Andres in the Province of Quezon.
All lands of the public domain within the coverage and scope
of the APLS shall fall under the classification of national park
as provided for in Article XII, Section 3 of the Constitution.

_ SEC. 5. Scope and Coverage.”~ The boundaries of the
Alibijaban Protected Landscape and Seascape are more
particularly described‘as follows:

Beginning at a point marked "1" on the map, being
N 69° 09' 54" E., 3,694.83 meters from “QZN-3479” with


geographic coordinates of 13° 19' 22.93063" Latitude and
“122° 40' 39.46402" Longitude located in the Municipality of
San Andres, Province of Quezon,

thence N 00° 53' 42"
thence N 07° 49' 49"
thence N 14° 44' 52"
thence N 46° 29' 39"
thence N 58° 29' 45"
thence S 64° 14' 28"
thence § 11° 04'53"
thence § 01° 02' 49”
thence § 03° 15' 18"
thence § 03° 26' 44"
thence § 01° 25' 29"
thence § 04° 10° 29"
thence § 27° 24' 41"
thence § 64° 38' 46"
thence N 40° 16' 25"
thence N 16° 58' 44"
thence N 00° 02'59"

1538.10 meters to corner 2;
843.63 meters to corner 3;
1258.88 meters to corner 4;
584.06 meters to corner 5;
612.09 meters to corner 6;
890.02 meters to corner 7;
379.66 meters to corner 8;
1289.75 meters to corner 9;
711.57 meters to corner 10;
1288.49 meters to corner 11;
1068.79 meters to corner 12;
924.65 meters to corner 13;
375.87 meters to corner 14;
1272.21 meters to corner 15;
310.24 meters to corner 16;
1069.61 meters to corner 17;
1124.57 meters to corner 1,

Hadaae gh ne eas

from the point of beginning containing an area of one thousand
fifty-six (1,056) hectares, more or less. Bearings and distances
of lines were derived using the PRS92 Philippine Zone IV
coordinate system, subject to ground delineation and
demarcation.

The Certification from the National Mapping and
Resource Information Authority (NAMRIA) containing the
boundaries and technical descriptions of the APLS is hereby
adopted and made an integral part of this Act. In case of
inconsistency, the boundaries and technical descriptions in the
attached Certification shall prevail.

Any modification of the scope and coverage of the APLS
in this Act shall be made through an act of Congress,
after consultation with the government agencies and
stakeholders concerned.

SEC. 6. Establishment of Buffer Zones. — The Secretary
of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources’
(DENR), upon the recommendation of the Protected Area
Management Board created under Section 7 of this Act, may
designate areas surrounding the APLS as buffer zones for the
purpose of providing an extra layer of protection where
restrictions may be applied: Provided, That in cases where
the designated buffer zone would cover private lands, the
owners thereof shall be required to design their development
with due consideration to the protected area management plan.

ARTICLE II
MANAGEMENT MECHANISMS

SEC. 7. Protected Area Management Board. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, a Protected
Area Management Board (PAMB) shall be created to oversee
the management of the APLS. The PAMB shall be composed
of the following:

(a) DENR Regional Executive Director for Region IV-A,
as Chairperson;

(b) Governor of the Province of Quezon or a duly
designated representative;

(c) Senators of the Republic of the Philippines who are
duly registered residents of the Province of Quezon, or their
duly authorized representatives, unless the Senators decline
membership in the PAMB;

(a) District Representative of the Congressional district
where the APLS is located, or a duly designated
representative, unless the District Representative declines
membership in the PAMB;

(e) Mayor of the Municipality of San Andres in the
Province of Quezon or a duly designated representative;

(f) Chairpersons of all the barangays with territorial
jurisdiction over the APLS;

(g) Regional Directors of the following government
agencies: Department of Agriculture (DA), National Economic
and Development Authority (NEDA), Department of Science
and Technology (DOST), Philippine National Police (PNP),
Department of National Defense (DND), and Department of
Tourism (DOT);

(h) Three (3) representatives from either NGOs or people’s
organizations (POs) based in the Province of Quezon, duly
accredited by both the DENR and the Provincial Government.
The NGOs or POs represented should have been in existence
for at least five (5) years and with track record in or related
to protected area management;

(i) At least one (1) but not more than three (3)
representatives from all the ICCs/iPs present in the area

and recognized by the National Commission on Indigenous
Peoples (NCIP);

(j) One (1) representative from an academic institution,
preferably from a university or college in the Province of
Quezon, with proven track record in or related to protected
area management; and

(k) One (1) representative from the private sector,
preferably a resident of the Province of Quezon, who is
distinguished in a profession or field of interest relevant to the
management of a protected area.

The terms of office of PAMB members, as well as the
grounds for their removal, shall be in accordance with the
provisions of Republic Act No. 7586, otherwise known as the
“National Integrated Protected Areas System Act of 1992”, as
amended by Republic Act No. 11038, otherwise known as
the “Expanded National Integrated Protected Areas System Act
of 2018”.

sec. 8. Powers and Functions of the PAMB. ~ The
PAMB shall have the following powers and functions:

(a) Oversee the management of the APLS;

(») Approve policies, plans and programs, proposals,
agreements, and other related documents for the management
of the APLS;

(©) Approve the management plan of the APLS and ensure
its harmonization with and integration into the Ancestral
Domain Sustainable Development and Protection Plan, land use
and other development plans, public or private, and their
implementation;

(a) Adopt a manual of operations to include rules of
procedure in the conduct of business, and the creation of
committees and their respective terms of reference;

(e) Recommend the deputation of appropriate agencies and
individuals for the enforcement of laws, rules, and regulations
governing the management of the APLS;

( Allocate financial resources for the implementation of
the management plan and manage the Protected Area Retained
Income Account (PA-RIA) and other funds in accordance with
government accounting, budgeting, and auditing rules and
regulations;

(g) Set fees and charges in accordance with existing
guidelines;

(h) Issue rules and regulations for the resolution of
conflicts through appropriate and effective means;

(@) Recommend appropriate policy changes to the DENR
and other government authorities with respect to the
management of the APLS;

(j) Monitor and assess the performance of the Protected
Ayvea Superintendent (PASu) and other protected area personnel
and compliance of partners with the terms and conditions of
any undertaking, contract, or agreement relative to any project
or activity within the APLS;

(k) Recommend the designation or appointment of the
PASu from a shortlist of qualified candidates; and

Q) Assess the effectiveness of the management of the
APLS: Provided, That the PAMB members representing the
LGUs and national agencies shall inform their respective
constituents, offices, or sectors of PAMB-approved or other
relevant policies, rules, regulations, programs, and projects, and
shall ensure that the provisions of this Act and its
implementing rules and regulations are complied with and
used as reference and framework in their respective plans,
policies, programs, and projects. Failure to comply with the
foregoing shall be the basis for disciplinary action against such
member according to administrative rules and regulations and
such penalties as the PAMB may provide: Provided, further,
That the DENR, through the Regional Executive Director,
shall ensure that the PAMB acts within the scope of its
powers and functions. In case of conflict between the
resolutions issued by the PAMB and the existing
administrative orders of national application, the latter
shall prevail.

SEC. 9. The Protected Area Management Office. — There
is hereby established a Protected Area Management Office
(PAMO) to be headed by a PASu who shall supervise the
day-to-day management, protection, and administration of the
APLS. The PASu shall hold a permanent plantilla position
and shall be appointed by the DENR Secretary. A sufficient
number of support staff with permanent plantilla positions shall
likewise be appointed by the DENR Secretary to assist the
PASu in the management of the protected area.

The PASu shall be primarily accountable to the PAMB
and the DENR for the management and operations of the
APLS. Pursuant thereto, the PASu shall have the following
duties and responsibilities:

(a) Prepare the management plan, including the annual
work and financial plan, and ensure its implementation, in
consultation with stakeholders;

(b) Ensure the integration of relevant national and LGU
plans and programs into APLS management plans, programs,
projects, and policies;

(c) Provide secretariat services to the PAMB and its
committees and ensure the availability of relevant and timely
information for decision-making;

(d) Formulate and recommend proposed policies, rules,
regulations, and programs to the PAMB;

(e) Establish, operate, and maintain a database
management system which shall be an important basis for
decision-making;

( Enforce the laws, rules, and regulations relevant to
the APLS, commence and institute administrative and legal
actions in collaboration with other government agencies or
organizations, and assist in the prosecution of offenses
committed in violation of the provisions of this Act;

(g) Monitor, evaluate, and report the implementation of
management activities of the APLS;

(h) Request for and receive any technical assistance,
support, or advice from any agency or instrumentality of the
government as well as academic institutions, NGOs, and the
private sector, as may be necessary for the effective
management, protection, and administration of the APLS;

(i) Issue permits and clearances for activities that
implement the management plan and other permitted activities
in accordance with terms, conditions, and criteria established
by the PAMB: Provided, That all permits for extraction of
natural resources for research purposes, including the
collection of wildlife and its by-products or derivatives, shall
specify the acts to be authorized, and shall continue to be
issued by relevant authorities, subject to prior clearance from
the PAMB, through the PASu;

(j) Collect and receive pertinent fees, charges, donations,
and other income for the APLS: Provided, That such fees,
charges, donations, and other income collected and received
shall be reported regularly to thé PAMB and the DENR in
accordance with existing guidelines;

(k) Prepare and recommend to the PAMB, the approval
of the annual work and financial plans of the APLS based on
the management plan;.and


Q@) Perform such other functions as the PAMB and the
DENR may assign.

The PAMO may be augmented by the deputized local
environment and natural resources officers upon the
recommendation of the PAMB and approval of the DENR.

ARTICLE III
PROCEEDS AND FEES

SEC. 10. The Alibijaban Protected Landscape and
Seascape Integrated Protected Area Fund, — There is hereby
established a trust fund to be known as the Alibijaban
Protected Landscape and Seascape Integrated Protected Area
Fund (APLS-IPAF) for purposes of financing projects and
sustaining the operation of the APLS and the NIPAS. All
income generated from the operation and management of wild
flora and fauna in the APLS shall accrue to the APLS-IPAT.
The income shall be derived from fees on the permitted sale
and export of flora and fauna and other resources from the
APLS, proceeds from the lease of multiple-use areas,
contributions from industries and facilities directly benefiting
from the APLS, and such other fees and income derived from
the operation of the APLS.

The PAMB shall retain seventy-five percent (75%) of all
revenues raised through the above means, which shall be
deposited in the PA-RIA in any authorized government
depository bank within the locality: Provided, That
disbursements out of such deposits shall be used solely for the
protection, maintenance, administration, and management of
the APLS and implementation of duly approved projects of the
PAMB. The remaining twenty-five percent (25%) of revenues
shall be deposited as a special account in the General Fund
of the National Treasury for puxposes of financing the projects
of the NIPAS.

The fund may be augmented by grants, donations, and
endowments from various sources, domestic or foreign:
Provided, That the fund shall be deposited i in full as a special
account in the National Treaswry and disbursements therefrom
shall be made solely for the protection, maintenance,

I]

administration, and management of the NIPAS and for duly
approved projects endorsed by the PAMB in accordance with
existing accounting, budgeting and auditing rules and
regulations: Provided, further, That the fund shall not be used
to cover personal services expenditures.

The LGUs shall continue to impose and collect all other
fees not enumerated herein which they have traditionally
collected, such as for business permits, property tax, and
rentals of LGUs’ facilities. .

ARTICLE IV
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 11. Appropriations. - The Secretary of the DENR
shall immediately include in the Department’s program the
implementation of this Act, the funding of which shall be
included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 12. Suppletory Application of the NIPAS Law. —
The provisions of Republic Act No. 7586, as amended by
Republic Act No. 11038, shall have suppletory application to
this Act.

SEC. 13. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Secretary
of the DENR shall, in consultation with the local government
of the Municipality of San Andres, the Provincial Government
of Quezon, and concerned national government agencies, issue
the corresponding rules and regulations for the effective
implementation of this Act.

SEC. 14. Separability Clause. — If any section or provision
of this Act is held unconstitutional or invalid, the remaining
sections or provisions not affected thereby shall continue to be
in full force and effect. -

SEC. 15. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive
orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or parts
thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.


SEC. 16. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette
or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,
yt
Ke, VOM ioe FRANCIS “CHIZ” G. ESCUDERO
Speaker of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 1725 on December 16, 2024 and adopted by
the House of Representatives as an amendment to House
Bill No. 7529 on January 22, 2025.

AE

Secretary General Z Senate
House of Representatives

  

Approved: KUL 9 9 2025

 

  
 
  

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

UL

  

A of the President
ANG RECORDS OFFICE