H. No, 1130%

Republi of the Philinpine:
Gongress of the Philippines
ailetes Mluvile:

Miweteontl Crvegy

 

Ghird Regular Seaton

 

Beguri and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, iwe thousand twenty-four,

(REepuBLIC Act No. 12264 |

 
     
 

AN AOT RECOGNIZING SINGAPOR! : MANTLA AS
AN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION GF RNATIONAL
CHARACTER, AND GRANTING CHRTATI BHROGATIVES
CONDUCIVE TO ITS DEVELOPMENT ANT GROWTH

  
  
 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Singapore School Mauaiia, herein referred to as
the School, is hereby recognized as an educational institution of
international character authorized to operate educational programs
that primarily and principally adhere to universally accepted and
recogiized. eclucational policies.

Sec. 2. The School shall use the registered name “Singapore
School Manila, Inc.”, and be governed by a Board of Directo
herein referred to as the Board, elected in accordance with
corporate character,

   

 

SEC. 8. To enable the School to continue carrying out its
educational program, improve its standard of insi: uction, and
meet the special needs of the foreign temporary resident community
for quality education, it shall:

 

(a) Accept applicants for admission, regardless of nationality,
in accordance with its own eligibility standards and vules for
admission, and grade placement: Provided, That no single alien
nationality shall consist move than one-third of the entire siudent
population im a given school year, as stated in the records of the

School, except in case of ‘dependents of foreign diplomatic personnel
or other foreign temporary residents, as may be provided by law:

    

   

  

(b) Whenever necessary to carry out its objectives, have the
vight to obtain leases on real properties, acquire personal properti
tangible or intangible, ov any interests in such PrO
than veal, by purchase, lease, bavier, donation, or gift,
of, aiortgage, or encumber ‘or the b i of the School
concerned, subject to the linitati vovided by law:

    

     
 
 

   

 
 

ce

 

isa Filipino ies I, a
by the Board:

whe possesses the qua lifications pr wrosevihed

 

(i Upon consultation with the Se retary of the Department

 

of Education @epkid, determine its own enuerandiay aie niet

 

imposed upon its learners and students, to mal
the School's standards of education:

 
  
 

in or conform to

we Maintain the inter oational eeadetds of | feducation aca ible

om the Philippines
pers a being

 

ie eomloment ex ent Taw ¢
nots protection of

 
 

op

provided by a bilateral agreement: Provided, furiher, That the
School shall give priority to hiring locally qualified teaching aud
management personnel;

() Promote international friendship, goodwill, and understanding
among members of the foreign community and the citizens of the
Philippines; and

() Not to teach anything derogatory to the prestige and
well-being of the Philippines and its people, nor those which will
subvert its institutions and government.

Ske. 4. Notwithstanding the recognition and prerogatives
under this Act, the School shall be under the supervision and
regulation. of the DepEd and shall adhere to the basic laws and
the rules and regulations of the Deplid governing international
or foreign schools.

 

SEC. 5. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this
Act, the Secretary of the Depfid shall. in consultation with the
members of the Board, issue the rules and regulations implementing
the provisions of this Act.

   

 

SEC. 6. If any part or provision of this Act is subsequently
declared invali unconstitutional, the remaining provisions not
otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect.

   

Sac. 7. Notwithstanding the non-issuance of the rules and
regulations under Section 5 herein, this Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazetie ov in a
newspaper of general circulation.

 

    

ae x 3
FRANCIS“CHIZ"G, ESCUDERO ERD AN WALD
Presideni of the Senaie L ’ Speaker of the House
~ of Represeniatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on February 3, 2025,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on June 9, 2025, and
which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives

on June 10, 2025.
ie ‘VELASCO

Secretary General
House of Representatives

  

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIP!

PINE: ”
ll il 10 WV ice of Ye President

PBBMO10006 MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFGZED COPY