8. No, 2781

Republic af the Philippines

Metra Manila

Nineteenth Congresa
Ghird Regular Session

—_3-—

day of July, two thousand twenty-four,

[REPUBLIC AcT No. 12254 |

AN ACT INSTITUTIONALIZING THE TRANSITION
OF THE GOVERNMENT TO E-GOVERNANCE,
STRENGTHENING THE ICT ACADEMY, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as the
“E-Governance Act”.

Suc. 2. Declaration of Policy. - The State recognizes the
vital role of information and communication in nation-building and
the necessity of leveraging the power of information and

communications technology (ICT) to drive national development
and progress.

The State hereby adopts a policy to establish, foster, and sustain
a digitally empowered and integrated government through the
implementation of a regulated, secure, and robust information and
communication system aimed at facilitating responsive and
transparent online citizen-centered services, thereby optimizing the
potential of open data for promoting economic growth while balancing
the rights to freedom of information and data privacy of every Filipino.

SEc. 3. Purposes and Objectives. — The purposes and
objectives of this Act are to:

(a) Define the roles and responsibilities of various government
agencies in the entire digital transformation process and provide
effective leadership in developing and promoting electronic government
services and processes;

(o) Promote interoperability of government systems and
processes through a consolidated process architecture, while allowing
government agencies, offices, and instrumentalities to implement the
proper controls and safeguards deemed appropriate on ICT and
information assets;

(c) Provide citizen-centered government information and
services, and improve public trust and citizen participation in the
government;

(@) Enable access to government information and services, in
accordance with the Constitution and relevant laws, while leveraging
ICT and emerging technologies to enhance process efficiency, data
security, and overall effectiveness;

(e) Strengthen transparency and accountability efforts of the
national and local governments:

@® Foster an informed and data-driven decision-making process
for policymakers by utilizing data analytics results, among other
pertinent factors;

(g) Strengthen resilience against information technology
disruptions, including, but not limited to. cybersecurity attacks, by

incorporating best practices both from public and private sectors, locally
and internationally;

(h) Promote electronic transactions, particularly where mobility
of citizens is restricted during disasters or pandemics;

@ Foster job creation, promote sustainability, and ensure
up-to-date qualification and competency standards of ICT positions
within the government;

@) Encourage sustainability and fortify manpower capabilities
by continuously upskilling ICT professionals through the ICT
Academy: and

(k) Reduce costs and burdens for businesses and other
government entities,

Sac. 4. Coverage. — This Act shall apply to all executive,
legislative, judicial, and constitutional offices. including local
government units (LGUs), state universities and colleges (SUCs),
government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs), and other
instrumentalities, whether located in the Philippines or abroad, that
provide services covering business- and non-business-related
transactions as defined in this Act, subject to limitations under existing
laws. This Act shall also cover back-end government operations within,
between, and across agencies, government-to-government transactions,
particularly those involving sharing and processing of data and
information between and among government agencies for policy,
planning, and decision-making purposes, and other government
operations. Nothing in this Act shall be construed to derogate from
the fiscal and administrative autonomy and independence of
government entities.

SEC. 5. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(a) Application Programming Interface (API) refers to an
intermediary that allows interaction between applications, programs,
software components, systems, hardware, and micro-services of
different individuals or organizations;

(b) Blockehain is a shared, immutable ledger that facilitates
the process of recording transactions and tracking tangible or
intangible assets in a business network, where virtually anything of

value can be tracked and traded, reducing risk and cutting costs for
all involved;

() Chief Information Officer (CIO) refers to a senior officer
responsible for the development, planning, and implementation of
the government entity's information systems strategic plan (ISSP)
or ICT plan, and management of the agency’s ICT systems, platforms,
and applications;

(a) Critical Information Infrastructure (CID) refers to the
computer systems and/or networks, whether physical or virtual,
and/or the computer programs, computer data, and/or traffic data that
are vital to this country that the incapacity, destruction, or interference
with such system and assets would have a debilitating impact on
security, national or economic security, national health and safety, or
any combination of those matters. Sectors initially classified as CIs
ave the following: government transportation (land, sea, air), energy,
water, health, emergency services, public finance. banking and finance,
business process outsourcing, telecommunications, space, and media;

@) Digitalization refers to the process of using digital
technologies to enhance the operations of the government, and provide
new revenue and value-producing opportunities:

() Digital Transformation refers to the process of optimizing.
reconstructing, and integrating digital technology into all areas of
government to maximize resource configuration, improve operational
efficiency and innovation capability, and enhance value delivery to
stakeholders;

(g) Digitization refers to the process of encoding information
or procedure into digital form that can be read and manipulated
by computers;

(a) E-Governance refers to the use of ICT by the government to
provide public services in a more friendly, convenient, affordable,
efficient, and transparent manner. Further, it is the application of
ICT for delivering government services through integration of
various stand-alone systems, platforms, and applications between
Government-to-Citizens (G2C), Government-to-Business (G2B), and
“Government-to-Government (G2G) services. It is often linked
to back-office processes and interactions within the entire
government framework;

@) E-Government refers to the use of ICT by the government to
enhance access to and delivery of government services for an efficient,
responsive, ethical, accountable, and transparent government;

@) ICT Assets refer to any data, device, equipment,
infrastructure, system, or component thereof, utilized to ensure or
support the proper and efficient operation and implementation of
ICT-related programs and delivery of ICT services;

(k) ICT Plan refers to the sum or set of goals, measures,
strategies, agenda, budget, and timeline for the implementation of
ICT programs and projects and the use of ICT, including digital
platforms, to deliver public services or otherwise perform governmental
functions;

@ Information and Communications Technology (ICT) refers
to the totality of electronic means to access, create, collect, store, process,
receive, transmit, present, regulate, and disseminate information:

(m) Information Security Standards (ISS) refer to generally
acceptable security standards which aim to protect and secure
the confidentiality, integrity, availability, authenticity, and
non-repudiation of information;

(n) Information Systems Strategic Plan (ISSP) refers to the
three (3)-year plan that serves as the government entity’s roadmap
for using ICT as a strategic resource to support the attainment of its
goals, mission, and vision. It is also a written expression that aims to
coordinate national ICT plans, efforts, knowledge, information,
resource-sharing, and database-building, and to link a government
entity’s ISSPs with national ICT goals;

(©) Interoperability refers to the ability of different operating
and software systems, applications, and services to communicate and
exchange data in an accurate, effective, and consistent manner with
different platforms and agencies;

(») Nonbusiness-related transaction refers to all other
government transactions not falling under Section 4(c) of Republic
Act No. 11032 or the “Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government
Service Delivery Act of 2018”;

(q) Privacy-by-Default refers te the practice of applying the
strictest privacy settings by default, without any manual input from
the user, when a product or service has been deployed for public use;

(x) Privacy-by-Design refers to an approach in the development
and implementation of projects, programs, and processes that integrates
safeguards that are necessary to protect and promote privacy into the
design or structure; and.

(8) Privacy Engineering refers to the integration of privacy
concerns into engineering practices for systems and software
engineering life cycle processes.

CHAPTER II
IMPLEMENTING AGENCY

SEC. 6. Role of the Department of Information and
Communications Technology (DICT). — The DICT shall be the lead
implementing body and administrator of this Act. In accordance with
applicable laws and rules, and subject to limitations provided by the
Constitution, the DICT shall ensure that all ICT projects in the
Philippines shall be done in accordance with the National ICT
Development Agenda and E-Government Master Plan, as provided
under Republic Act No. 10844 or the “Department of Information and
Communications Technology Act of 2015”. For this purpose, the DICT
shall establish measures to implement policies under this Act and
ensure that all ICT projects in the Philippines, whether national or
local, are harmonized with the overall ICT plans and in compliance
with applicable standards. Accordingly, the DICT shall:

(a) Adopt a national policy and process that promotes
innovations, supports start-ups, and facilitates the entry and adoption
of technolagies consistent with the goals of this Act;

(b) Support, advise, monitor, and guide government agencies in
ensuring the quality, security, and reliability of their respective ICT
infrastructure and services, in accordance with international or
industrial standards, specifications, and best practices, and ensure
_ the interconnection or interoperability of ICT infrastructure, systems,
and facilities when necessary to achieve the goals of this Act;

(c) Coordinate and/or collaborate with the private sector and
enter into partnerships and joint ventures in accordance with the goals
of this Act;

(@ Mandate and guide the adoption of policies and processes to
ensure the implementation of this Act, including the adoption of a
roadmap to provide a strategic and phased whole-of-government
transformation to E-Government, with clear and identified milestones,
and which explicitly defines the roles and responsibilities of covered
government agencies, offices, and instrumentalities;

(@) Be empowered to guide the operations of [CT infrastructure,
systems, and facilities, and in the exercise of such functions, in
accordance with applicable laws and rules;

(® In coordination with the Civil Service Commission (CSC),
mandate government agencies, offices, and instrumentalities to comply
with the minimum qualification and competency standards of
ICT positions in the government and require government agencies,
offices, and instrumentalities, to regularly report the status of
compliance thereto;

(g) Engage technical and standards organizations and consult
industry experts on matters requiring engineering inputs, enterprise
architecture, and other highly specialized concerns;

(h) Where applicable, recognize the administrative autonomy
provided by the Constitution to independent government agencies,
offices, and instrumentalities in the implementation and enforcement.
of the foregoing;

(i) Develop, in accordance with applicable civil service laws and
vules, consistent with the compensation and position classification
system of the government, the competency and qualification standards
of all ICT positions in the government, and submit to the Department
of Budget and Management (DBM) the: (1) proposal for the creation
and updating of current civil service positions for [CT workers, which
include cybersecurity, data governance, data privacy, and other
ICT-related government positions; (2) the appropriate job levels and
corresponding compensation rates aligned with the personnel needs of

digitally transformed government and comparable with the prevailing
industry rates; and (8) the qualification standards, duties, and
functions essential to the effective operation of government ICT
infrastructure and systems: Provided, That government agencies,
offices, and instrumentalities granted by law and by their charter
with fiscal and administrative autonomy in the performance of their
constitutional and statutory mandates shall independently undertake,
supervise, and regulate their own ICT projects and shall only
be required to coordinate and report to the DICT for alignment of
policy objectives;

G) Ensure that E-Government programs and platforms are
inclusive and accessible to persons with disabilities, as far as
practicable; and

(k) Issue Performance Score Cards on the compliance of
the different agencies, LGUs, SUCs, GOCCs as provided under
Section 4 hereof. Such Performance Score Cards shall only be advisory
in nature.

SEC. 7. The E-Governance Unified Project Management Office
(2Gov UPMO). — Within one (1) year from the effectivity of this Act,
the DICT shall establish a government-wide EGov UPMO, which shall
cater to and address the portfolio, program, and project management
needs of government agencies, to ensure that ICT projects across the
government are managed with efficiency and agility, following
international best practices and standards.

The DICT shall provide guidelines on the operation of the
EGoy UPMO and the qualifications of its personnel who shall, at
the minimum, obtain internationally recognized certifications
and a required number of units on Project Management, Program
Management, IT Service Management, Enterprise Architecture,
Information Security, Data Privacy, Risk Management, and other
similar fields or specializations. For this purpose, the ICT Academy
created under this Act shall ensure that courses, multimodal
training, and certifications to develop this human resource are
regularly offered.

The EGov UPMO shall be headed by the Undersecretary for
~ E-Government of the DICT.

CHAPTER II

THE E-GOVERNMENT MASTER PLAN, PROGRAMS
AND SYSTEMS

SEc. 8. E-Governmeni Master Plan. — The DICT shall
formulate and promote an E-Government Master Plan (EGMP) or its
equivalent that will serve as a blueprint for the development and.
enhancement of all electronic government service processes and
workforce to achieve digital transformation in the bureaucracy, taking
into consideration the Philippine Development Plan. An integrated
framework shall be developed to provide the government enterprise
architecture and operationalize the blueprint through programs and
projects relating to E-Government, to fully realize the vision, goals,
and objectives of the EGMP. The EGMP and the accompanying
integrated framework shall be reviewed and updated every three (3)
years or earlier as the need arises, in anticipation of disruptions,
emergencies, crises, and new and emerging technologies.

To effectively implement E-Governance across the government,
a whole-of-government approach shall be adopted for the formulation
and promotion of the EGMP. This approach shall facilitate engagement
primarily with government agencies, instrumentalities, GOCCs,
LGUs, Regional Development Councils, ICT Councils, technical and
standards organizations, and other relevant stakeholders to ensure
the full and effective implementation of the country’s E-Governance
Agenda. All E-Government Programs identified herein and, in the
future, as well as in the ISSP of each government entity, shall be
subject to mandatory monitoring by the DICT for alignment with the
EGMP and its integrated framework.

Sec. 9. E-Government Programs (EGP). — The DICT, in
coordination with relevant government agencies, shall develop the
following programs and systems that will be regularly updated
in consultation with stakeholders; and ensure that such programs
and systems are compliant with standards imposed by relevant
laws, rules, and regulations relating to data privacy and security,
including, but not limited to, Republic Act No. 10173 or the “Data
Privacy Act of 2012”:

(a) Citizen Frontline Delivery Services Platform (CFDSP). —
Services that are needed to facilitate business and non-business

transactions on permitting, licensing, and the issuance of any
privilege, right, reward, clearance, authorization, or concession,
including frontline services enrolled in the existing citizen's charter.
corresponding back-end support services, and regulatory functions
shall be made efficient by integrating all agencies involved, such
as the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA), Department of
Foreign Affairs (DFA), Land Transportation Office (LTO), Land
Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB),
National Bureau of Investigation (NBI), Professional Regulation
Commission (PRC), Department of Trade and Industry (DTI),
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Bangko Sentral ng
Pilipinas (BSP), Cooperative Development Authority (CDA),
Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR), Government Service Insurance
System (GSIS), Social Security System (SSS), Home Development
Mutual Fund (HDMF) or the PAG-IBIG Fund, and Philippine
Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth), into one platform,
made available in the form of a portal, mobile application, and/or
other applicable variations thereof.

All other government agencies, offices, and instrumentalities,
including LGUs which provide frontline services, as defined under
Republic Act No. 9485 or the “Anti-Red Tape Act of 2007”, as amended,
shall file an application for integration with the DICT, All agencies,
offices, and instrumentalities that will be integrated shall establish
and maintain measures to ensure that such services are accessible
and capable of delivery to the public through the platform:

(b) Electronic Local Government Unit (eLGU) System. — In
compliance with Section 9(g), LGUs shall establish their own portal
or utilize the eLGU system developed by the DICT and its equivalent
programs and systems: Provided, That LGUs unable to establish their
own systems within one (1) year from the effectivity of this Act are
mandated to utilize the eLGU or equivalent programs and systems:
Provided, further, That LGUs establishing their own portal or those
with existing portals shall immediately be connected by the
DICT: Provided, finally, That the eLGU software or equivalent,
including its necessary infrastructure, shall likewise be provided by
the DICT for the effective use of the eLGU to the unserved and
underserved municipalities;

(c) Government Digital Payment Systems for Collection and
- Disbursement. — An electronic payment facility and gateway that will

il

enable citizens and businesses to remit and receive payments
electronically to or from government agencies shall be created. It
shall render services through various delivery channels, which
include debit instructions (ATM accounts), credit instructions
(credit cards), and mobile wallets (mobile application/SMS). For
this purpese, the government may, in accordance with applicable
laws and rules, engage the services of, and interconnect with, public
and private payment systems and facilities, among others, consistent
with the National Retail Payment System Framework of the BSP.

These systems should interface smoothly with the current
monitoring and accounting systems of the National Treasury;

(@) Government Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) Program. —
The DICT shall encourage and promote the use of Government PKI
digital certificates that allow paperless transactions and remote
approval by signatories in the government to reduce red tape and
enforce ease of doing business. The adoption of PKI aims to strengthen
#-Government security through its implementation in all government
offices and supply of digital certificates to the citizens. The PKI digital
certificates shall ensure the security of digital data and transactions
by providing:

(i) Authentication to prevent unauthorized disclosure
of information;

(2) Confidentiality to ensure that a message remains unmodified
during transmission;

(8) Integrity to validate the identity of senders; and

(4) Non-repudiation to ensure non-deniability of actions by
any party.

(©) Human Capital Management Information System (HCMIS).—
An HCMIS shall be developed to eliminate paper-based and manual
human resource (HR)-related processes. Consistent with applicable
civil service laws and rules, the HCMIS shall automate the following
HR-related functions in government: recruitment and selection,
appointment preparation and submission, personnel records keeping.
salary, benefits and payroll administration, leave management,
learning and development, rewards, recognition, and performance
management, among others. This system shail utilize analytics to

provide insights necessary for strategic HR functions such as
performance management, forecasting, promotion, succession planning,
among others: Provided, That government agencies, offices, and
instrumentalities granted by law and their respective charters with
fiscal and administrative autonomy in the performance of their
constitutional and statutory mandates, including those that have been
exempted from the Salary Standardization Law and have been granted
authority to formulate their own classification systems, shall be
allowed to independently develop, maintain, undertake, supervise, and
regulate their own HCMIS and shall only be required to coordinate
and report to the DICT for alignment of policy objectives:

@ Integrated Financial Management Information System
(IMIS). —To ensure fiscal discipline, fund allocation efficiency, and
operational efficiency in the delivery of public services, an IFMIS shall
be jointly developed by the DBM, Department of Finance, Commission
on Audit, and DICT. This shall harmonize all existing financial systems
in government to enable real-time, online accounting monitoring, and
control of obligations and disbursements and directly link these to
cash management for a more effective financial control and
accountability, This shall facilitate the generation and monitoring of
vital information on all aspects of government financial transaction
to support timely and informed decisions across the bureaucracy;

(g) Integrated Government Network (IGN). — An integrated,
dedicated, interconnected, interoperable, secure, and resilient
government network shall be established as the primary means for
the sharing and communication of resources, information, and data
through digital and electronic platforms across all agencies of
government, covering all branches, agencies, instrumentalities, and
offices of the national and local governments, including GOCCs.

Such network shall also be the government's primary and
focal information management tool and communications network and
the data traffic that will be coursed by the government agencies and
key stakeholders through this network will be exchanged through a
designated Government Internet Protocol Exchange (G/TPX) facility.
Interconnectivity and interoperability measures shall be established
and maintained between all existing internal networks and the IGN.
This program shall also cover the acquisition and management of

_internet resources of the government, such as internet protocol ([P)
addresses and domain names, among others;

(b) Online Public Service Portal. —~ Complementing the CFDSP,
an Online Public Service Portal shall be made accessible through
digital platforms such as the internet and other ICTs to citizens of
the Philippines; foreign nationals who have been lawfully admitted to
the country; and businesses organized and existing or operating under
the laws and rules of the Philippines for purposes consistent with the
efficient delivery of public services. The Online Public Service Portal
shall serve as a help desk where citizens can request for information
and assistance on government frontline services, service procedures,
and report commendations, appreciation, complaints, and feedback.

For purposes of interoperability, interconnection, and
harmonization, all existing systems or mechanisms, such as the 8888
Citizens’ Complaint Center and government social media channels,
established and/or maintained by government agencies, offices, and
instrumentalities, and LGUs shall be integrated to the Online Public
Service Portal. Likewise, the Online Public Service Portal shall be
fully integrated with the IGN and Records and Knowledge Management
Information System for real-time updating of data and information.

To ensure that the public is served efficiently and expeditiously
agencies, offices, and instrumentalities, GOCCs, government financial
institutions, as well as the LGUs, are hereby mandated to cooperate
and coordinate with each other and with the Presidential Management
Staff to ensure prompt action on the concerns received through the
Online Public Service Portal and associated communication channels.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Act, access to and use of
resources, information, and data through the portal shall be in
accordance with Republic Act No. 11032 and all relevant laws, rules,
and regulations on data and information privacy and pertinent rules
on confidentiality of government information;

@) Philippine Digital Health System. — A comprehensive,
integrated, interoperable, progressive, secure, and sustainable ICT
system and framework shail be established to provide wide access to
quality health information and services that promotes and ensures
streamlined and safety-regulated delivery of digital health services to
reduce inequalities and achieve universal healthcare and better health
outcomes for every Filipino;

@) Philippine Government Interoperability Framework. —~ A
Philippine government interoperability framework shall guide and
govern the basic technical and informational interoperability of
government ICT systems necessary for the effective and efficient
delivery of government services. Such a framework shall provide shared
operations and services of the Philippine government, between and
among its various agencies, as well as for these agencies in dealing
with their various constituencies. This shall be reviewed and updated
regularly, to ensure responsiveness to the current needs of the
government and alignment with the newly adopted standards;

(k) Procurement System. —A modernized Philippine Government
Procurement System shall be developed and implemented to provide
an auditable online system that encompasses all procurement and
supply chain management processes involving bidding, contract
management, delivery, acceptance, and payment for services or
supplies: Provided, That government agencies, offices, and
instrumentalities granted by law and their respective Charters
with fiscal and administrative autonomy in the performance of their
constitutional and statutory mandates shall independently develop,
maintain, undertake, supervise, and regulate their own procurement
systems and shall only be required to coordinate and report to the
DICT for alignment of policy objectives: Provided, further, That such
system shall comply with Republic Act No. 12009 or the “New
Government Procurement Act”; and

@ Records and Knowledge Management Information
System. ~ A records and knowledge management information system
shall be designed to systematically and efficiently manage government
decuments, records, and knowledge products and services. This includes
the digitization of paper-based documents, records, and knowledge
products and services, as well as the re-engineering and digitalization
of paper-based workflows, from creation, dissemination, processing,
analysis, tracking, storing, verification and authentication, and
archiving or disposal, while adhering to existing policies, laws, and
internationally recognized standards and best practices.

A repository and corresponding secure API shall be created
for the common data sets, which include pricing, demographic,
and geospatial data to improve publication, sharing, and utilization

“of data across the government. The DICT shall ensure that such
repository shall be compliant with applicable data privacy laws and
information security standards, in coordination with the National

Privacy Commission (NPC). The DICT shall also establish a platform
or its equivalent for government data storage and interoperability.

Subject to the provision of Section 4 of this Act, the President of
the Philippines may require an existing office, agency, or
instrumentality of the government to utilize the platform herein
established by the DICT.

Sze. 10. Privacy Impact Assessment (PTA). — The DICT shail
conduct a mandatory PIA, according to relevant NPC guidelines,
on the proposed systems for processing personal data included
in the EGMP before its publication, to identify privacy risks and
establish the appropriate control framework in line with existing
data privacy and cybersecurity standards.

Sec. 11. Minimum Information Security Standards
Compliance. — The DICT shall prescribe and implement minimum
information security standards for E-Government, aligned with
internationally accepted standards, relevant laws, rules, and
regulations, including its own policies, to ensure the security of all
ICT systems utilized.

The DICT is mandated to provide the proper guidance, assistance,
and training on cybersecurity standards to all government agencies,
offices, and instrumentalities that are part of the E-Government
system. Nothing in this Act prevents a government agency, office,
or instrumentality from implementing additional standards, or
other standards higher than the minimum set by the DICT as it
deems necessary.

Suc. 12. Protection of Government Critical Information
Infrasiructure (CID. - The DICT, in coordination with relevant
government agencies and stakeholders, shall issue guidelines for the
protection of government CII identified in the EGMP. All government
Clls shall undergo Vulnerability Assessment and Penetration Testing
(VAPT) before deployment and an annual risk and security assessment.

All government CII shall create an organizational Computer
Emergency Response Team (CERT) or Computer Security Incident
Response Team (CSIRT) and immediately notify major information
security incidents affecting their institutions to the DICT’s National
Computer Emergeucy Response Team (NCERT), which shall be the

central authority for all the sectoral and organizational CERTs
in the country, subject to rules and regulations, protocols, guidelines,
and standards in cybersecurity.

SEC. 13. Public Service Continuity Plan. —-Consistent with the
existing issuances of the National Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Council (NDRRMC) and the CSC, all [CT systems
and infrastructure covered in the priority programs of the EGMP
and ISSPs shall be included as part of the Public Service Continuity
Plan (PSCP) of all government agencies and instrumentalities,
to ensure the continuous delivery of essential agency functions,
notwithstanding any emergency or disruption.

SEc. 14. National E-Government Development Index (EGDD)
and E-Government Maturity Survey. —The DICT shall, in coordination
with other government agencies, establish a national EGDI, which
provides globally competitive indicators, definitions, and statistical
standards. They shall develop a manual for measuring E-Government
indicators to institutionalize the measurement framework and conduct
an annual E-Government maturity survey to assess the ICT readiness
and maturity of agencies, with the survey results primarily used for
formulating and updating EGMP.

SEC. 15. Free Access to the Internet for the Public. — Subject
to compliance with existing laws, rules, and regulations, the free
public internet access program shall utilize the Free Public Internet
Access Fund (FPIAF’) to provide necessary computer systems,
programs, databases, management and information systems,
and core transmission and distribution networks to facilitate
knowledge-building among citizens and empower them to participate
in the evolving digital age.

CHAPTER IV

ROLE OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES, OFFICES, AND
INSTRUMENTALITIES

SEC. 16. Responsibilities of the Heads of Government Agencies,
Offices, and Instrumentalities. — The head of each agency, office, or
instrumentality of the national and local governments, in consultation

“with the DICT, shall ensure:

(a) Adherence to the requirements of this Act, including related
standards for all ICT infrastructures, systems, equipment, designs,
and all other technology promulgated by the DICT;

(b) Compliance with the standards and protocols for
cybersecurity, resiliency, data privacy and confidentiality, promulgated
by the DICT in consultation with the NPC;

(e) Prompt and effective communication of information
technology standards promulgated by the DICT to all concerned
agency officials;

(@) Support for the efforts of the national and local governments
to develop, maintain, and promote an integrated system of delivering
government information and services to the public;

) Establishment and implementation of policies and
standards on information security, freedom of information, and open
data within their organization following its mandate and technological
needs or risks;

(@ Conformity to the re-engineering and streamlining
requirements of the Anti-Red Tape Authority (ARTA) as provided under
Republic Act No, 11032;

(g} Undiminished availability of government information
and services for individuals and entities who lack access to the
internet; and

(h) Availability of alternative modes of delivery that make
government information and services more accessible to individuals,
either electronically or manually.

To these ends, agencies shall:

(a) Develop performance measures that demonstrate how
ICT enables progress toward agency objectives, strategic goals, and
statutory mandates;

(b) In measuring performance, rely on existing data collections
to the extent practicable and introduce new data collection schemes
necessary to collect performance data and derive valuable insights.
Areas of performance measurement that agencies should include ave

customer service, agency productivity, and adoption of innovative
information technology, including the appropriate use of industry
best practices;

(©) Link their performance goals, as appropriate, to key groups,
including citizens, businesses, and other governments:

@) As appropriate, work collectively in linking their performance
goals to key groups and use information technology in delivering
government information and services to those groups;

(@) Ensure that all ISSPs and ICT plans are updated annually
and considered in their budget preparation activities;

@® Regularly undertake cost compliance analysis, time and
motion studies, undergo evaluation and improvement of their
transaction systems and procedures and re-engineer the same ifdeemed
necessary to reduce bureaucratic red tape and process time;

(g) Support the development of a digital competency framework
inorder to undertake a competency assessment of personnel and provide
them with appropriate learning and development programs to
strengthen their digital competency; and

(h) Be accountable in the implementation of the ISSP or
ICT Plan:

Provided, however, That for purposes of efficiency and avoidance
of redundancy, government agencies, offices, and instrumentalities,
with existing: (1) standards for all ICT infrastructures, systems,
equipment, designs, and all other technology; (2) protocols for
cybersecurity, resiliency, and data privacy and confidentiality;
(3) effective mechanisms for communicating promptly and effectively
all information technology standards within their agency; and
(4) equipment, systems, programs, and infrastructure that
substantially comply with the minimum requirements indicated
in the relevant provisions of this Act, as well as those that already
have existing government positions, such as Chief Information
Officer, within their respective offices whose qualifications are aligned

~ with the requirements under this Act, shall be allowed to maintain
those existing standards, protocols, mechanisms, equipment, systems,
programs, infrastructure, and positions, and shall already be deemed
’ compliant with the provisions hereof,

SEC. 17. Chief Information Officer (CIO). — All covered
government entities under this Act shall create a plantilla position
for a CIO who shall ensure the development and implementation
of the agency’s ICT plan, its security and compliance with
DICT-prescribed standards, relevant laws, rules, and regulations,
including Republic Act No. 10173.

Recruitment, selection, and appointment to the position shall
be subject to civil service laws, rules, regulations, and competency
standards prescribed by the DICT.

SEC. 18. Functions of the CIO. — The CIO shall perform the
following functions:

(a) Advise agencies on how to leverage ICTs to optimize the
delivery of secured public services and achieve efficient and
cost-effective operations;

(b) Securely develop, maintain, and manage the agency’s
information systems;

(©) Manage and supervise the implementation of ICT-related
projects, systems, and processes;

(a) Formulate and implement processes in relation to the adoption
of ICT-based solutions, including emerging technologies as provided
in the EGMP;

(©) Manage operational risks related to ICT in coordination with
the agency’s management and stakeholders;

() Ensure that the ICT programs and operations are consistent
with national policies and prevailing industry standards;

© Accelerate the adoption of open data, blockchain, and
emerging technologies, while benchmarking against ICT industry best
practices in ICT programs and operations;

(h) Ensure that personal information and data in government
information systems are secured and protected; and

@) Ensure that E-Government Programs are accessible and
inclusive to persons with disabilities, as far as practicable.

SEC. 19. Inclusiviéy.—In accordance with the provisions of this
Act, when promulgating policies and implementing programs
regarding the provision of government information and services over
the internet and other platforms or channels, agency heads shall
consider the impact on persons without access to such platforms or
channels, and shall, to the extent practicable, ensure that the
availability of government information and services has not been or
shall not be diminished for individuals and entities who lack access to
the internet; and pursue alternate modes of delivery that make
government information and services more accessible to individuals,
either electronically or manually.

CHAPTER V
GOVERNMENT WEBSITES AND INFORMATION PORTALS

SEC. 20. Government Websiie and Electronic Bulletin
(E-Bulletin) Board. — National government agencies, offices,
instrumentalities, including local governments, are mandated to
consistently enhance their existing websites and establish an e-Bulletin
Board for efficient information dissemination. The website and
e-bulletin board should be interactive, well-designed, functional, and
mobile-friendly, prioritizing security and accessibility. Regular updates
to website content shall also be required.

Suc. 21. Minimum Standards. — The following shall be the
minimum standards for government websites and information portals.
They shall:

(a) Include direct and easily identifiable links to: (1) description
of the mission, statutory authority, and the organizational structure
of the agency; and (2) frequently asked questions (FAQs) with
the corresponding answers; and other common matters of
public concern;

(b) Include direct and easily identifiable links to the relevant
and applicable portals and E-Government Programs public
service delivery;

(c) Include the ability to provide access to public information
- via an API;

(d) Inchude an up-to-date government directory containing the
contact information, such as emails and telephone numbers, of the
offices and officials within an agency;

(¢) Be compliant with the Philippine Web Accessibility policy,
or any relevant and updated issuance from the DICT: and

() Provide a real-time citizen feedback mechanism integrated
into all E-Government platforms to allow users to rate services, provide
comments, and report issues directly. Data from this mechanism shall
be publicly aggregated and published quarterly to ensure transparency
and guide service improvements.

SEC. 22. Information Dissemination Through Website
and E-Bulletin Board. ~ Government offices, agencies, and
instrumentalities required by law or rules to share public notices,
documents, or information shall publish the same on their websites,
e-bulletin boards, and verified official government social media
accounts, in addition to traditional publication methods.

Except as provided by law, publication of notices, documents, or
any other information on the website and e-bulletin board shall be
construed as sufficient notice for purposes of this Act. Date of publication
shall be reckoned from the date on which the notice, document, or
information was first uploaded and made accessible to the public.

CHAPTER VI
SECURITY AND PRIVACY

SEC. 23. Data and Information Security. — All resources,
information, or data stored in or transmitted through the government
information systems and all networks interconnected to and
interoperable with it, the portals, and websites shall be kept secure
and free from interference or unauthorized access that can hamper or
otherwise compromise the confidentiality, integrity, and availability
of the ICT assets,

Access to and use of the resources, information, and data in the
government information systems shall be limited to the government
and its duly authorized officers and agents, in accordance with all
relevant laws, rules, and regulations on data and information privacy

and the pertinent rules on confidentiality of government information:
Provided, That the data used by all concerned government agencies,
offices, and instrumentalities with access to information systems and
used data stored therein shall he destroyed or disposed of in accordance
with acceptable standards and guidelines existing under the law for
disposal of data upon fulfillment of its purpose.

Any person who shall knowingly commit an act which results
to the compromise of the security and integrity of the government
information systems and all networks interconnected to and
interoperable with it, to the detriment of the government and the
public shall incur criminal liability in accordance with the provisions
of applicable and relevant penal laws.

SEO. 24. Responsibility of the National and Local
Governments. — All agencies, offices, and instrumentalities of the
national and local governments, including SUCs and GOCCs, shall be
responsible for:

(a) Providing information security protections commensurate
with the risk and magnitude of the harm resulting from unauthorized
access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction of
information collected or maintained by or on behalf of the agency;
and information systems used or operated by an agency, its contractor,
ov by other organizations on its behalf:

(b) Determining the levels of information security appropriate
to protect such information and information systems, and
implementing the same in coordination with the DICT:

() Periodically testing and evaluating information
security controls and techniques to ensure that they are
effectively implemented;

@) Ensuring procedures, standards, and guidelines, including
information security standards promulgated by the DICT and
information security standards and guidelines for national security
systems issued in accordance with law and as directed by the President
of the Philippines;

(e) Ensuring that information security management processes
are integrated with agency strategic and operational planning
processes; and

@ Adopting the Privacy-by-Design, Privacy Engineering, and
Privacy-by-Default principles in developing, implementing, and
deploying systems, processes, software applications, and services
throughout the processing of personal data.

SEC. 25. Master Data Management. — In order to have access
to the most updated data, the government shall establish and maintain
measures to ensure that the parent government agency responsible
for a set of data shall own, maintain, update, and protect the data
while giving access through a secure API to other agencies.

CHAPTER VII
PARTICIPATION OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR

SEC. 26. Governmené Cooperation with ihe Private Sector. -
Nothing in this Act shall prevent the national and local governments
from entering into contracts, agreements, or partnerships with the
private sector to provide various resources, assets, and services to
comply or enhance compliance with the provisions of this Act.

Any and all contracts or agreements with the private sector
within the context of this Act shall be subject to the laws and rules on
public accountability, transparency and good governance.

To ensure inclusivity, public telecommunications entities (PTEs)
and non-PTE internet service providers (ISPs) shall be allowed to enter
into contracts with government agencies at the national and local
levels to build and operate networks to provide internet connections in
support of E-Government Programs, especially in the underserved and
unserved areas.

CHAPTER VIIL
THE ICT ACADEMY

SEC. 27. Strengthening the ICT Academy for E-Governance. ~
In line with the DICT Department Circular No. 3, Series of 2021,

otherwise known as “Institutionalizing the Information and
Communications Technology (ICT) Academy”, the DICT shall
teorganize and restructure its ICT Literacy and Competency
Development Bureau in order to develop rules and policies for
the operations of the ICT Academy, hereinafter referred to as
Academy that shall:

(a) Become the National Center of Excellence for ICT Education;

(b) Conduct trainings on E-Governance in furtherance of
this measure;

(© Promote education to enhance the nation’s labor capacity
in relation to the most relevant and updated data on local and
international skills supply and demand;

(@) Promote, foster, and conduct quality ICT education for the
capacity development of all citizens;

(©) Foster and support the strategic goals of the national ICT
development agenda, as provided in Republic Act No. 10844 through
data collection and globally competitive ICT skills development
programs and for other purposes;

() Conduct programs and activities for the capacity development
of all citizens to gain globally competitive skills and drive inclusive
economic growth;

(g) Create and foster partnerships with different persons,
entities, and institutions for purposes of developing and updating
the Academy’s resources, and its ICT curriculum, modules, and
pedagogical approaches;

(h) Promote gender parity through technology education;

@ Ensure continuous learning and development of educators
on current ICT trends;

@) Promote immersion of learners to industry partners, whether
in the private or public sector;

(k) Establish and implement a scholarship system for qualified
individuals in training and programs under the Academy or other
activities approved by the DICT Secretary;

@) Facilitate the screening, admission process, and monitoring
of all admitted scholars;

(m) Spearhead academic research and development related
to ICT;

f) Regularly assess the state of the country in terms of
comparative ICT skills and performance and suggest responsive
policies to address concerns; and

(©) Develop curricula and courses for learners and students on
ICT to upskill ICT proficiency and competency, in collaboration with
the Department of Education, Commission on Higher Education
(CHED), Technical and Skills Development Authority (TESDA), SUCs,
and local universities and colleges,

SEC. 28. Satellite Uniis.~The Academy may establish satellite
units in existing DICT offices in particular regions, provinces, or
municipalities. To ensure broader access to quality ICT trainings and
skills development and further enhance the capability of the Academy
to attain its purposes, additional satellite units may be established
upon determination of the DICT and in coordination with the CHED
and the TESDA.

SEC. 29, Access and Admission. — The Academy shall be
accessible to all citizens regardless of skill, age, gender, religious belief,
economic status, ethnicity, physical disability, political opinion, or
affiliation.

The DICT, through the Academy, shall promulgate an equitable
and inclusive admission Process to ensure that citizens have equal
access to ICT education and that the broadest base of the citizenry
shall have ICT education.

SEC. 30. Finances. ~The operations of the Academy shall be
financially supported by a budget from the DICT, reasonable fees and
dues collected, as well as through donations, in accordance with
applicable laws and rules.

Donations collected shall be held in a fund to be administered
in trust by a committee created by the DICT for such purpose, The
fund shall in no case be impaired. Donations received shall be used
only for the purposes for which they were donated, subject to accounting
and auditing rules and regulations.

SEC. 31. Partnerships. -The Academy may form partnerships
with different educational institutions, technical and standards
organizations, and private entities for purposes of achieving the goals
ofthe Academy.

Partnerships may be in the form of research collaborations,
resource sharing, module and training development, faculty exchange
standards development, training collaborations, internships,
apprenticeships, and other similar forms.

AU partnerships entered into by the Academy shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this law and approved by the
DICT Secretary. There shall be no disbursement of any funds by
the Academy or the government for the purpose of establishing
these partnerships.

The Academy shall be empowered to accredit courses offered by
educational institutions, private or public, following strict competency
standards and guidelines developed by the DICT.

CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS AND FINAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 32. Transitory Provision. ~ In accordance with the
objectives of this Act, the DICT, in coordination with relevant
government agencies and instrumentalities, as well as private
stakeholders and civic organizations, shall study, formulate, and
implement a master plan for the transition of the government and its
provision of services in the digital age.

All new positions created under this Act shall be prioritized,
subject to the review and approval of the DBM consistent with civil
service laws, rules, and regulations. Moreover, until such time that
- the government shall have completed the transition in accordance
with the objectives of this Act, all government activities covered under

this Act shall be conducted in the manner provided under existing
laws and rules.

The government shall complete the transition within a period of
one (1) year from the effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 33. E-Government I nteroperability Fund (ETF), ~An RIF
is hereby created as a special account in the general fund managed by
the DICT for the implementation of the EGP and government websites,
including eLGU system, among others.

The ELIF will be primarily sourced from donations and fees as
well as Spectrum Users Fees which currently accrue to the FPIAF
created under Republic Act No. 10929 or the “Free Internet Access
in Public Places Act”. The EIF may be funded through grants and
loans from development and foreign partners, or through applicable
Public-Private Partnership mechanisins.

SEC. 34. Appropriations. ~The amount necessary for the initial
implementation of this Act at the national government level shall be
charged against the current year's appropriations of the DICT,
National Telecommunications Commission, NPC, and such other
national government agency, office, or instrumentality concerned.
Thereafter, such sums needed for its continued implementation shall
be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

The amounts necessary to implement this Act in the local
government level shall be charged against the funds ofthe LGU concerned.

All appropriations of the national and local government under
this Act shall be subject to the existing budgeting, accounting, auditing,
and other pertinent laws, rules, regulations, and guidelines.

The DICT is also authorized to receive grants and donations for
the implementation of this Act.

SEC. 35. Applicability of Republic Act No. 8439, as Amended
by Republic Act No. 11812, and Republic Act No, 10929. — All lor
employees across all government agencies and instrumentalities
providing technical support for the implementation of all E-Government
Programs in their respective agencies shall be covered by Republic
Act No. 8439 or the “Magna Carta for Scientists, Engineers,

Researchers and Other Science and Technology Personnel in the
Government,” as amended.

The provisions of Republic Act No. 10929 shall apply suppletorily
to this Act.

SEC. 36. Regular Status Reports. — All agencies, offices, and
instrumentalities of the national and local governments shall submit
an annual report on the status of implementation of this Act to the
President, both Houses of Congress, and the DICT. These reports
shall be made publicly available in government websites and
information portals.

The status report shall include the following:

(a) Status of the implementation of E-Government initiatives
based on its approved ICT Plan;

(b) Compliance by the agency with this Act; and

© Performance in delivering programs and services through
the E-Government to their constituencies.

SEC. 37. Joint Congressional Oversight Committee on
E-Governance. ~ A Joint Congressional Oversight Committee on
E-Governance (JCOCEG) shall be constituted to monitor and ensure
the effective implementation of this Act, identify the deficiencies,
limitations, and challenges in the current legal framework, and propose
necessary amendments or supplementary legislation to address them.

The JCOCEG shall be composed of three (3) members from the
Senate and three (3) members from the House of Representatives, in
addition to the Chairperson of the Senate Committee on Science and
Technology and the Chairperson of the House of Representatives
Committee on Information and Communications Technology who shall
jointly chair the JCOCEG.

The minority in the Senate and the House of
Representatives shall each have at least one (1) seat in the
-JCOCEG as Co-Vice Chairpersons.

The Secretariat of the JCOCEG shall come from the existing
Secretariat personnel of the Committee on Science and Technology of
the Senate and the Committee on Information and Communications
Technology of the House of Representatives.

The JCOCEG shall conduct a hearing at least once every
quarter to review the implementation of this Act and identify other
necessary legislation.

The JCOCEG shall cease to exist after five (5) years from the
effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 38. Implementing Rules and Regulations. ~ Within one
hundred eighty (180) days from the effectivity of this Act, the DICT,
in coordination with relevant offices, agencies, and instrumentalities
of the national and local government, shall promulgate the necessary
rules and regulations in effectively implementing the law.

SEC. 89. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this Act is
declared unconstitutional, the remainder thereof not otherwise affected
shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 40. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential decrees,
executive orders, letters of instruction, proclamations, or
administrative regulations that are inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

SEC. 41. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette ov ina newspaper
of general circulation.

Approved,

/

ya
\ a Lf Yi
FRANCIS “CHIZ” G. ESCUDERO RDINAND. TIN G.ROMU,. DEZ

President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

Srey . an aR TAIN AE RE ERE AME SER EN NE NSE AN ITS

This Act, which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 7827 and

Senate Bill No. 2781, was passed by the House of Representatives and
the Senate of the Philippines on June 9, 2025.

REGINALD%,. VELASCO

Secretary General
House of Representatives

FERDINAND ROMUALBEZ MARCOS IR.
Presideng of the Philippines

LIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

EA 0

fide of the President
cn tc RECORDS OFFICE

TED COPY

F
}
t
}
b