S.No. 2780
H. No. 10722

Republic of the Philippines
Gougress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Nineteenth Congress

Ghird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

{ Repusuic Act No. 12019 |

AN ACT GRANTING JURIDICAL PERSONALITY AND LEGAL
CAPACITY TO THE BOARD OF THE FUND FOR
RESPONDING TO LOSS AND DAMAGE DUE TO
CLIMATE CHANGE

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known and
referred to as “The Loss and Damage Fund Board Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is the policy of the
State to protect and adwance the right of the people to a
balanced and healthful ecology in accord with the rhythm and
harmony of nature.

As a party to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement, the
State lauds the creation of a fund for responding to loss and
damage (Fund) under the Decision 2/CMA.4 of the Conference
of Parties serving as the meeting of Parties to the Paris


Agreement (CMA) and during the 27" Conference of Parties
(COP) to the UNFCCC under Decision 2/CP.27 of the COP,
and its operationalization during the 28'* COP under COP
Decision 1/CP.28 and CMA Decision 5/CMA.5. The State
resolutely welcomes the Fund’s establishment to finance and
assist the most vulnerable developing countries’ response and
recovery from losses and damages caused by climate change.

To advance climate and disaster risk resilience, the State
shall take a whole-of-government approach in creating and
implementing effective policy frameworks and mobilizing broad
and innovative sources of climate financing to address loss
and damage.

To accelerate access to critical climate finance and
investments for future-proofing the economy and ensuring
sustainable and inclusive growth for all Filipinos, the State
supports the hosting of the governing Board of the Fund in
the Philippines. Towards this end, the State recognizes the
need to grant juridical personality and legal capacity to the
Board to enable it to discharge its roles and functions.

SEC. 3. Juridical Personality and Legal Capacity of the
Board. — The Board, as the governing body of the Fund, shall
have juridical personality with full legal capacity to:

(a) Contract:

(b) Acquire and dispose of immovable and movable
property;

(c) Institute legal proceedings;

(d) Negotiate. conclude, and enter into a hosting
arrangement with the World Bank as interim trustee and host
of the Fund’s secretariat; and

(e) Undertake activities as necessary for discharging its
roles and functions.

SEC. 4. Privileges, Immunities, and Exemptions. — The
Board shall enjoy the status, immunities, privileges, and
exemptions granted under relevant treaties, international
agreements, and agreements that may be entered into between
the Government of the Philippines and the Board.

SEC. 5. Separability Clause. — If any portion or provision
of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the remainder of this
Act or any provision not affected thereby shall remain in force
and effect.

SEC. 6. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential decrees,
executive orders, administrative orders, and rules and
regulations inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed,
modified, or amended accordingly.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect upon
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of

general circulation.

Approved,

. ROM
Speaker of the House
of Representatives

 

FRANCIS “CHIZ” G. ESCUDERO
President of the Senate

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 2780 on August 19, 2024 and adopted by the
House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill
No. 10722 on August 21, 2024.

       
 
 
  
     
       

   

REGINALD VELASCO
Secretary General
House of Representatives

Approved: AUG 28 2024

  

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

PBBM005490

 

 

ATM. . ESPINO
9 6-m- u2y ACTING ‘DIRECTOR IV