S$. No. 1691
H. No. 7506

Republic of the Philippines
Gougress of the Philippines ~
Metra Manila

| ‘Nineteenth Congress

Ohicd Regular Sessian

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[ Repusiic Act No. 12229 |

ANACT DECLARING A PARCEL OF LAND LOCATED IN THE
MUNICIPALITY OF SAN FRANCISCO IN THE
PROVINCE OF QUEZON, A PROTECTED AREA WITH
THE CATEGORY OF PROTECTED LANDSCAPE UNDER
THE NATIONAL INTEGRATED PROTECTED AREAS
SYSTEM, TO BE REFERRED TO AS THE SAN
FRANCISCO PROTECTED LANDSCAPE, PROVIDING
FOR ITS MANAGEMENT, AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “San Francisco Protected Landscape Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. ~ Cognizant of the
profound impact of human activity on all. components of the
natural environment, it is hereby declared the policy of the
State to secure for the Filipino people of present and future
generations, the perpetual existence of all native plants and
animals through the declaration of protected areas under
the National Integrated Protected Areas System (NIPAS)
within the classification of national park as provided in
the Constitution.

In recognition of the richness of biological resources, both
flora and fauna, that are native and distinct to the Mulanay
Watershed Forest Reserve, as well as their aesthetic and
ecological importance, a parcel of land located in the
Municipality of San Francisco, Province of Quezon, is hereby
declared a protected area under the category of protected
landscape, and shall hereinafter be referred to as the San
Francisco Protected Landscape (SFPL). As such, the State
shall ensure the conservation, protection, management, and
rehabilitation of the area. It is likewise recognized that effective
administration of this area is possible only through cooperation
among the national government, local government units
(LGUs), concerned non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
private entities, and local communities. The use and enjoyment
of this area must be consistent with the principles of biological
diversity and sustainable development.

Towards this end, the State shall ensure the full
implementation of this Act, the mobilization of resources for
the institutional mechanisms herein established, and the full
scientific and technical support needed for the conservation of
biodiversity and the integrity of the ecosystems, and cultural
and indigenous practices.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(a) Buffer zones refer to identified areas outside the
boundaries of and immediately adjacent to designated protected
areas that need special development control in order to avoid
or minimize harm- to the protected area;

(b) Conservation refers to any act or acts of preservation
and sustainable utilization of wildlife or maintenance,
restoration, and enhancement of habitats;

(©) Indigenous cultural communities/Indigenous peoples
(ICCs/IPs) refer to groups of people sharing common bonds of
language, customs, traditions, and other distinctive cultural
traits, and who have, since time immemorial occupied,
possessed, and utilized a territory;

@ National park refers to land of the public domain
classified as such in the Constitution which includes all areas
under the NIPAS, primarily designated for the conservation
of native plants and animals, their associated habitats, and
cultural diversity;

) Protected area refers to an identified portion of land
and water set aside by reason of its unique physical and
biological significance, managed to enhance biological diversity,
and protected against destructive human exploitation;

() Protected landscape refers to an area of national
significance which is characterized by the harmonious
ingeraction of human. and land and water while providing ~
opportunities for public enjoyment through recreation, tourism,
and other economic activities; and

(g) Tenured migrants refer to protected area occupants who
are presently occupying, and have been actually and continuously
occupying, a portion of the protected area for five (6) years before
the same was established by proclamation or law as a protected
area, and are solely dependent therein for subsistence.

SEC. 4. Classification as a National Park. - The SFPL
is composed of a parcel of land of the public domain located
in the Municipality of San Francisco, Province of Quezon. All
lands of the public domain within the coverage and scope of
the SFPL shall fall under the classification of national park
as provided for in Article XII, Section 3 of the Constitution.

SEC. 5. Scope and Coverage. — The boundaries of the
San Francisco Protected Landscape are more particularly
described as the area beginning at a point marked "1" on the
Map, being N43°19'44"E., 2,157.25 meters from QZN-3477 with
geographic coordinates of 13°20'53.63034" Latitude and 122°
30'56.82977" Longitude located in Barangay Poblacion,
Municipality of San Francisco, Province of Quezon,

thence N 37°59'28" E 307.06 meters to corner 2;
thence S 63°16'32" E 162.34 meters to corner 3;
thence N 70°39'18" E 238.47 meters to corner 4;
thence S 50°45'19" E 260.82 meters to corner 5;
thence S 06°37'51" E 346.32 meters to corner 6;
thence S 56°51'03" W265.16 meters to corner 7;
thence N 33°41'18" W 46.87 meters to corner 8;
thence N 39°03'05" W 68.25 meters to corner 9:
thence N 47°04'51" W 77.83 meters to corner 10;
thence N 46°34'30" W 77.10 meters to corner 11;

thence N 65°04'36" W 109.17 meters to corner 12;
thence N 55°31'59" W204.98 meters to corner 13;
thence N 70°22'22" W136.96 meters to corner 1,

from the point of beginning containing an area of twenty-nine
and 60/100 (29.6) hectares, more or less. Bearings and
distances of lines were derived using the PRS92 Philippine
Zone III coordinate system, subject to ground delineation and
demarcation.

The Certification from the National Mapping and
Resource Information Authority (NAMRIA) containing the
boundaries and technical descriptions of the SFPL is hereby
adopted and made an integral part of this Act. In case of
inconsistency, the boundaries and technical descriptions in the
attached Certification shall prevail.

Any modification of the scope and coverage of the SFPL
in this Act shall be made through an act of Congress, after
consultation with the government agencies and stakeholders
concerned.

SEC. 6. Establishment of Buffer Zones. - The Secretary
of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources
(DENR), upon the recommendation of the Protected Area
Management Board (PAMB) created under Section 7 of this
Act, may designate areas surrounding the SFPL as buffer
zones for the purpose of providing an extra layer of protection
where restrictions may be applied: Provided, That in cases
where the designated buffer zone would cover private lands,
the owners thereof shall be required to design their
development with due consideration to the protected area
management plan.

wu

ARTICLE IT
MANAGEMENT MECHANISMS

SEC. 7. Protected Area Management Board. ~ Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, a Protected
Area Management Board (PAMB) shall be created to oversee
the management of the SFPL. The PAMB shall be composed
of the following: ‘

(a) DENR Regional Executive Director for Region IV-A,
as Chairperson; .

(b) Governor of the Province of Quezon or a duly
designated representative;

(©) Senators of the Republic of the Philippines who are
duly registered residents of the Province of Quezon, or their
duly authorized representatives, unless the Senators decline
membership in the PAMB; :

@ District Representative of the Congressional district
where the SFPL is located, or a duly designated
representative, unless the District Representative declines
membership in the PAMB;

© Mayor of the Municipality of San Francisco in the
Province of Quezon or a duly designated representative;

@® Chairpersons of all the barangays with territorial
jurisdiction over the SFPL;

(g) Regional Directors of the following government
agencies: the Department of Agriculture (DA), National
Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), Department of
Science and Technology (DOST), Philippine National Police
(PNP), Department of National Defense (DND), and
Department of Tourism (DOT);

(h) Three (3) representatives from either NGOs or
people's organizations (POs) based in the Province of Quezon,
duly accredited by both the DENR and the Provincial
Government. The NGOs or POs represented should have been
in existence for at least five (5) years and with track record
in or related to protected area management;

@ At least one (1) but not more than three ‘(3)
representatives from all the ICCs/IPs present in the area

and recognized by the National Commission on Indigenous
Peoples (NCIP);

G) One (1) representative from an academic institution,
preferably from a university or college in the Province of
Quezon, with proven track record in or related to protected
area management; and

(k) One (1) representative from the private sector,
preferably a resident of the Province of Quezon, who is
distinguished in a profession or field of interest relevant to the
management of a protected area.

The terms of office of PAMB members, as well as the
grounds for their removal, shall be in accordance with the
provisions of Republic Act No. 7586, otherwise known as the
“National Integrated Protected Areas System Act of 1992”, as
amended by Republic Act No. 11038, otherwise known as the

“Expanded National Integrated Protected Areas System Act ~

of 2018”.

SEC. 8 Powers and Functions of the PAMB. - The
PAMB shall have the following powers and functions:

(a) Oversee the management of the SFPL;

(b) Approve policies, plans and programs, proposals,
agreements, and other related documents for the management
of the SFPL:

(c) Approve the management plan of the SFPL and
ensure its harmonization with and integration into the
Ancestral Domain Sustainable Development and Protection
Plan, land use, and other development plans, public or private,
and their implementation;

@) Adopt a manual of operations to include rules of
procedure in the conduct of business, and the creation of
committees and their respective terms of reference;

© Recommend the deputation of appropriate agencies
and individuals for the enforcement of laws, rules, and
regulations governing the management of the SFPL;

(® Allocate financial resources for the implementation
of the management plan and manage the Protected Area-
Retained Income Account (PA-RIA) and other funds in
accordance with government accounting, budgeting, and
auditing rules and regulations;

(g) Set fees and _ charges in accordance with existing
guidelines;

th) Issue rules and regulations for the resolution of
conflicts through appropriate and effective means;

@) Recommend appropriate policy changes to the DENR

and other government authorities with respect to the
management of the SFPL;
, () Monitor and assess the performance of the Protected
Area Superintendent (PASu) and other protected area personnel
and compliance of partners with the terms and conditions of
any undertaking, contract, or agreement relative to any project
or activity within the SFPL;

(k) Recommend the designation or appointment of the
PASu from a shortlist of qualified candidates; and

@ Assess the effectiveness of the management of the
SFPL: Provided, That the PAMB members representing the
LGUs and national agencies shall inform their respective
constituents, offices, or sectors of PAMB-approved or other
relevant policies, rules, regulations, programs, and projects, and

-shall ensure that the provisions of this Act and its

implementing rules and regulations are complied with and
used as reference and framework in their respective plans,
policies, programs, and projects. Failure to comply with the
foregoing shall be the basis for disciplinary action against such
member according to administrative rules and regulations and
such penalties as the PAMB may provide: Provided, further,
That the DENR, through the Regional Executive Director,
shall ensure that the PAMB acts within the scope of its


powers and functions. In case of conflict between the
resolutions issued by the PAMB and the existing
administrative orders of national application, the latter shall
prevail.

SEC. 9. The Protected Area Management Office. — There
is hereby established a Protected Area Management Office
(PAMO) to be headed by a PASu who shall supervise the
day-to-day management, protection, and administration-of the
SFPL. The PASu shall hold a permanent plantilla position
and shall be appointed by the DENR Secretary. A sufficient
number of support staff with permanent plantilla positions shall
likewise be appointed by the DENR Secretary to assist the
PASu in the management of the protected area.

The PASu shall be primarily accountable to the PAMB
and the DENR for the management and operations of the
SFPL. Pursuant thereto, the PASu shall have the following
duties and responsibilities:

(a) Prepare the management plan, including the annual
work and financial plan, and ensure its implementation, in
consultation with stakeholders;

(b) Ensure the integration of relevant national and LGU
plans and programs into SFPL management plans, programs,
projects, and policies;

(©) Provide secretariat services to the PAMB and its
committees and ensure the availability of relevant and timely
information for decision-making;

(@) Formulate and recommend proposed policies, rules,
regulations, and programs to the PAMB;

@ Establish, operate, and maintain a database
management system which shall be an important basis for
decision-making;

@ Enforce the laws, rules, and regulations relevant to
the SFPL, commence and institute administrative and legal
actions in collaboration with other government agencies or
organizations, and assist in the prosecution of offenses
committed in violation of the provisions of this Act;

Ane Baul

(g) Monitor, evaluate, and report the implementation of
management activities of the SFPL;

th) Request for and receive any technical assistance,
support, or advice from any agency or instrumentality of the
government as well as academic institutions, NGOs, and the
private sector, as may be necessary for the effective
management, protection, and administration of the SFPL;

@ Issue permits and clearances for activities that
implement the management plan and other permitted activities
in accordance with terms, conditions, and criteria established
by the PAMB: Provided, That all permits for extraction of
natural resources for research purposes, including the
collection of wildlife and its by-products or derivatives, shall
specify the acts to be authorized, and shall continue to be
issued by relevant authorities, subject to prior clearance from
the PAMB, through the PASu;

*  @) Collect and receive pertinent fees, charges, donations,

and other income for the SFPL: Provided, That such fees,
charges, donations, and other income collected and received
shall be reported regularly to the PAMB and the DENR in
accordance with existing guidelines;

(Kk) Prepare and recommend to the PAMB, the approval
of the annual work and financial plans of the SFPL based on
the management plan; and

@ Perform such other functions as the PAMB and the
DENR may assign.

The PAMO may be augmented by the deputized local
environment and natural resources officers upon the
recommendation of the PAMB and approval of the DENR.

ARTICLE III
PROCEEDS AND FEES
SEC. 10. The San Francisco Protected Landscape

Integrated Protected Area Fund. — There is hereby established
a trust fund to be known as the San Francisco Protected


Landscape Integrated Protected Area Fund (SFPL-IPAF) for
purposes of financing projects and sustaining the operation of
the SFPL and the NIPAS. All income generated from the
operation and management of wild flora and fauna in the
SFPL shall accrue to the SFPL-IPAF. The income shail be
derived from fees on the permitted sale and export of flora and
fauna and other resources from the SFPL, proceeds from the
lease of multiple-use areas, contributions from industries and
facilities directly benefiting from the SFPL, and such other
fees and income devived from the operation of the SFPL.

The PAMB shall retain seventy-five percent (75%) of all
revenues raised through the above means, which shall be
deposited in the PA-RIA in any authorized government
depository bank within the locality: Provided, That
disbursements out of such deposits shall be used solely for the
protection, maintenance, administration, and management of
the SFPL and implementation of duly approved projects of the
PAMB. The remaining twenty-five percent (25%) of revenues
shall be deposited as a special account in the General Fund
of the National Treasury for purposes of financing the projects
of the NIPAS.

The fund may be augmented by grants, donations, and
endowments from various sources, domestic or foreign:
Provided, That the fund shall be deposited in full as a special
account in the National Treasury and disbursements therefrom
shall be made solely for the protection, maintenance,
administration, and management of the NIPAS and for duly
approved projects endorsed by the PAMB in accordance with
existing accounting, budgeting, and auditing rules and
regulations: Provided, further, That the fund shall not be used
to cover personal services expenditures.

The LGUs shall continue to impose and collect all other
fees not enumerated herein which they have traditionally
collected, such as for business permits, property tax, and
rentals of LGUs’ facilities.

 

il
ARTICLE IV

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 11. Appropriations. - The Secretary of the DENR
shall immediately include in the Department’s program the
implementation of this Act, the funding of which shall be
included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 12. Suppletory Application of the NIPAS Law. -
The provisions of Republic Act No. 7586, as amended by
Republic Act No. 11038, shall have suppletory application to
this Act.

SEC. 13. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within -
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Secretary
of the DENR shall, in consultation with the local government
of the Municipality of San Francisco, the Provincial
Government of Quezon, and concerned national government
agencies, issue the corresponding rules and regulations for the
effective implementation of this Act.

SEC. 14. Separability Clause. - If any section or
provision of this Act is held unconstitutional or invalid, the
remaining sections or provisions not affected thereby shall
continue to be in full force and effect.

SEC. 15. Repealing Clause. - All laws, decrees, executive
orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or parts
thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

_. SEC. 6. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation.

Approved, -

      

RON. p  ROMUABDEZ ~~ FRANCIS “CHIZ” G. ESCUDERO-
Speaker of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

 

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 1691 on December 16, 2024 and adopted by
the House of Representatives as an amendment to House
Bill No. 7506 on January 22, 2025.

REGINALD S. VELASCO
Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved: JUL @ 3 202

  
    

Tan

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.

Prensa ye Philippines

oO

 
 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

UY ROY TTA A

PBBM009356

 

  
     
 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTAFIED COPY