H. No. 10181

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meters Manila
Nineteenth Congress

Chird Regular Session
—_-—_

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 32283 ]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A COLLEGE OF MEDICINE IN
THE SULTAN KUDARAT STATE UNIVERSITY IN THE
CITY OF TACURONG, PROVINCE OF SULTAN KUDARAT
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Establishment. — There is hereby established a
medical school in the Sultan Kudarat State University located in the
City of Tacurong, Province of Sultan Kudarat, which shall be known
as the “Sultan Kudarat State University-College of Medicine”.

SEC. 2. General Mandate. — The Sultan Kudarat State
University (SKSU)-College of Medicine, hereinafter referred to as the
“College”, shall primarily offer a Doctor of Medicine Program, including
an Integrated Liberal Arts and Medicine Program, consisting of
basic science and clinical courses, and using a learner-centered,
competency-based, and community-oriented approach. The primary
goal of the College shall be to develop a corps of professional physicians
to help strengthen the healthcare system of the country, as well as to
respond to the human resource development needs of the Province of
Sultan Kudarat and the Central Mindanao Region.

The College is also mandated to undertake research and extension
services and provide progressive leadership in these areas.

SEC. 3. Governance. —The governance of the College shall be
vested in the Board of Regents of the SKSU, hereinafter referred to as
the Board, whose powers and functions are defined under Republic
Act (RA) No, 9966, entitled, “An Act Converting the Sultan Kudarat
Polytechnic State College (SKPSC) in the City of Tacurong and its
Designated Campuses in the Municipalities of Lutayan, Kalamansig,
Palimbang and Isulan, All Located in the Province of Sultan Kudarat
into a State University to be Known as the Sultan Kudarat State
University (SKSU) and Appropriating Funds Therefor”, and other
applicable laws and regulations, unless otherwise provided or amended
elsewhere in this Act.

SEC. 4. Administration. — The administration of the College
shall be vested in the Dean of the College insofar as may be authorized
by the SKSU Board. ”

SEC. 5. The College Dean. ~The College shall be headed bya
Dean who shall be appointed by the Board, subject to the guidelines,
qualifications, and standards set by the Board, and upon the
recommendation of the President, following a process of consultation
with the constituents of the College. The Dean shall render full-time
service for a term of three (8) years and may be reappointed to
another term.

Within six (6) months from the effectivity of this Act,
the President of the SKSU shall constitute the Search Committee for
the Deanship.

The powers and duties of the Dean ‘of the College, in addition
to those specifically provided for in this Act, shall include those usually
pertaining to the Office of the Dean of similar state universities and
colleges and those delegated by the President.

The salary of the Dean of the College shall be in accordance
with RA No. 11466, otherwise known as the “Salary Standardization
Law of 2019”, and such other laws amendatory thereto, which may
hereinafter be enacted, and shall be comparable to that being received
by the Deans of similar educational institutions.

In case of vacancy in the Office of the Dean by reason of death,
compulsory retirement, resignation, removal for cause, or incapacity
of the Dean to perform the functions of the office, the Board shall,
upon the recommendation of the President, designate an Officer-in-Charge

(OIC) of the College, pending the appointment of a new Dean: Provided,
That the OIC shall serve only during the unexpired portion of the term.

The Dean of the College shall be assisted by a College Secretary,
who shall be appointed by the Board.

SEC. 6. The Faculty.—The Board shall, upon the recommendation
of the President of the SKSU, appoint the faculty members of the
College: Provided, That no political belief, sex, gender, cultural or
community affiliation, ethnic origin, religious opinion or affiliation
shall be a matter of inquiry in the appointment of faculty members of
the.College: Provided, further, That said appointment shall be subject
to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board:
Provided, finally, That no member of the faculty shall teach for or
against any particular religious denomination.

SEC. 7. Scholarship Programs and Admission. —The College
shall provide scholarships and other affirmative action programs to
assist poor but deserving students who qualify for admission to the
College. Students who have availed themselves of nationally-funded
scholarship programs to complete the Doctor of Medicine Program
under the College shall be required to render a return service as
provided for by applicable laws and regulations, or the contract to be
signed between the student and the College.

No student shall be denied admission to the College by reason of
sex, gender, religion, cultural or community affiliation, physical
disability, ethnic origin, or any other forms of discrimination.

SEC. 8. Academic Freedom. ~The College shall enjoy academic
freedom, pursuant to Section 5, Paragraph 2 of Article XIV of
the Constitution.

SEC. 9. Loan or Transfer of Supplies, Apparatuses, or Equipment,
and Detail of Personnel to the College. ~ Heads of national government
agencies and instrumentalities may, upon the request of the Board
through the President of the SKSU, loan or transfer supplies,
apparatuses, or equipment, and detail personnel to the College:
Provided, That such loan, transfer or detail shall not be detrimental
to public service.

The personnel to be detailed to the College shall perform such
duties as may be deemed required by the Dean of the College and the
time spent for such duties shall be counted as part of the detailed
personnel’s regular service.


SEC. 10. Assets, Liabilities, and Personnel. — All assets, both
real and personal, personnel, and records of the College, as well as its
liabilities or obligations, shall be titled or named after the SKSU.

All parcels of land belonging to the government to be occupied
by the College shall be the property of the SKSU and titled under its
name: Provided, That should the SKSU cease to exist or be abolished
or such aforementioned parcels of land be no longer needed by the
SKSU, the same shall revert to the local government unit concerned
or to the Republic of the Philippines, as the case may be.

SEC. 11. Duty and Tax Exemptions. ~The importation by the
College of medical books or publications, medical equipment or
instruments which are for medical, laboratory or scientific purposes
shall, upon certification by the Commission on Higher Education
(CHED), be exempt from customs duties in accordance with the
provisions of RA No. 10863, otherwise known as the “Customs
Modernization and Tariff Act (OMTA)”.

All grants, bequests, endowments, donations, and contributions
made to and used actually, directly, and exclusively for educational
purposes by the College, shall be exempt from donor’s tax and
the same shall be considered as allowable deductions from gross
income for purposes of computing the taxable income of the donor in
accordance with the provisions of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended.

SEC. 12. Compliance with CHED Requirements. —The SKSU,
prior to the establishment of the College and offering of new and revised
courses and programs related thereto, shall ensure compliance with
the applicable policies, standards, and guidelines of the CHED.

SEC. 13. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of RA
No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher Education Modernization
Act of 1997”, shall form part of this Act. .

SEC. 14, Appropriations. — The amount necessary to carry out
the provisions of this Act shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

SEC. 15. Implementing Rules and Regulations. —Within sixty (60)
days from the approval of this Act, the Board shall, in consultation
with the CHED, issue rules and regulations to implement its provisions,

SEC. 16. Separability Clause. —If, for any reason, any part or
provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the
remaining parts or provisions not affected are in full force and effect.

SEC. 17. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential decrees,
executive orders, and rules and regulations contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are amended, repealed, or

modified accordingly.
) Suc. 18. Effectivity. —This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days
: after its complete publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
y of general circulation.
Approved,

 
   

FRANCIS “CHIZ” G. ESCUDERO FI
President of the Senate

FANID) |G. ROMUALDEZ
Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on May 8, 2024, amended
by the Senate of the Philippines on June 3, 2025, and which amendments
were concurred in by the House of Representatives on June 9, 2025.

, = : VELASCO

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

uupsed Mito AW Of SEP 0.7 2026
without the signature ef the Presi
dent, in accordance with Article VI,

Approved:

{ Section 27 (1) of the Constitution
FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
{ President of the Philippine

  

. TOLENTINO-NAVA
DIRECTOR IV