8. No, 2212
H. No. 7751

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manily

Nineteenth Congress

Sirst Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth
day of July, two thousand twenty-two,

—__.

[ Rerusuic ActNo. 11959 ]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING SPECIALTY CENTERS IN
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH HOSPITALS IN EVERY
REGION AND IN GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR
-CONTROLLED CORPORATION SPECIALTY
HOSPITALS AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

. SECTION 1. Short Title. ~ This Act shall be known as
the “Regional Specialty Centers Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. ~ It is the policy of the
State to protect and promote the right to health of the people
and instill health consciousness among them by making health
services available, accessible, and affordable for all.

 

Towards this end, the State shall adopt: an integrated
and comprehensive approach to health development by
providing specialized health services to the general public
through the establishment and institutionalization of specialty
healthcare centers in all regions of the Philippines.

SEC. 8. Definition of Terms. — For purposes of this Act,
the following terms are defined as“follows:

(a) Advanced Comprehensive Specialty Center (ACSC)
refers to a specialty center that serves a full range of specialty
and subspecialty clinical services at the subnational level, and
has the capacity to conduct and provide specialty and
subspecialty clinical; public health, and operations research,
and training;

(b) Basic Comprehensive Specialty Center (BCSC) refers
to a specialty center that serves a full range of specialty
clinical services at the regional level, and has the capacity to
conduct and provide specialty clinical, operational, and public
health research, and training;

© DOH Hospitals refer to hospitals under the direct
supervision and control of the Department of Health (OH);

@ Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporation
(GOCC) Specialty Hospitals refer to hospitals that specialize
in a particular organ or group of organs, or type of patients,
as mandated’under their respective charters, and are attached
to the DOH, specifically pertaining, but not limited, to the
Philippine Heart Center, the National Kidney and Transplant
Institute, the Lung Center of the Philippines, and the
Philippine Children’s Medical Center;

© National Specialty Center (NSC) refers to a specialty
center with the highest level of expertise in clinical services,
teaching, training, and research. The term shall also refer to
the designation by the DOH to specialty centers, DOH
hospitals mandated by law to provide specialized care in a
certain specialty, and GOCC Specialty Hospitals; and

® Specialty Center refers to a unit or department in
a hospital that offers specialized care addressing particular
conditions and providing specific procedures and management

s

ot

¥+}

of cases requiring specialized training and equipment on a
specific specialty.

SEC. 4. Specialty Centers. — The DOH shall establish
specialty centers in DOH hospitals in every region of the
country and in GOCC specialty hospitals pursuant to their
respective mandates: Provided, That the following specialties
shall be prioritized: cancer care, cardiovascular care, lung care,
renal care and kidney transplant, brain and spine cake, trauma*
care, burn care, orthopedic care, physical rehabilitation
medicine, infectious disease and tropical medicine, toxicology,
mental health, geriatric care, neonatal care, dermatology, eye
care, and ear, nose and throat care. .

The DOH shall categorize the level of service capability
of the specialty centers to be established as NSCs, ACSCs and
BCSCs, in accordance with the Philippine Health Facility
Development Plan.

The DOH shall provide appropriate specialist equipment
and prioritize funding for capital outlay investment for
specialty centers through the Health Facilities Enhancement
Program and other fund sources.

The establishment of Specialty Centers or any part
thereof, in separate premises and operated under the same
management of a DOH hospital, shall not require a separate
license.

The DOH, in collaboration with the NSCs, DOH hospitals,
the Professional Regulation Commission, the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM), the Civil Service Commission,
the concerned accredited professional organization and specialty
and subspecialty associations, and other relevant government
agencies and stakeholders, shall ensure the sustainability of the
staffing of the specialty centers by developing and implementing
plans, policies, strategies, and programs concerning the
production, recruitment, training, and retention of medical
specialists and expert personnel. : .

 

The DOH shall determine the organizational structure
and staffing pattern of specialty centers, subject to the

 

 

evaluation and approval of the DBM and in accordance with
civil service laws, rules and regulations.

SEC. 5. Criteria for the Establishment of Specialty
Centers. — The establishment of specialty centers shall adhere
to guidelines set by the DOH on planning and prioritizing
health facilities based on the following criteria:

(a) Upgrading of hospitals based. on the Resource
Stratified Framework developed by the DOH for each specialty
care;

(b) Evidence of the health needs and demands, including
disease burden, in the catchment populations of the DOH
facilities;

© Service capability of hospitals and geographic or
physical access;

@) Appropriate level of specialized healthcare provider
role in the continuum of care, including roles of the DOH
hospitals as referral facilities for province-wide and city-wide
healthcare provider networks;

(®) Availability of competent health human resources for
specialized healthcare; and

() Operational and financial performance of the DOH
facilities, including accreditation, to avail of specialized
healthcare packages from the Philippine Health Insurance
Corporation.

SEC. 6. Philippine Health Facility Development Plan
(PHFDP). ~ The DOH shall include the establishment of
specialty centers in the PHFDP, which serves as a guide for
investments funded by the national government to rationalize
the distribution of capacity and capability of health facilities:
Provided, That at least one (1) specialty center shall be
established in every region, within five (5) years upon the
effectivity of this Act, based on the top burden of disease and
special needs in the area.

SEC. 7. National Specialty Centers. - The NSCs shall
have the following roles and responsibilities:

(a) Serve as the core information hub for the
specializations and diseases they cover, in coordination with
concerned DOH offices;

(b) Lead in the development of policies, protocols, and
standards for the particular specialty and shall have the
highest level of clinical services and training capability;

(©) Provide scientific leadership by conducting specialized
clinical, public health, and operations research with a multi-
disciplinary or multi-center approach;

@) Provide specialty tramming and technical assistance to
specialty centers to ensure the delivery of quality services and
strengthen the network of care across the country for a
particular specialty; and

' © Conduct capacity and capability assessment of the
services provided by ACSCs and BCSCs for a particular
specialty.

SEC. 8. Medical Specialists and Experts. - The NSCs,
and DOH hospitals with ACSCs and BCSCs, are hereby
authorized to contract the services of medical specialists or
experts to provide specialty training and technical assistance.
DOH hospitals with ACSCs and BCSCs may also send medical,
allied medical and other necessary personnel to the NSCs for
training and capacity development.

SEC. 9. Report to Congress. - The DOH shall provide
Congress, through the Committee on Health of the House of
Representatives and the Committee on Health and Demography.
of the Senate, an annual report of the activities,
accomplishments, and operational plans of the specialty centers. .

 

 

Five (5) years after the start of the effectivity of this Act,
the Committee on Health of the House of Representatives and
the Committee on Health and Demography of the Senate shall
conduct a systematic evaluation of the implementation,

 

 


accomplishments, and impact of this Act, as well as the
performance of established specialty centers, for purposes of
determining remedial legislation.

SEC. 10. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the DOH, in
consultation with the NSCs, DOH hospitals, and other
concerned agencies, shall promulgate the implementing rules
and regulations necessary to carry out the purposes of this
Act.

SEC. 11. Appropriations. - The amount necessary for the
initial implementation of this Act shall be charged against the
current year’s appropriation of the DOH. Thereafter, the DOH
shall include in the Department’s program the establishment
and operationalization of the specialty centers in DOH
hospitals, the funding of which shall be included in the budget
of the DOH under the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 12. Separability Clause. — If any provision herein
shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid, the other
provisions hereof that are not affected thereby shall continue
to be in full force and effect.

 

 

 

 

SEC. 13. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
rules, and regulations or other issuances or parts inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly. ,

SEC. 14. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect after
fifteen (15) days from its publication in the Official Gazette
or in a newspaper of general circulation.

    

Approved,
AND G" ROMUALDEZ F. ZUBIRI
Speaker of the House esident of the Senate

of Representatives

  

wT

 
 

This Act, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 2212
and House Bill No. 7751, was passed by the Senate of the Philippines
and the House of Representatives on May 31, 2023.

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

 

PBBM002712

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

af?
TTY. E. FERROLINO-ENAD
DIRECTOR IV