H. No, 6295

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Nineteenth Congress

Second Regular Session
—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand twenty-three.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No.12017 ]

AN ACT GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO THE LEYTE II ELECTRIC
COOPERATIVE INC. (LEYECO II) TO CONSTRUCT,
INSTALL, ESTABLISH, OPERATE, OWN, MANAGE AND -
MAINTAIN DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS FOR THE
CONVEYANCE OF ELECTRIC POWER TO THE END-USERS
IN THE CITY OF TACLOBAN AND MUNICIPALITIES OF
BABATNGON AND PALO, PROVINCE OF LEYTE

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise, — Subject to the
provisions of the Constitution and applicable laws, rules and
regulations, there is hereby granted to the Leyte II Electric Cooperative,
Inc. (LEYECO II), hereunder referred to as the Grantee, its successors
or assignees a franchise to construct, install, establish, operate, own,

manage and maintain in the public interest and for commercial
purposes, a distribution system for the conveyance of electric power to
the end-users in the City of Tacloban and Municipalities of Babatngon
and Palo, Province of Leyte.

As used in this Act, distribution system refers to the system of
wires and associated facilities including sub-transmission lines
belonging to a franchised distribution utility extending between the
delivery point on the national transmission system or generating facility
and the metering point/facility of the end-users.

SEC, 2. Manner of Operations of Facilities. — All electric
distribution facilities, lines and systems for electric services installed,
owned, operated, managed or maintained by the Grantee, its successors
or assignees shall be operated or maintained at all times in a superior
manner, and it shall be the duty of the Grantee, its successors or
assignees, whenever required to do so by the Energy Regulatory
Commission (ERC), or its legal successor, or the Department of Energy
(DOE), or its legal successor, or the National Electrification
Administration (NEA), or its legal successor, or any other government’
agency concerned to modify, improve and change such facilities or
systems in such manner and to such extent as the progress in science
or technology and improvements or innovations in the electric power
services may render reasonable and proper.

Whenever practicable, and for purposes of maintaining order,
safety and aesthetics along the highways, roads, streets, alleys or
right-of-way, the Grantee may allow the use of free spaces in its poles,
facilities, or right-of-way by interested parties upon reasonable
compensation to the Grantee considering the costs incurred to
accommodate and administer the use of the Grantee’s facilities by
such parties. The ERC shall decide in case of dispute or disagreement
between the parties.

SEC. 3. Authority of the ERC and NEA. — The Grantee shall
secure from the ERC or the NEA or any government agency
having jurisdiction over its operations, the certificate of public
convenience and necessity and any other license, permit or authority
indispensable for the construction and operation of the electric power
distribution system.

SEC. 4. Excavation and Restoration Works. — For the purpose
of erecting and maintaining the poles or other supports for said
facilities, wires or other conductors or for the purpose of laying and
maintaining said facilities, wires, cables or other conductors, it shall
be lawful for the Grantee, its successors or assignees, with the prior
approval of the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)
or the local government unit concerned, as may be appropriate, to
make excavations or lay conduits in any of the public places, highways,
roads, streets, lanes, alleys, avenues, sidewalks, or bridges of the
province, cities or municipalities: Provided, however, That a public
place, highway, road, street, lane, alley, avenue, sidewalk, or bridge
disturbed, altered, or changed by reason of the erection of poles or
other supports or the underground laying of wires, other conductors
or conduits shall be repaired and replaced in workmanlike manner
by the Grantee, its successors or assignees, in accordance with
the standards set by the DPWH or the local government unit
concerned. Should the Grantee, its successors or assignees,
after the ten (10)-day notice from the grant of authority, fail, refuse or
neglect to repair or replace any part of public place, highway, road,
street, lane, alley, avenue, sidewalk, or bridge altered, changed, or
disturbed by the said Grantee, its successors or assignees, then the
DPWH or the local government ‘unit concerned shall have the right to
have the same repaired and replaced in good order and condition and
charge the Grantee, its successors or assignees, double the amount of
the cost and expenses for such repair or replacement.

SEC. 5. Responsibility to the Public. — The Grantee shall supply
electricity to its captive market in the least costly manner. In the
interest of the public good and as far as feasible and whenever required
by the ERC, the Grantee shall modify, improve, or change its facilities,
poles, lines, systems and equipment for the purpose of providing efficient
and reliable service and reduced electricity costs. The Grantee shall
charge reasonable and just power rates for its services to all types of
consumers within its franchised areas in order that businesses and
industries shall be able to compete.

The Grantee shall have the obligation to provide open and
non-discriminatory access to its distribution system and services for
any end-user within its franchise area consistent with Republic Act
(RA) No. 9136, otherwise known as the “Electric Power Industry Reform

Act of 2001”. The Grantee shall not engage in any activity that will
constitute an abuse of market power such as unfair trade practices,
monopolistic schemes, and other activities that will hinder
competitiveness of businesses and industries.

SEC. 6. Rates for Services. — The retail rates and charges for
the distribution of electric power by the Grantee to its
end-users shall be regulated by and subject to the approval of
the ERC or its legal successor.

The Grantee shall identify and segregate in its electricity bill
to the end-users the components of the retail rate pursuant to
RA No. 9186, unless otherwise amended. Such rates charged by the
Grantee to the end-users shall be made public and transparent. The
Grantee shall implement a lifeline rate for marginalized end-users as
mandated under RA No. 9136.

SEC. 7. Promotion of Consumer Interests. — The herein
Grantee shall establish a consumer desk that will handle consumer
complaints and ensure adequate promotion of consumer interests, The
Grantee shall act with dispatch on all complaints brought before it.

SEC. 8. Commitment to Provide and Promote the Creation of
Employment Opportunities. — The Grantee shall create employment
opportunities and shall allow on-the-job training in their franchise
operation: Provided, That priority shall be accorded to the residents
where their principal office is located: Provided, further, That the
Grantee shall comply with the applicable labor standards and allowance
entitlement under existing labor laws, rules and regulations, and
similar issuances.

SEC. 9. Right of the Government. ~ A special right is hereby
reserved to the President of the Philippines, in times of war, rebellion,
public peril, calamity, emergency, disaster or disturbance of peace
and order, to temporarily take over and operate the stations or facilities
of the Grantee; to temporarily suspend the operation of any station or
facility in the interest of public safety, security, and public welfare; or
to authorize the temporary use and operation thereof by any agency of
the government, upon due compensation to the Grantee, for the use of
the stations or facilities during the period when these shall
be so operated.

SEC. 10. Right of Eminent Domain. — Subject to the limitations
and procedures prescribed by law, the Grantee is authorized to exercise
the right of eminent domain insofar as it may be reasonably necessary
for the efficient maintenance and operation of its services. The Grantee
is authorized to install and maintain its poles, wires, and other facilities
over and across public property, including streets, highways, forest
reserves, and other similar property of the Government of the
Philippines, its branches, or any of its instrumentalities. The Grantee
may acquire such private property as is actually necessary for the
realization of the purposes for which this franchise is granted:
Provided, That proper expropriation proceedings shall have been
instituted and just compensation paid.

Szc. 11. Term of Franchise. — Unless sooner cancelled, the
franchise shall be in effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years
from the effectivity of this Act. This franchise shall be
deemed ipso facto revoked in the event the Grantee fails to operate
continuously for two (2) years.

SEC. 12. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. — The Grantee shall hold the national, provincial, city,
and municipal governments of the Philippines free from all claims,
accounts, demands, or actions arising from accidents causing injury
to persons or damage to property, during the construction, installation,
operation, and maintenance of the distribution system of the Grantee.

SEC. 13. Liability for Damages. — The Grantee shall be liable
for any injury to persons and damage to property arising
from accidents by reason of any defective construction under this
franchise or of any neglect or omission to keep its poles and wires in
safe condition.

Sc. 14. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Usufruct, or Assignment of
Franchise. — The Grantee shall not sell, lease, transfer, grant the
usufruct of, or assign this franchise or the rights and privileges
acquired thereunder to any person, firm, company, corporation, or
other commercial or legal entity;er merge with any other corporation,
or entity, or transfer the controlling interest of the Grantee, whether as
a whole or in part, and whether simultaneously or contemporaneously,
to any such person, firm, company, corporation, or entity without the
prior approval of the Congress: Provided, That Congress shall be

informed of any lease, transfer, grant of usufruct of, sale, or assignment
of franchise or the rights and privileges acquired thereunder, or of the
merger, or sale of the controlling interest within sixty (60) days after
the completion of said transaction: Provided, further, That any such
transfer, sale, or assignment is in accordance with the constitutional
limitations: Provided, furthermore, That failure to report to Congress
such change of ownership shall render the franchise ipso facto revoked:
Provided, finally, That any person or entity to which this franchise is
sold, transferred, or assigned shall be subject to the same conditions,
terms, restrictions, and limitations of this Act.

SEC. 15. Reportorial Requirement. — The Grantee shall submit
an annual report to Congress, through the Committee on Legislative
Franchises of the House of Representatives and the Committee on
Public Services of the Senate, on its compliance with the terms and
conditions of the franchise and on its operations on or before April 30
of every year during the term of the franchise. The reportorial
compliance certificate issued by Congress shall be required before any
application for permit or certificate is accepted by the ERC.

SEc. 16. Fine. — The failure of the Grantee to submit the
requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized with a fine in
the amount of Five hundred pesos (P500.00) per working day of
non-compliance which shall be collected by the ERC. The fine shall be
collected separately from the reportorial penalties imposed by the ERC
and shall be remitted to the Bureau of the Treasury.

SEC. 17. Equality Clause. — Any advantage, favor, privilege,
exemption, or immunity granted under existing franchises, or which
may hereafter be granted, upon prior review and approval of Congress,
shall become part of this franchise and shall be accorded immediately
and unconditionally to the herein Grantee: Provided, however, That
the foregoing shall neither apply to nor affect provisions concerning
territory covered by the franchise, the life span of the franchise or the
type of service authorized by the franchise: Provided, further, That
the foregoing shall not apply to the sale, lease, transfer, grant of
usufruct, or assignment of legislative franchises with prior
congressional approval.

a

SEC. 18. Applicability of Existing Laws. —The Grantee shall
comply with and be subject to the provisions of Commonwealth Act
No. 146, as amended, otherwise known as the “Public Service Act”,
RA No. 9186, and Republic Act No. 10531 or the “National
Electrification Administration Reform Act of 2013”.

SEC. 19. Repealability and Non-Exclusivity Clause. — This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal
by Congress when the public interest so requires and shall
not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges herein
provided for.

SEC. 20. Existing Powers. — Existing mandates, powers,
functions, and privileges granted to electric cooperatives under
existing laws, including Section 10 of RA No. 10531, otherwise known
as the “National Electrification Administration Reform Act of 2013”,
shall remain valid and effective, unless expressly repealed by
succeeding laws. ®

SEC. 21. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections or
provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not affected
thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 22. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential decrees,
executive orders, letters of instruction, and administrative rules
and regulations or parts thereof, which are contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

SEC. 23. Effectivity. —This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days
after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

Approved,

ene “CHIZ” G, ESCUDERO IV, G. ROM ALDEZ

President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

  

‘ This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on December 5, 2022,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on May 20, 2024, and which

amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives
on May 22, 2024.

REGIN, . VELASCO
Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved: ‘AUG 09 282%

/

/ )
FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR. §
Presidentfof the Philippines

  

oO

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CER IFIED COPY

N. ESPINO

     
 

ACTING” DIRECTOR IV

anit
REPUBLIC

  

PHILIPPINES

PBBM005302