S. No. 2507
H. No. 7355

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Nineteenth Congress

Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand twenty-three.

—

[ Rerusuic Acr No. 12000 ]
AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE NEGROS ISLAND REGION

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Negros Island Region Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is hereby declared the
policy of the State to promote efficiency in the government to
enable it to pursue programs consistent with national goals
for accelerated social and economic development.

Pursuant to this policy, the State shall promote
administrative decentralization to strengthen local autonomy
and accelerate the economic, cultural, and social development
of the region.

SEC. 3. Creation. — The Negros Island Region (NIR) is
hereby established which shall be composed of the following
provinces, including the cities, municipalities, and barangays
comprising the provinces:

(a) Negros Occidental including Bacolod City;

(b) Negros Oriental; and

(c) Siquijor.

SEC. 4. Negros Island Region Government Offices. — To
ensure the effective delivery of public services to the NIR,
regional offices shall be established and designated in the
following manner:

() Negros Occidental

(a) Agriculture and Land-Related Cluster

(1) Department of Agriculture;

(2) Department of Environment and Natural Resources;

(3) Department of Agrarian Reform; and

(4) Department of Human Settlements and Urban
Development.

(b) Peace and Order and Security Cluster

(1) Department of Justice;

(2) Department of the Interior and Local Government;
(3) Philippine National Police; and

(4) Department of National Defense.

(c) Governance Cluster

(1) Department of Budget and Management;

(2) Department of Finance;

(3) National Economic and Development Authority;
(4) Department of Foreign Affairs;

(5) Commission on Audit; and

(6) Commission on Elections.

(I) Negros Oriental

(a) Human Development Cluster

(1) Department of Education;

(2) Department of Social Welfare and Development;
(3) Department of Health;

(4) Technical Education and Skills Development Authority;
(5) Commission on Higher Education;

(6) Civil Service Commission;

(7) Philippine Statistics Authority; and

(8) Department of Labor and Employment.

(b) Infrastructure Cluster

(1) Department of Public Works and Highways;
(2) Department of Transportation;

(3) Department of Information and Communications

Technology; and

(4) Department of Energy.
(c) Industry and Labor Cluster
(1) Department of Trade and Industry;

(2) Department of Tourism;

(3) Department of Science and Technology; and

(4) Departmend of Finance - Securities and
Exchange Commission.

SEC. 5. Creation of a Technical Working Group (TWG).
— Upon the approval of this Act, a TWG shall be constituted.
This will be composed of the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA), the Department of the Interior
and Local Government (DILG), the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM), the representative of the Office of the
Governor of the provinces, and the representatives from all
elected Members of the House of Representatives of
the provinces.

The TWG shall formulate the plan or roadmap to put
in place all institutional arrangements for the Negros Island
Region and arrange for the organizational development
requirements as well as other necessary concerns for
development planning, investment programming, and public
service provision. The DILG shall serve as the secretariat of
the TWG.

SEC. 6. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to carry
out the provisions of this Act shall be charged against the
current year’s appropriations of concerned agencies. Thereafter,
the amount needed for the implementation of this Act shall
be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 7. Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR). —
Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the
DILG, NEDA, and DBM, in consultation with the provincial
governments of Negros Occidental, Negros Oriental, and
Siquijor, are mandated to promulgate the IRR in relation to
this Act.

SEC. 8. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is held invalid or unconstitutional, the other parts or
provisions hereof not affected thereby shall continue to be in
full force and effect.

SEC. 9. Repealing Clause. — All laws, issuances, rules
and regulations or parts thereof that are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or
modified accordingly.

SEC. 10. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen

(15) days from its complete publication in the Official Gazette
or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved, .

  
   

  

(GUEL F. ZUBIRI
President of the Senate

. RO}
Speaker of the Hous
of Representatives

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 2507 on March 12, 2024 and adopted by the
House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill
No. 7385 on March 13, 2024.

 
     
 

REGIN 7 VELASC
Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved: JUN 441 202
/

G

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR. Wea
President of the Philippines ‘

O

 
 

  
 

Office of the President

   

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

UY NON

PBBM004808

 

ACTING DIRECTOR IV

      

 

G14 -1y

 

 

MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

ATTY. N. ESPINO