S. No. 2814
H. No. 6509

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Nineteenth Congress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

—
[ Rerusuic Act No. 2177 |

AN ACT PROVIDING FREE LEGAL ASSISTANCE TO
MILITARY AND UNIFORMED PERSONNEL FACING
ANY CHARGE ARISING FROM INCIDENTS RELATED
TO THE PERFORMANCE OF OFFICIAL DUTY, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Free Legal Assistance for Military and Uniformed
Personnel Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is the declared policy
of the State to protect the dignity and rights of its citizens,
including those responsible for upholding the Constitution,
defending the sovereignty and territory of the country against


all enemies, enforcing the laws of the land, preventing crimes,
and maintaining peace and order.

The State shall promote peace and order and ensure
public safety through effective and efficient military and
uniformed service composed of highly motivated officers,
enlisted and uniformed personnel.

To this end, the State shall, as far as practicable,
provide free legal assistance to military and uniformed
personnel in criminal, civil, or administrative proceedings
arising from service-related incidents.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(a) Military and Uniformed Personnel (MUP) refers to
officers, enlisted and uniformed personnel of the Armed Forces
of the Philippines (AFP), Bureau of Fire Protection (BFP),
Bureau of Jail Management and Penology (BJMP), Philippine
Coast Guard (PCG), Bureau of Corrections (BuCor), Philippine
National Police (PNP). and the Hydrography Branch of the
National Mapping and Resource Information Authority
(NAMRIA); and

(b) Service-related Cases refer to civil, criminal, and
administrative cases filed against the MUP for incidents
related to or in connection with the discharge of their official
functions or the performance of their duties.

SEC. 4. Qualifications for Free Legal Assistance. — The
MUP facing any service-related case before a prosecutor's office,
court, quasi-judicial or administrative body, or any competent
body or tribunal shall be entitled to free legal assistance.

Retired and honorably discharged and separated MUP
shall be eligible for free legal assistance on service-related cases
committed while still in active duty.

SEC. 5. Procedure and Coverage. - Within
twenty-four (24) hours from the official receipt of the charge
against the MUP, the heads of the MUP agencies, through
the head of the Legal Office, shall direct their respective legal
officers to provide free legal assistance to qualified MUP as
provided in this Act. The agencies shall establish guidelines

and procedures for availing free legal assistance and
determining service-related cases to be approved by the head
of the MUP agency: Provided, That in case of conflict of
interest, the MUP shall not be entitled to free legal assistance
under this Act. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary,
“conflict of interest” as used in this Act shall refer to an
instance where the handling by the legal office of a case will
adversely affect the interest of the MUP concerned agency.

The determination of which cases are service-related shall
be made by the respective legal offices of the AFP, BFP,
BJMP, PCG, BuCor, PNP, and NAMRIA based on the
evidence provided by the MUP. Any officer tasked to determine
the eligibility of MUP applicants for free legal assistance under
this Act who, through manifest partiality, evident bad faith,
or gross inexcusable negligence, improperly denies or approves
an application shall be held liable under Section 3(e) of
Republic Act No. 3019, otherwise known as the “Anti-Graft
and Corrupt Practices Act”.

Free legal assistance shall include the following:

(a) Legal representation in civil, criminal, or
administrative proceedings, as far as practicable;

(b) Legal advice or consultations;

(c) Preparation of pleadings, motions, memoranda, and all
other legal forms and documents;

(ad) Court fees and other related fees; and
(e) Notarization of documents.

SEC. 6. Strengthening the Legal Offices of the AFP, BFP,
BJMP, PCG, BuCor, PNP, and NAMRIA. — Within ninety
(90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Chief of Staff
of the AFP, the Chiefs of the PNP, BJMP, and BFP, the
Commandant of the PCG, the Director General of BuCor, and
the Administrator of the NAMRIA shall submit to the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) the revised
organizational structure and staffing patterns based on the
ideal ratio of legal officers with the total number of personnel.
taking into consideration the demands of the service, historical

‘


number of cases handled, current case load, and logistical
requirements necessary for their respective legal offices to
render adequate and effective free legal assistance to qualified
personnel. The DBM shall act on the submissions in
accordance with Republic Act No. 11032 or the “Ease of Doing
Business and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act
of 2018”.

SEC. 7. Entitlement of Government Lawyers to Payment
for Expenses. — The government lawyer providing legal
assistance to the MUP shall be entitled to payment of actual
travel and other expenses, including Special Counsel Allowance
for each appearance before the prosecutor's office, court,
quasi-judicial, and administrative agency, or any competent
body or tribunal, subject to existing laws, rules, and
regulations.

SEC. 8. Applicability to Pending Cases. — This Act shall
apply to all MUP who have pending service-related cases.

SEC. 9. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the DBM,
Department of National Defense, Department of Justice,
Department of the Interior and Local Government, and
Department of Transportation, in coordination with the Chief
of Staff of the AFP. Chiefs of the PNP, BJMP and BFP, the
Commandant of the PCG, the Director General of BuCor, and
the Administrator of the NAMRIA, shall issue the necessary
rules and regulations to implement this Act: Provided, That
the non-promulgation of the implementing rules and
regulations shall not prevent the implementation of this Act
upon effectivity.

SEC. 10. Appropriations. - The amount necessary for
the implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 11. Separability Clause. — If any portion or provision
of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the remainder or any
provision not affected thereby shall remain in force and effect.

SEC. 12. Repealing Clause. — All other laws, decrees,
orders, rules. regulations. or parts thereof inconsistent with
this Act are hereby amended, repealed, or modified accordingly.

 

SEC. 13. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation.

Approved,

Fon Mild: =

UALDEZ — FRANCIS “CHIZ’ G. ESCUDERO
Speaker of the Gbuse President of the Senate
of Representatives

 

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 2814 on January 27, 2025 and adopted by the
House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill
No. 6509 on January 28, 2025.

 

REGINALD S. VELASCO
Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

  

Office of the President
N ECORDS OFFICE

ED COPY

    
 

IC OF THE PHILIPPINES