H. No. 7088

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meten Manila

~ Nineteenth Congress

_ AHecmd Regular Sessian

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand twenty-three.

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A COLLEGE OF MEDICINE IN
THE UNIVERSITY OF EASTERN PHILIPPINES
LOCATED IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF CATARMAN,
PROVINCE OF NORTHERN SAMAR, TO BE KNOWN
AS THE UNIVERSITY OF EASTERN PHILIPPINES-
COLLEGE OF MEDICINE, AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Establishment.—There is hereby established
a medical school in the University of Eastern Philippines (UEP)
located in the Municipality of Catarman, Province of Northern
Samar, to be known as the “University of Nastern Philippines-
College of Medicine”.

SEC. 2. General Mandate. — The University of Eastern
Philippines-College of Medicine, hereinafter referred to as
the “College”, shall primarily offer a Doctor of Medicine
Program, including an Integrated Liberal Arts and Medicine
Program, consisting of basic science and clinical courses, and
using a learner-centered, competency-based, and community-
oriented approach. The primary goal of the College shall be to
develop a corps of professional physicians to ¢ gthen the
healthcare system of the country, as well as to respond to the
human resource development needs of the Province of Northern
Samar and Region VIII.

  

The College is also mandated to undertake research and
extension services provide progressive leadershin in
these areas.

 

SEC. 3. Governance.— The governance of the College shall
be vested in the Board of Regents of the UEP, hereinafier referred
to as the Board, whose powers are defined under Republic Act
No. 4126, entitled “An Act Converting the Samar Institute of
Technology in the Municipality of Catarman, Province of Samar,
into a University to be Known as the University of Eastern
Philippines, and Authorizing the Appropriation of Funds
Therefor”, and other applicable laws and regulations, unless
otherwise provided or amended elsewhere in this Act.

Sec. 4. Adminisiraiion. — The administration of the
College shall be vested in the Dean of the College insofar as may
be authorized by its Board.

SEC. 5. The College Dean. — The College shall be headed
by a Dean who shall be appointed by the Board, subject to the
guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board, and
upon the recommendation of the President, following a process of
consultation with the constituents of the College. The Dean shall
render full-time service, serve a term of three (3) years, and may
be reappointed to another term.

Within six (6) months from the effectivity of this Act, the
President of the UEP shall constitute the search committee for
the deanship.

The powers and duties of the Dean of the College, in addition
to those specifically provided for in this Act, shall include those
usually pertaining to the Office of the Dean of similar state
universities and colleges and those delegated by the President.

The salarv ofthe Dean

  
 
   
 

vn as the “Salary
Standardi: ws amendatory
thereto, whic e enacted, and shail be
comparable to that being received by the Deans of similar
educational institutions,

 

incapacity of the Dean to perform the functions of the office,
the Board shail, upon the recommendation of the President,
designate an Offi -Charge of the College, pending the
ided, That the Officer-in-Charge
shall serve oniy during the unexpired portion of the term.

 

  

    

The Dean of the College shall be aagisted by a College
Secretary, who shall be appointed by the Board.

SEC. 6. The Faculty. — The Board shall, upon the
recommendation by the President of the UEP, appoint the facuity
members ofthe College: Pr, i, That no political belief, sex,
gender, cultural or comm iation or ethnic origin, nor
religious opinion or affiliation shall be a matter of inquiry in the
appointment of faculty members of the Colle ge: Provided, further,
That said appointment shall be subject to the guidelines,
qualifications. and standards set by the Board: Provided, finally,
That no member of ¢ ity shell teach for or against any
particular reli

   
   

 
   
 
 
  
 

ms and Admission. — The
affirmative

who qualify for
ege. ied themselves
of the scholarship program under Republic Act No. 11599,
otherwise known as the “Doktor Para sa Bayan Act”, shall render
a return service in accordance with the said law. Students availing
themselves of other nationally-funded scholarship programs to

    

complete the medicine degree program under the College may be
required to render a return service depending on the contract to
be signed between the student and the College.

No student shall be denied admission to the College by
reason of sex, gender, religion, cultural or community affiliation,
physical disability, ethnic origin, or any other forms of
ai ;

  

Sc. 8. Academic Freedom and Institutional Autonomy.
— The College shall enjoy academic freedom and institutional
autonomy, pursuant to Paragraph 2, Section 5 of Article XTV of
the Constitution.

SEC. 9. Loan or Transfer of Supplies, Apparatuses, or
Equipment, and Detail of Personnel to the College. — Heads of
national government agencies and instrumentalities may, upon
the request of the Board through the President of the UBP, loan
or transfer supplies, apparatuses, or equipment, and detail
personnel to the College: Provided, That such joan, transfer or

detail shall not be detrimental to public service.

The personnel to be detailed to the College shall perform
such duties as may be deemed required by the Dean of the College
and the time spent for such duties shall be counted as part of the
detailed personnel’s regular service.

SEC. 10. Assets, Liabilities, and Personnel. — All
appropriations, assets, both real and personal, personnel, and
records of the College, as well as its liabilities or obligations, shall
be titled or named after the UEP.

All parcels of land belonging to the government to be
occupied by the College shall be the property of the UEP, and
titled under its name: Provided, That should the UEP cease to
exist or be abolished or should such aforementioned parcels of
land be no longer needed by the UEP, the same shall revert to the
Municipality of Catarman or to the Republic of the Philippines,

_ as the case may be.

SEC. 11. Duty and Tax Exemptions. — The importation by
_ the College of medical books or publications, medical equipment
or instruments which are for medical, laboratory or scientific

purposes shall, upon certification by the Commission on Higher
Education (CHED), be exempt from customs duties in accordance
with the provisions of Republic Act No. 10868, otherwise known
as the “Customs Modernization and Tariff Act (CMTA)’.

All grants, bequests, endowments, donations, and
contributions made to and used actually, directly, and exclusively
for educational purposes by the College, shall be exempt from
donor's tax and the same shali be considered as allowable deduction
from gross income for purposes of computing the taxable income
of the donor in accordance with the provisions of the National
Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended.

SEC. 12. Compliance with CHED Requirements. — The
UEP, prior to the establishment of the College and the offering of
new and revised courses and programs related thereto, shall ensure
compliance with the applicable policies, standards, and guidelines

ofthe CHED.

SEC. 13. Suppletory Application. + The provisions of
Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher Education
Modernization Act of 1997”, shall form part of this Act.

SEC. 14. Appropriations. The amount necessary to carry
out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

SEc. 15. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days from the approval of this Act, the Board shall, in
consultation with the CHED, issue rules and regulations to
implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 16. Separability Clause. —If. for any reason, any part
or provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional,
the remaining parts or provisions not affected are in full force
and effect.

SEC. 17. Repealing Clause.—All laws, presidential decrees,
executive orders, and rules and regulations contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are amended, repealed,
or modified accordingly.

SEC. 18. Effectivity.—'This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation.

   

Approved,
ee ~ 4 c 4
AIAN MIGUEL E, ZUBIRILAFER DINAN, if TING. RQRIUALDEZ
President of the Senate . Speaker of the Hofge
of Representatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on February 22, 2023,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on September 25, 2028,
end which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on September 27, 2028.

gE
REGINALD” VELASCO™

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

 

Approved: DEC 20 2023

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.

Presideny of the Philippines

 

  

II
Teal oa Coa aoe
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

PBBM003542

 

   
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY
Hr. Peberibc

“lING DIRECTOR IV

    
   

   

=