S.No. 1359
H. Nos. 6483 and 7584

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Nineteenth Congress

Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand twenty-three.

a

[ Repustic Act No. 1984]

AN ACT MANDATING PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS TO ALLOW
DISADVANTAGED STUDENTS WITH UNPAID
TUITION AND OTHER SCHOOL FEES TO TAKE
THE PERIODIC AND FINAL EXAMINATIONS AND
FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as
the “No Permit, No Exam Prohibition Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is the policy of the
State to protect and promote the right of all citizens to quality
education and to take appropriate steps to make education
accessible to all.

To this end, the State shall establish, maintain, and
support a complete, adequate, and integrated system of
education relevant to the needs of the people and society. It
shall also take into account the welfare of both the students
and the educational institutions by exercising just and
reasonable supervision of the latter and ensuring that
educational opportunities are made available to students
regardless of their economic status.

SEC. 3. Coverage. — This Act shall cover all public and
private basic (K to 12) institutions, higher education
institutions, and technical-vocational institutions (TVIs):
Provided, That in the case of TVIs, this Act shall only cover
long-term courses exceeding one (1) year.

SEC. 4. Mandate of Educational Institutions to
Disadvantaged Students. — All public and private educational
institutions covered by this Act are hereby mandated to
accommodate and allow Disadvantaged Students unable to pay
tuition and other fees to take the scheduled periodic and final
examinations without requiring a permit: Provided, however,
That in the case of K to 12 students, the mandate shall be
for the entire school year: Provided, That the Municipal, City
or Provincial Social Welfare and Development Officer, or the
Regional Office of the Department of Social Welfare and
Development (DSWD), as the case may be, shall issue the
necessary certificate on the disadvantaged status of the student
due to calamities, emergencies, force majeure and other good
or justifiable reasons in accordance with the rules and
regulations to be issued by the DSWD: Provided, further, That
this Act shall be without prejudice to the right and power of
educational institutions to require the submission of a
promissory note, withhold records and credentials of students
and such other legal and administrative remedies available to
them for the collection of unpaid fees: Provided, finally, That
educational institutions may voluntarily, without need of the
certification mentioned herein, allow a Disadvantaged Student
with outstanding tuition and other fees to take examinations
and release their relevant records and credentials in. accordance
with its policies, rules and regulations.

 

 

 

 

 

J

SEC. 5. Administrative Sanctions. — All covered public
and private educational institutions found guilty of violating
Section 4 of this Act shall be subject to administrative
sanctions that may be imposed by the Department of
Education, Commission on Higher Education, and Technical
Education and Skills Development Authority, as the case
may be.

SEC. 6. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
DSWD shall, in consultation with all relevant stakeholders,
promulgate the rules and regulations defining “Disadvantaged
Student” and the criteria and requirements for, and effectivity
of, the issuance of a certification to that effect by the
Municipal, City or Provincial Social Welfare and Development
Officer, or the Regional Office of the DSWD, to effectively
implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 7. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part
hereof is declared unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act
or any provision not affected thereby shall remain in full force
and effect.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SEC. 8. Repealing Clause. — All laws, acts, decrees,
executive orders, issuances, and rules and regulations or parts
thereof which are contrary to and inconsistent with this Act
are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

 

SEC. 9. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,
AND: GRO! pet = MIGUEL F. ZUBIRI
Speaker of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1359
and House Bill Nos. 6483 and 7584, was passed by the Senate )
of the Philippines and the House of Representatives on )
December 6, 2023.

REGINA! < VELASCO -
Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved: MAR 11 2024

 

FERDINAND RO) ALDED MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines

 

 
 

ua A

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

ATY. MOE N. ESPINO
3-4-tay ACTING DIRECTOR IV