_ HNo. 7240

Republic.of the Philippines
Congress af the Hlilippines
AMetea Menai :

Thich Regular Sessian

day of July, two thousand twenty-four.



[ Repusuic ActNo. 12231 ]

AN ACT OPTIMIZING THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
FOR EFFICIENT PUBLIC SERVICE DELIVERY

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Government Optimization Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. - It is hereby declared the
policy of the State to promote and maintain effectiveness,
efficiency, economy, equity, and ethical accountability in the
government; enhance institutional capacity to improve public
service delivery; and ensure the attainment of the country’s
societal and economic development goals and objectives.
Consistent with this, the government shall provide adequate
resources to support an organization’s essential role, scope, and
level of governance, and minimize, if not eliminate,

redundancies, overlaps, and duplications in its operations and -

simplify its rules and regulations, systems and processes, while
protecting the welfare of civil servants and other government
workers.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(a) Abolition refers to the dissolution of an agency or
unit and the discontinuance of its operations, or the
elimination of a position deemed obsolete, unnecessary,
redundant, or overlapping; - :

(b) Affected Personnel refers to a government employee,
whether regular, contractual; or casual, who may be affected
by organizational actions arising from the results of the
strategic review and study under the Government Optimization
Program (GOP); cos

© Consolidation refers to the dissolution of two (2) or
more agencies or units with duplicating or overlapping
functions to create a new one;

@) Creation refers to the establishment of an agency,
unit, or position deemed necessary for the agency's operations
or performance of essential functions;

© Deactivation refers to the act of making dormant or
non-operational an agency or unit by phasing out its functions
or transferring them to. other agencies or units, and
discontinuing the provision of resources. An agency or unit is
rendered dormant or non-operational if it is defunded and its
operation is terminated but its formal existence continues.
A deactivated agency or unit is devoid of any activity,
personnel, financial, and physical resources;

. @ Detailed Optimized Organizational Structure refers
to the output of a government agency that provides information
on the systematic arrangement and functions of the divisions
“and units within the organization. This shall be based on the
Optimized Organizational Structure that shall be developed by
the Committee on Optimizing the Executive Branch (COEB);

(g) Merger refers to the combination of two (2) or more
agencies or units, whereby the identity of one is retained and
the other agency/ies or unit/s is/are abolished or deactivated;

(h) Optimization refers to the process of analyzing and
designing the appropriate roles, mandates, structures,
functions, sizes, systems, and processes of government agencies
to ensure effective, responsive, and efficient service delivery;

@ Optimized Organizational Structure refers to the
output of the COEB, which shall contain the appropriate
structure of government agencies and their corresponding
mandates and functions, resulting from the conduct of strategic
review and study;

@ Phase out refers to the gradual elimination or
discontinuance of a function, program, activity, or project
through the sequential or selective abolition of its parts, until
the said function, program, activity, or project ceases to exist;

(k) Placement refers to the process of matching the
position, qualifications, and skills of the personnel with the
needs of the agencies, which occurs when the. individual is
assigned to a particular job;

Q Scaling down refers to the reduction in the intensity
or magnitude of a function, program, activity, or project either
by eliminating selected components or reducing the
geographical, demographic or clientele coverage, the types of
services rendered, or the level of outputs;

(m) Staffing pattern refers to the staffing complement of
an agency which shows the number of authorized positions by
class and occupational group for each organizational unit
within the agency;

(a) Strengthening refers to the act of increasing the
targets of a core function, or its expected goods or services
and their desired impact, or widening its clientele or
geographical coverage by infusing additional physical, financial,
and other resources to it; and

(©) Transfer refers to the movement of an agency or unit
to another where it properly belongs or its functions are more
aligned, or of a position or employee from one (1) organizational
unit to another within the same department or agency, or
from one (1) department or agency to another, with equivalent
rank, level, or salary.

SEC. 4. Coverage. - This Act shall cover all agencies
of the Executive Branch, including departments, bureaus,
offices, commissions, boards, councils, and all other entities
attached to or under their administrative supervision,
and government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs)
not covered by Republic Act No. 10149 or the “GOCC
Governance Act of 2011”.

The following positions shall be excluded in the coverage
of this Act:

(a) Teaching and teaching-related positions in elementary,
secondary, technical or vocational schools, state universities and
colleges, and non-chartered tertiary schools; and

(&) . Military and uniformed personnel in the Department
of National Defense, the Department of the Interior and Local
Government, the Department of Transportation, the
Department of Environment and Natural Resources, and the
Department of Justice:

Provided, That the agencies to which these excluded
positions belong shall ensure that the personnel involved
conform with the qualifications and are actually performing
the functions of such excluded positions.

The Legislature, Judiciary, Constitutional Commissions,
and Office of the Ombudsman may, within their respective
authorized appropriations, optimize their respective offices,
consistent with the principles and guidelines contained in this
Act, and within the parameters of the Unified Position
Classification and Compensation System established under
Republic Act No. 6758, as amended.

a. see pee

Local government units (LGUs) may also optimize their
respective offices, consistent with the governing principles and
guidelines contained in this Act and.the provisions of Republic
Act No. 7160 or the “Local Government Code of 1991”, as
amended, and subject to their financial capability.

The Governance Commission for GOCCs shall continue
to exercise its: authority under Republic.Act No. 10149 to
reorganize, merge, streamline, abolish, or privatize any GOCC,
in consultation with the department to. which the GOCC
is attached. .

SEC. 5. Governing Principles. - The National Government
shall implement the GOP in accordance with the following,
principles:

(a) The scope, level, and prioritization of government
programs, activities, and projects, as well as the appropriate
manner for providing public goods and services, shall be
determined in accordance with the constitutional mandate,
political and socio-economic contexts, objectives, and available
resources of the government;

(b) The government shall establish a conducive policy
environment to encourage the active engagement of the private
sector and civil society organizations in the production and
delivery of goods and services;

(© The government shall recognize the principle of equal
pay for equal work;

.@) The government shall respect the right to
self-organization of employees in the public sector and shall
encourage participation in matters affecting their rights;

@® The delineation of functions and responsibilities
between:the National Government and LGUs in the provision

-of public goods and services shall be clearly defined, consistent

with the provisions of Republic Act No. 7160, as amended, and
other pertinent laws and issuances, to provide a more seamless,
accessible, and responsive government service to the people;

(® A whole-of-nation approach shall be adopted to ensure
seamless operations of agencies within and across sectors to
better anticipate and be more responsive to public needs;

(g) Government operations shall be simplified so that the

agencies can focus on the performance of their core functions |

and the implementation of programs and projects that will

lead to the attainment of the desired sectoral and national ° a

goals and outcomes;

(h) Government systems and processes shall be

streamlined and modernized to facilitate the delivery and,

upgrade the quality of frontline services, improve policy
formulation, planning, and performance evaluation, and raise
the overall productivity of the public sector; abe

@  Digitalization and e-governance shall be utilized as

a means to efficiently optimize government roles and provide. .

prompt and effective services to the people;

() Government rules, procedures, and requirements

shall be rationalized to reduce the regulatory burden on.: ..

citizens, businesses, and other stakeholders, as well as reduce
the administrative burden on the part of the government; and

(&&) The organizational structure of an agency shall be
designed and optimized to facilitate the effective, efficient, and
economical implementation of programs and projects, and
attainment of organizational outputs and outcomes.

The appropriate staffing mix shall be determined based
“on the skills and competencies required to effectively and
efficiently carry out the agency mandate and functions.

SEC. 6. Authority of the President to Optimize the

_ Operations of the Executive Branch. — The President is hereby - we
granted the following authority in optimizing the operations :

of the different agencies in the Executive Branch:

(@) To pursue the following functional shifts ‘or
- modifications: :

(1) Strengthen the functions of the agency that directly
contribute to the targeted ultimate societal outcomes of the

. National.Government and/or the targeted sector or subsector

outcomes of the agency;

De “Seale down, phase out, eliminate, or discontinue
functions, programs, projects, or activities that can be better
carried, out or undertaken by the private sector, or have
already been devolved to LGUs consistent with the governing:
principles provided in this Act; and

8) Transfer or integrate functions from one (1) agency
to another which can better perform the same, or split

functions of agencies, bureaus, and offices that may be~

conflicting or multifarious; and

-() To implement the following organizational and
‘staffing actions, upon determination by the COEB that it is’ ”

. in the best. interest of the State to create, reorganize, merge,

streamline, abolish, or deactivate agencies, offices, or units:

Q) “Merge. or consolidate agencies whose functions are

, unnecessarily overlapping or duplicating and can be undertaken -~
. by a single entity, or whose clients are similar or related, to ‘ -

rationalize the use of government resources;

(2): ‘Transfer agencies, units, or positions to another
department, agency, or: unit where, their functions are more
aligned;. ..-. .

8) Split agencies, or units with multifarious functions

. that’ are distinet but equally important aspects of governance;

“@ Create 1 new agencies, ‘offices, or positions, as needed,

: to. strengthen the: capacity ‘of Bovernment agencies to perform’ :
“thei mandate; : o

6) ‘Regulatize ad ‘hoc offices whose functions are vital |

_and significant, and must continuously be undertaken by the .
, government: and”

(©) Abolish or deactivate agencies or units, subject to

evaluation and favorable recommendation of the COEB, baséd : ne 4

on any of the following grounds: (a) the functions are already
yedundant, no longer relevant or necessary, or can be better
undertaken by another entity or subsumed under other
departments/agencies/units; (b) the agency is no longer
achieving the objectives and purposes for which it was
originally created; (c) the agency's continued operation is not
cost-effective since it does not generate the desired level of
outputs and outcomes vis-a-vis the resource inputs; or (d) the
agency or unit has become. non-operational or dormant
and/or has outlived its purpose.

’ SEC. 7. Creation of the ‘Committee on Optimizing the
- Executive Branch. — There is hereby created a COEB to
oversee the implementation of the GOP, pursuant to the
provisions of this Act. The COEB shall be convened within
thirty (80) days from the effectivity of this Act to commence
the exercise of its powers and functions. It shall be composed
. of the’ following:

(a) The Executive Secretary as Chairperson;

(b) The Secretary of the Department of Budget and
’ Management (DBM) as Co-Chairperson;

() The Secretary of the Department of Economy,
Planning, and Development as member;

- @) The Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission
(CSC) as member; and

) The Director-General: ‘of the Anti-Red Tape Authority
as member. ~

The foregoing. may appoint a representative who shall be –at-least-a third (3) ranking. official of the agency.

A government employee representative, who shall be the
Public Sector Labor-Management Council (PSLMC) sectoral
labor representative, depending on the agency or unit being
considered for optimization, shall also be a member of the
COEB.

The COEB shall organize subcommittees composed of
experts on government operations, organizational development,
and human resource management, with a secretariat for each
subcommittee, composed of regular personnel from said
agencies, to assist in the performance of its functions.

The DBM shall provide the necessary secretariat services
to the COEB and designate focal persons for each
subcommittee to ensure effective coordination.

SEC. 8. Powers and Functions of the Committee on
Optimizing the Executive Branch. — The COEB shall:

@) Develop the policies, frameworks, indicators,
strategies, and mechanisms, in consideration of the lessons
learned from previous efforts on reorganization, to be adopted
in the implementation of the GOP;

(b) Develop a GOP Management Plan containing, among
others, the activities, responsibilities, and resource
requirements that shall be adopted to ensure its effective
implementation and submit the same to the President within
thirty (80) days from the issuance of the implementing rules
and regulations (IRR);

() Conduct studies on the mandates, functions,
programs, projects, operations, structures, and manpower
complement of the different government agencies and
instrumentalities;

@) Develop and prepare the Optimized Organizational
Structure of concerned agencies and the corresponding
executive issuances for approval by the President, in accordance
with the provisions of Section 6 of this Act;

© Develop and prepare the overall change management
program, which shall include communication plans, the
appropriate Organizational: Development Program, and other
mechanisms to effectively manage the transition, ensure the
smooth implementation of the GOP, and safeguard the welfare
of employees affected by the optimization efforts; ,

() Monitor the different agencies’ implementation of
their respective approved optimization plans, and report to the
President any issue that must be addressed;

(@) Engage the services of experts or consultants,
through the DBM, to assist the COEB and its subcommittees
in the performance of their functions; and .

th) Formulate the IRR of this Act.

SEC. 9. Conduct of Strategic Review and Study on the
Mandates, Functions, Systems, Operations, and Processes of
the Executive Branch. - Within the period prescribed in the
IRR, the COEB shall conduct a strategic review and study on.

the roles, mandates, functions, programs, projects, operations, ot
structures, and manpower complement of the different agencies au

under the Executive: Branch for purposes of:

(@) Determining the role of the government, as well as

‘the suitable extent of government intervention in the sectoral Lit

areas covered;

(b) Identifying, among others, areas of dysfunction and
bureaucratic inefficiencies in the sectoral areas covered and
concerned government agencies; o

(©) Assessing the relevance of an agency’s mandates,
- functions, programs, and projects in pursuit of the country’s
socio-economic and developmental goals and outcomes; and

@ Providing recommendations on the appropriate roles,

.mandates, and functions of government agencies; organizational... .... -
actions to improve efficiency and interoperability of government: ;
agencies; and necessary transformational and organizational . :

changes that can be implemented in the sectoral areas.
: andlor concerned agencies. oa

“The ‘conduct of the strategic review and study shall
be consistent with the governing principles set forth under .

Section 5 of this Act and may contain the recommended: oo.

actions provided in Section 6 of this Act.

period prescribed ‘in. the IRR. .The: DBM and the CSC may:.. .
: -extend;, as necessary, sassistance! to the agencies in the «
u,preparation of. the-Optimization Plan.

il
SEC. 10. Prerequisites. to Optimization. —
(a) Organizational Review and Study. — An agency

covered under this Act shall conduct an organizational review -
and study. of the agency’s mandates, missions, objectives,

-functions; systems, procedures, programs, activities, projects,
. organizational structure, staffing pattern, and manpower

complement. The study shall also include the evaluation of the _
qualifications and performance of all personnel.

» &). Optimization :Plan. - Thé agency shall formulate an
Optimization: Plan consistent with the governing principles set © -

forth under Section 5 of this Act, which shall include areas: - 1
v. where improvements. are necessary and areas where more. .
» .yesources. need to be ‘rechanneled as part of its institutional. -...

strengthening’ effort...

The Optimization Plan may also include the agency’s

. requirement for additional plantilla positions for its qualified
casual or contractual personnel, as well as its job order or |:

contract of service workers with a minimum of ten (10) years
of continuous service in the agency, subject to a cap or quota...
as may .be determined by-the COEB and the existing civil «.:.

“ service laws, rules, and regulations, and the CSC-approved

Merit Selection Plan of the agency: Provided, That the
optimized agency shall not be allowed to hire. casual or.
contractual personnel, as well as job order or contract .of -
service workers within. five (5) years from the time the

. Optimization Plan is.implemented.

«, The organizational review and study, and the
Optimization Plan. shall be submitted to the COEB within the ..

The agency shall conduct the organizational review and

study; and .the. Optimization Plan, in consultation with an‘. *
. employee representatives in -the following order of preference: , :

/@: “The: sole. and exclusive negotiating agent (SENA);

(2) The representative of its registered organization; or

(8) A nominee from its rank and file employees.

SEC. 11. Submission of the Optimized Organizational
Structure and Proposed Executive Issuances to the President.
- Within the period. prescribed in the IRR, the COEB shail
submit to the President the Optimized Organizational
Structure of the concerned agencies and the corresponding
executive issuances, taking into consideration the results and
findings of the strategic review and study.

SEC. 12. Submission of the Detailed Optimized
_ Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern to the DBM.
‘= Agency heads shall prepare and submit to the DBM the
‘Detailed Optimized, Organizational Structure and Staffing
Pattern” (OSSP), including its estimated cost, within the period
prescribed in the IRR.

SEC. 18. Retirement Benefits and Separation Incentives
for Personnel Who May be Affected by the GOP. — The affected
personnel hired on a permanent basis and with appointments
., attested by the CSC shall be entitled to retirement benefits

“and separation incentives.

“ (a) Qualified affected personnel shall be given the option
‘to avail of any of the following retirement benefits under
existing laws:

"(Retirement gratuity. provided under Republic Act
No. 1616 or “An Act Further Amending Section Twelve of
Commonwealth Act Numbered One Hundred Highty-Six, as
Amended, By Prescribing Two Other Modes of Retirement and
for Other Purposes”; as amended;

Q) Retirement benefit under Republic Act No. 660 or

“An Act to Amend Commonwealth Act Numbered One
Hundred and Eighty-Six Entitled ‘An Act to Create and
_ Establish , a Government Service Insurance System, to Provide
- for its Administration, and to Appropriate the Necessary Funds
“Therefor, and té Provide Retirement Insurance and for Other

. Purposes”; or

_, :@) Retirement, separation, or unemployment benefit
provided under’ Republic Act No. 8291 or “An Act Amending

Presidential Decree No. 1146, as Amended, Expanding and
Increasing the Coverage and Benefits of the Government
Service Insurance System, Instituting Reforms Therein and for
Other Purposes”: Provided, That affected personnel shall have
a minimum of five (5) years of government service to avail
of the-rseparation benefits provided under this Act. The
Government Service Insurance System (GSIS) shall formulate
guidelines on the grant of separation or unemployment benefits
to affected personnel.

Qualified affected personnel availing the benefits under
Republic Act No. 1616 shall be entitled to a refund of
retirement premiums consisting of both personal and.
government shares, to be paid by the GSIS. The personnel

shall be given the option to avail either the retirement gratuity ©

benefit provided under Republic Act No. 1616 or the separation
incentives under Section 13(b) of this Act, which shall be
charged against the General Appropriations Act (GAA). .

(b) In addition to said retirement benefits, the affected
personnel retiring or separated shall be entitled to the following
separation incentives as applicable:

(1) - One half (%) of the actual monthly basic salary for
every year of government service, for those who have rendered
five (5) to less than eleven (11) years of service;

- @) Three-fourths (%) of the actual monthly basic salary
for every.year of government service, computed starting from ~

: .the first year, for those who have rendered eleven (11) to less .

than twenty-one (21) years of service;

(3) The actual monthly basic salary for every year of
government ‘service, computed starting from the first year, for

‘- those who. have rendered twenty-one (21) to less than

thitty-one (31): years of service; and

“(4 One and one-fourth (1%) of the actual monthly basic
salary for every year of government service, computed starting

from the first year, for those who have rendered thirty-one (81) .

years of service and above.

A reatenhiercin reel

eso ANA MELLEL RAN SERN RISEN

The actual monthly basic salary shall refer to the affected
personnel’s salary as of the date of approval of the agency’s
Detailed Optimized OSSP by the DBM:

Provided, That for the purpose of computing the total
amount of separation incentives that affected personnel will
receive, only the government service rendered up to age
fifty-nine (59) and a fraction thereof will be counted.
Government service from the age of sixty (60) will no longer
be subject to the separation incentives provided herein, without
affecting the original incentive factor determined based on the
actual years of service of the affected personnel, as applicable:

Provided, further; That to comply with the required
number of years of service under Republic Act No. 8291, the
portability scheme under Republic Act No. 7699 or “An Act
Instituting Limited Portability Scheme in the Social Security
Insurance Systems by Totalizing the Workers’ Creditable
Services or Contributions in Each of the Systems” may be
applied, subjéct to existing policies and guidelines:

Provided, finally, That affected personnel who retired or

‘were separated from the service as a result of the

implementation of the GOP shall not be reemployed in any
agency of the National Government, including GOCCs, for a
period of five (5) years, except in the exigency. of service or
as teaching or medical staff in educational institutions and
hospitals, respectively.

The number of personnel who will avail of separation
incentives under Séction 13(b) of this Act shall in no case
exceed the number of positions declared for abolition.

The specific guidelines to carry out the provisions of this
section shall be prescribed in the IRR of this Act.

SEC. 14. Other Benefits of Retired or Separated
Personnel. — The''affected personnel who retired or were
separated from service shall be entitled to the following

_ benefits, among others, under applicable laws:

(a) Refund of Pag-IBIG Contributions. — All affected personnel who are members of the Pag-IBIG Fund shall be

I5

entitled to the refund of their contributions (both personal and
government), pursuant to existing rules and regulations of the
Home Development Mutual Fund; and

(b) Commutation of Unused Vacation and Sick Leave
Credits: — All affected personnel shall be entitled to the
commutation of unused vacation and sick leave credits in
accordance with existing rules and regulations.

SEC. 15. Period of. Availability of the Retirement Benefits
and Separation Incentives. — The retirement benefits and
separation incentives provided under this Act shall be available
within sixty (60) days from the issuance of the Notice of
Organization, Staffing, and Compensation Action (NOSCA) by
the DBM to the concerned agencies.

SEC. 16. Option for Affected Personnel Who Opt Not to
Retire or Separate from the Service. — The affected personnel
who opt not to retire or separate from the service shall, if
qualified, occupy vacant positions within the agency without
reduction in salary.

Alternatively, affected personnel may apply for transfer to other departments/agencies/GOCCs, subject to CSC rules and regulations.

The personnel shall be subject to a reskilling and
upskilling program to capacitate them for redeployment.

The personnel movement, including the conduct of
reskilling and upskilling, shall be completed within the period
approved by the COEB.

SEC. 17. Non-interruption of Government Service During
the Transition Period; Change Management Program. — This
Act, or any guidelines, rules, or regulations issued in
pursuance hereof, or any initiative related to the
implementation of the recommendations under the strategic
review and study conducted through the GOP, shall not operate
to suspend or exempt any government office or personnel from
compliance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 11032 or
the “Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government Service
Delivery Act of 2018”.

cxentcncicta ARCA ANA eon EA MA ESLEIS$ A en :
tc eeenreiey on a AAT DEL Se erUDL a at Neer Ca ON UME ETRE WASSER DADE HEA MLE OT EINES

‘to determine, among others, the effects and gains of ,,
its implementation. rare

The agencies shall implement their respective approved
Detailed Optimized OSSP in such a manner that government
operations will not be delayed or disrupted. For this purpose,

agencies affected by the GOP shall be given a period of .

one (1) year from the approval of the NOSCA to fully
implement their respective Detailed Optimized OSSPs.

Agencies and personnel shall perform their respective

functions, duties, and responsibilities in a holdover capacity. .

until the transition has been completed.

Agencies shall ensure that a change management

program is carried out to ensure smooth and effective . .

transition.

SEC. 18: Joint. Congressional Oversight Committee on
the Government Optimization Program. — There is hereby.
created an Oversight Committee to oversee, monitor, and
evaluate the implementation of this Act. :

The Oversight Committee shall be composed of five (5)
members each from the Senate and the House of
Representatives. This shall include the Chairpersons of the

Senate Committees on Civil Service, Government ,
Reorganization and Professional Regulation, and Finance, and- - |:
the Chairpersons of the House Committees on Government. — . ..
Reorganization, and Appropriations. The President of the, ..~. ’

Seriate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall .
each ‘designate the remaining three (3) members from the..
Senate and the House, respectively, one (1) of whom shall be
from the minority.

SEC. 19..Conduct of an Impact Assessment. — The DBM
shall commission an independent impact assessment of the...
GOP to be conducted three (8) years after its completion;;

SEC. 20. Report to Congréss. — The President shall

submit a report to Congress on the results of the GOP after,. .
the completion of its implementation. te cep ie

” respective corporate funds,,1

SEC. 21. Provisions Applicable to Other Branches of
Government, Constitutional Commissions, Office of the -
Ombudsman, and the LGUs. ~.The governing principles,
policies, standards, guidelines, conditions, and limitations:
provided in this Act shall be followed in the implementation
of the,GOP by..the. other branches of government,
Constitutional Commissions, the Office of the Ombudsman, and:
the LGUs. bobo .

n

The heads of said offices shall issue their respective IRRs

and furnish a copy thereof to the Senate Committees on Civil

Service, Government, Reorganization and Professional
Regulation, and Finance;,.the, House Committees on;
Government Reorganization, and Appropriations, and the DBM,.

SEC. 22. Funding Requirements. — The amounts

_ necessary for the initial implementation of this Act shall be .
charged against any applicable appropriation items under the
current’GAA, subject to existing budgeting, accounting, and - .

auditing laws, rules, and regulations. Subsequent amounts,
needed to continue, the implementation of the GOP shall be
included in. the annual GAA,. subject to the usual budgetary
process. © 0 ve os She. Lots

In the event that the,,,Legislature, Judiciary,
Constitutional Commissions, and Office of the Ombudsman.
optimize..their respective: offices in accordance with the
provisions of this Act,.the funds-necessary for this purpose
shall likewise, be. sourced from, any. applicable appropriations ©
under.the GAA. fetes. dal. ie

The amount needed to implement the GOP of GOCCs not
covered by Republic Act. No:..1Q149, shall be sourced from their
case. of funding deficiency, the
National Government, may in the payment of separation
incentives of ‘the .affected; persannel whose salaries and -
other compensation are covered by Republic Act No. 6758, . -
as amended. :

In case the LGUs ,purswe optimization efforts consistent

_with the provisions of this Act and Republic Act No. 7160,

as amended, the amounts needed for the purpose shall be-
drawn from their respective local government funds.

SEC. 23. Sunset Provision. — The authority given to the
President’ under: this Act shall end five (5) years after the
effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 24. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days from its convening, the COEB shall issue the
necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation
of the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 25. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is declared unconstitutional, the remainder hereof not
otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect.

~ SEC. 26. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential
decrees, executive orders, letters of instruction, proclamations,
or administrative regulations that are inconsistent with the

provisioris of this‘Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified

accordingly. °

‘SEC. 27. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper

“of general circulation.

Approved,
UE G. ROMU. FRANCIS “CHIZ” G. ESCUDERO
Speaker of the House President of the Senate

of Representatives

This Act, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 890

and House Bill No. 7240, was passed by the Senate of the
Philippines and the House of Representatives on June 4, 2025.
,

RE DS. VELASCO
House of Representatives

UBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

Office of the President