H. No, 9988

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meten Manila ‘

Nineteenth Congress
Third Regular Seasian

pal cccssans

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 12147}

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A REGULAR CAMPUS OF THE
DON HONORIO VENTURA STATE UNIVERSITY IN THE
CITY OF SAN FERNANDO, PROVINCE OF PAMPANGA
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. —- This Act shall be known as the
“Don Honorio Ventura State University-City of San Fernando
Campus Act”.

SEC. 2. Establishment of the Don Honorio Ventura State
University-City of San Fernando Campus. — There is hereby
established a regular campus of the Don Honorio Ventura State

University (DHVSU), to be located in the City of San Fernando,
Province of Pampanga, which shall be known as the “Don Honorio
Ventura State University-City of San Fernando Campus”:
Provided, That upon the effectivity of any law renaming the Don
Honorio Ventura State University, the City of San Fernando Campus,
as converted into a regular campus by virtue of this Act, shall also be
automatically renamed.

SEC. 3. General Mandate. -The DHVSU-City of San Fernando
Campus shall primarily provide short-term, technical-vocational,
undergraduate, and graduate courses within its areas of competency
and specialization, pursuant to the mandate of the DHVSU, and
according to its capability, as the Board of Regents, hereinafter referred
to as the Board, may deem necessary to respond to the human resource
development needs of the Province of Pamp anga and the Central Luzon
Region. It shall be mandated to undertake research and extension
services, and to provide progressive leadership in these areas.

SEC. 4. Supervision and Management of the DHVSU-City of
San Fernando Campus. —The DHVSU-City of San Fernando Campus
shall be headed by a Campus Administrator, to be appointed by the
Board, subject to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by
the Board, and upon the recommendation of a Search Committee duly
constituted for the purpose of selecting the Campus Administrator.

Suc. 5. Compliance with the Requirements of the Commission
on Higher Education (CHED). — The DHVSU shall ensure the
compliance of the DHVSU-City of San Fernando Campus with the
policies, standards, and guidelines of the CHED for the operation of
the Campus, including those related to the offering of courses and
the introduction of new or revised courses and programs prior to
itsestablishment. ~

SEC. 6. Management of Personnel, Assets, and Records of the
Campus. — All assets, both real and personal, personnel, and records
of the DHVSU-City of San Fernando Campus, as well as its liabilities
or obligations, shall be titled under or named after the DHVSU.

All parcels of land belonging to the government that shall be
occupied by the DHVSU-City of San Fernando Campus shall be the
property of the DHVSU and shall be titled under its name: Provided,
That should the campus cease to exist or be abolished or should such

aforementioned parcels of land be no longer needed by the DHVSU,
the same shall revert to the concerned local government unit, provincial
government, or to the Republic of the Philippines, as the case may be.

SEC. 7. Appropriations, — The amount necessary to carry out
the provisions of this Act, including those required to fund the plantilla
positions of teaching and non-teaching personnel of the DHV, SU-City
of San Fernando Campus, shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

. SEC. 8. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of Republic Act
No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher Education Modernization Act
of 1997”, shall form part of this Act.

SEc. 9. Implementing Rules and Regulations. ~ Within sixty (60)
days after the effectivity of this Act, the Board shall, in consultation
with the CHED and the Department of Budget and Management, issue
rules and regulations to implement its provisions.

; SEe. 10. Separability Clause. ~If, for any reason, any part or
provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the
remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force
and effect.

ws
SEC. 11. Repealing Clause. ~ Ail laws, presidential decrees,
executive orders, and rules and regulations contrary to or
Inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are amended, repealed or
modified accordingly.

: SEc. 12, Effectivity. —This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days
after its complete publication in the Official Gazette or ina newspaper
of general circulation,

Approved,

FRANCIS “CHIZ” G. ESCUDERO._ FEI

IN G. ROMU,
President of the Senate ADEZ

Speaker of the House
of Representatives

 

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
‘was passed by the House of Representatives on March 12, 2024,
amended by ‘the Senate of the Philippines on February 3, 2025,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives
on February 5, 2025.

   
    

{
= = =
Secretary General
House of Representatives
oO
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PBBM008282
}
é
y
}

  
  

Office of the President
MALACANAN ORDS OFFICE

CERTI