H. No. 9602

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Mantle
Nineteenth Congress

Third Regular Session
——

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 12297 ]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE BAYBAY CITY HIGH SCHOOL
FOR SPORTS IN BAYBAY CITY, PROVINCE OF LEYTE,
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as the
“Baybay City High School for Sports Act”.

SEC. 2.- Declaration of Policy.—The State recognizes the vital
role of thé youth in nation-building. To this end, it shall advance
and protect their physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual, and social
well-being through the promotion of physical education and sports
programs, league competitions, and amateur sports, including training
in international competitions; foster self-discipline, teamwork, and
excellence for the development of a healthy and alert citizenry; and
develop athletes with a strong sense of patriotism and love of country.
It shall likewise provide appropriate sports training and academic
preparation to promote the holistic development of learners with
athletic abilities, instill in them strong patriotic ideals, and prepare
them for careers in sports.

Src. 3. Establishment of the Baybay City High School
for Sports. - The Baybay City High School for Sports, herein
referred to as the School, is hereby established to advance the
athletic talents and improve the skills of high school learners in
Baybay City, Province of Leyte and its environs.

The School shall be administered and supervised by the
Department of Education (DepEd), in close coordination with
the Philippine Sports Commission (PSC) and the National Academy
of Sports (NAS).

It shall be administered and operated in accordance with
the policies, guidelines, and criteria to be issued by the NAS System
Board of Trustees, pursuant to Section 8(a) of Republic Act No. 11470
or “The National Academy of Sports” law.

Src. 4. Mandate. — The School shall implement a general
secondary education, as prescribed by Republic Act No. 10533 or the
“Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2018”, to learners with considerable
potential in sports. The curriculum shall be contextualized in order to
have significant emphasis on developing the athletic skills of the
learners through subjects pertaining to physical education and sports.

Src. 5. Powers and Functions. — The School shall exercise
the following powers and functions:

(a) Formulate and implement policies, plans, and programs
that shall promote the development and harness the potential of
high school learners;

(b) Provide an integrated framework to optimize the potential of
its learners;

(©) Establish sports programs and facilities that shall be
accessible to learners;

() Promote strategic partnerships and alliances between
and among local and international sports organizations and
educational training institutions to enhance the competitiveness
of learners and personnel;

©) Develop plans and programs that shall enhance the career
advancement opportunities of school personnel;

® Establish guidelines for public-private partnerships in the
implementation of sports programs of the School; and

(2) Perform such other functions as may be required to
implement the objectives of this Act.

Suc. 6. Organizational Structure and Staffing Patiern. —
The organizational ‘structure and staffing pattern of the School
shall be prescribed by the DepEd, subject to the approval of the
Department of Budget and Management.

SEC. 7. Sectoral and Industry Task Forces. —The School may
create sectoral and industry task forces, technical working groups,
advisory bodies, or committees for the furtherance of its objectives.

The members of the sectoral and industry task forces may come
from the agencies of the national government, government-owned
and -controlled corporations, local government units, the academe,
civil society organizations, sports organizations, and sports-related
industrial organizations. The manner of selection of such members
shall be provided under the implementing rules and regulations to
be formulated to implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 8. Appropriations. — The Secretary of Education shall
immediately include in the Department’s program the
operationalization of the Baybay City High School for Sports, the
initial funding of which shall be charged against the current
year’s appropriation of the Schools Division Office of Baybay City.
Thereafter, the amount necessary for the continued operation of the
school shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEc. 9. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days after the effectivity of this Act, the DepEd, in
coordination with the PSC, the NAS, and the local government
of Baybay City, shall promulgate the rules and regulations
necessary for the effective implementation of this Act. Such
implementing rules and regulations shall provide for the
School’s organization, administration, operations, and management,
in accordance with Republic Act No. 9155 or the “Governance of
Basic Education Act of 2001”, Republic Act No. 10533, Republic
Act No. 11470, and other basic education-related laws.

SEC. 10. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part of
this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder
hereof not otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 11. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential decrees,
executive orders, letters of instruction, proclamations, or
administrative regulations that are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

ow

Src. 12. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect after
fifteen (15) days following the completion of its publication in the (
Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

   
 

FRANCIS “CHIZ” G, ESCUDERO_ FE)
President of the Senate

TIN G@ ROMUALDEZ
Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on December 12, 2023,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on June 9, 2025, and which
amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives
on June 10, 2025.
4A

JR. ns : VELASCO

nate Secretary General
House of Representatives

    

Approved:

SEP 15 2025 (
uapsen VEO LAW GIB wassconativecinecpocntmom =. ‘
vithout the signature of the Presi.
dent, in accordance with Article VI,

Section 27 (1) of the Constitution

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines

  
 
  

 
   
  

“Glfice of the President
MALACANAMG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTYRIED COPY

LENTINO-NAVA
IRECTOR IV