Metra Manila

| Second Regular Session

day of July, two thousand twenty-three.

aca ne

[ RepusuicAcrNo. 11999 ]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE BULACAN SPECIAL
ECONOMIC ZONE AND FREEPORT IN THE
PROVINCE OF BULACAN, CREATING FOR THE
PURPOSE THE BULACAN SPECIAL ECONOMIC
ZONE AND FREEPORT AUTHORITY, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Bulacan Special Economic Zone and Freeport Act”.

A ANN ett as stata

STARE Bit eh 8s

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is declared the policy
of the State to encourage, promote, and accelerate the sound
and balanced industrial, economic and social development of
the country. The establishment of a strategically-located,
master-planned, and value-creation-oriented special economic
zone, within the framework and limitations of the Constitution,
shall attract legitimate and productive foreign investments that
generate employment and increase productivity and individual,
as well as family incomes, thereby enhancing the quality of
life of the Filipino people. It is also the declared policy of the
State to promote an effective and sustainable economic growth
model that benefits all stakeholders.

CHAPTER II

CREATION OF THE ECONOMIC ZONE AND FREEPORT

SEC. 3. Creation of the Bulacan Special Economic Zone
and Freeport. — In accordance with the foregoing declared
State policy, there is hereby established a Special Economic
Zone and Freeport, hereinafter referred to as the Bulacan

EcoZone (BuZ).
The BuZ shall cover:

a) the Airport Project and the Airport City Project, as
dation? che to be developed pursuant to, Sections 1 and
6 of Republic Act No. 11506, otherwise known as “An Act
Granting San Miguel Aerocity Inc. a Franchise to ae
Develop, Establish, Operate, and Maintain a Domestic an
International Airport in the Municipality of Bulakan, es
of Bulacan, and to Construct, Develop, Establish, Operate, an
Maintain an Adjacent Airport City,” respectively;

(b) the remaining land territories of the cities of Malolos
and Meycauayan, and of the municipalities of ene
Paombong, Guiguinto, Balagtas, Bocaue, Marilao, Obando, ani
Sta. Maria, in the Province of Bulacan, that are not yet
included as component parts of the Airport Project and the
Airport City Project; and

(©) all other expansion areas or municipalities, whose
metes and bounds shall be clearly defined through a
Presidential Proclamation, within the Province of Bulacan and
surrounding areas which may be declared as part of the BuZ
in compliance with Section 7(e) of this Act.

SEC. 4. Creation of the Bulacan Special Economic Zone
and Freeport Authority. — There is hereby created a body
corporate to be known as the “Bulacan Special Economic Zone
and Freeport Authority,” hereinafter referred to as the BEZA,
which shall manage and operate the BuZ, in accordance with
the provisions of this Act: Provided, That the management
and operations of any existing Philippine Economic Zone
Authority (PEZA)-supervised economic zones in the BuZ shall
remain with PEZA: Provided, further, That existing
PEZA-registered locators within the BuZ shall have the option
to register with PEZA or the BEZA: Provided, finally, That
the management and operations of the Airport Project and the
Airport City Project shall be in accordance with Republic Act
No. 11506.

It shall be organized within one hundred eighty (180)
days upon the effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 5. Land Use, Planning, and Development. — Any
provision of existing laws, ordinances, executive orders, rules
or regulations to the contrary notwithstanding, forest lands
located in Barangay San Nicolas in the Municipality of
Bulakan; in Barangay Ubihan and Barangay Liputan, in the
City of Meycauayan: in Barangay Abangan Norte, Barangay
Abangan Sur, and Barangay Nagbalon, in the Municipality of
Marilao; and in Barangay Salambao, Barangay Binuangan,
Barangay Tawiran, Barangay Paco, Barangay Lawa, Barangay
San Pascual, Barangay Paliwas, Barangay Pag-Asa (Poblacion),
Barangay Catanghalan, Barangay Panghulo, in the
Municipality of Obando, are hereby converted to agricultural
lands and, as such, are declared as alienable and disposable,
and may be used for industrial, commercial, or other lawful
uses, as the case may be, in accordance with the Constitution
to ensure that other inalienable lands shall not be included.

To ensure the efficient and sustainable development of
areas covered, and proper inter-local development and

i
i
i
i

coordination, the BEZA, in consultation with the National
Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), shall establish
the general framework for land use, planning, and development
for the area covered by the BuZ, which shall be consistent
with the goals of the Philippine Development Plan (PDP). The
framework shall abide by the following principles:

(a) The general framework shall maintain an optimal
balance between economic maximization and ecological
protection;

(b) The framework shall provide for the development of
necessary transport, sanitation, waste management, flood
control, and support infrastructure; and

( The framework shall include criteria for the
designation or subdivision of the area covered into various zones
for commercial, industrial, residential, or other uses.

The BEZA shall establish under it a land use, planning,
and development office or unit to craft, revise, and implement
the framework.

Local, regional, and national plans for the use and
development of the areas covered by the BuZ shall be
consistent with the framework established by the BEZA. The
BEZA shall also be involved in the crafting of local, regional,
and national land use, zoning, and development plans which
partially or fully cover the area of the BuZ, or which cover
means of access to the BuZ.

SEC. 6. Registration with the BEZA. — Prospective
locators within the BuZ may register with the BEZA and
qualify for business incentives in accordance with Republic Act
No. 11534, otherwise known as the “Corporate Recovery. and
Tax Incentives for Enterprises Act” or “CREATE i Provided,
That the Airport Project and the Airport City Project shall
remain covered by Republic Act No. 11506, including the
incentives and regulatory regime provided therefor.

SEC. 7. Governing Principles. — The BEZA, created under
Section 4 of this Act, shall manage and operate the BuZ
under the following principles:

etanniinenrnesnedsiininennnnmesienensinnessanconnnsiansistniiinrsttey on

(a) Within the framework and limitations of the
Constitution and applicable provisions of Republic Act No. 7160,
otherwise known as the “Local Government Code of 1991”, as
amended, the BuZ shall be developed into and operated as a
decentralized, self-reliant and self-sustaining aviation hub,
industrial, commercial, trading, agro-industrial, tourism,
retirement, banking, financial and investment center, emerging
and future technologies, with suitable residential areas;

(b) Notwithstanding the autonomy provided in Section 7(a)
of this Act, the BuZ may continue to be provided by the
National Government (NG) and local government and shall be
equipped with transportation, telecommunications, and other
facilities needed to attract legitimate and productive
investments, and generate linkage industries and employment
opportunities for the people of the Province of Bulacan, and
its neighboring towns and cities: Provided, That the
development of the BuZ shall be integrated and consistent with
the plans of the National Government Agencies (NGAs),
Regional Development Council (RDC), and Local Government
Units (LGUs) with respect to transportation,
telecommunications infrastructure and other facilities:
Provided, further, That access to the BuZ shall be incorporated
in the planning, construction, and operation of such
infrastructure or expansions;

(©) The BuZ may establish mutually beneficial economic relations with other entities or enterprises within the country

= or, subject to the administrative guidance of the Department

of Foreign Affairs (DFA), the PEZA, and the Department of
Trade and Industry (DTI), with foreign entities or enterprises;

(@ Subject to existing laws, rules and regulations,
foreign citizens and companies owned by non-Filipinos may set
up enterprises in the BuZ, either by themselves or in a joint
venture with Filipinos, in any sector of industry, international
trade and commerce within the BuZ;

(e) The areas comprising the BuZ may be expanded or
reduced when necessary through a Presidential Proclamation
with the concurrence through local legislation by the concerned

LGU: Provided, That the acquisition by the BEZA of lands
distributed under the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform
Program shall be subject to existing laws, rules, and
regulations: Provided, further, That the acquisition of land by
BEZA in areas outside of BuZ’ territorial coverage shall not
automatically expand the same;

() Goods manufactured by a BuZ enterprise shall be
made available for immediate retail sale in the domestic
market, subject to the payment of corresponding taxes on raw
materials and other regulations that may be formulated by
the BEZA, the Department of Finance (DOF), the Bureau of
Customs (BOC), and the DTI. However, in order to protect
domestic industries, a Negative List of industries shall be
drawn up and regularly updated by the Interagency
Investment Promotion Coordination Committee (IPCC),
pursuant to Republic Act No. 7042, otherwise known as the
“Foreign Investments Act of 1991”, as amended, and other
relevant laws, rules, and regulations. Enterprises engaged in
industries included in such Negative List shall not be allowed
to sell their products locally; and

(g) The security of its perimeter, maintenance of peace
and order, firefighting, and disaster response within the BuZ
shall be the responsibility of the NG in cooperation with the
BuZ and the LGUs: Provided, That, for the costs of securing
the BuZ, the Office of the President (OP) shall, upon the
recommendation of the DOF, establish a cost-sharing scheme
between the BEZA and the relevant NGAs.

SEC. 8. Separate Customs Territory. — The BEZA shall
operate and manage the BuZ as a separate customs territory,
thereby ensuring the free flow or movement of goods and
capital within, into, and out of its territory: Provided, That
the BEZA shall establish a permanent customs control or
customs office at its perimeter to enhance revenue collection
and prevent importation of prohibited goods into the customs
territory. The exportation or removal of goods from the
territory of the BuZ to the other parts of the Philippine
territory shall be subject to customs duties and taxes under
Republic Act No. 10863, otherwise known as the “Customs
Modernization and Tariff Act (CMTA)”, and other relevant tax
Jaws of the Philippines: Provided, finally, That this provision

shall be effective upon the form izati
ffec al orga:
and submission of the Master Plan for the Bas, —

The BOC shall continue to exercise border protection and

customs control authority over the customs territory outside

bl pet een That the BEZA shall allow patrol or other
ent arrangements by the BOC

i be within the municipal waters eee

e » Subject to coordination with the BEZA, to enkrane

protection and control capacity and ensure compliance with

customs, fisheries, and other laws and regulations

SEC. 9. Development Goals of the BuZ. :

be ea _ its development goals for de oe ae
ie ae et of a soeeee and international

tar ses within
ee and national ieee ee oA
a 8. The Administrator shall, upon approval by the B ward
of i irectors of the BEZA, submit the BuZ plans. pas
. a . the RDC for inclusion and inputs to the overall
a oe pment plan. The RDC endorsement or comments
ame sa as well as subsequent amendments to the
. e submitted to the OP, the Provin

concerned LGUs, in order to ensure that the plan hes
vetted, prioritized, and translated into budgets pate finally

SEC. 10. Capitalization L
E j . — The BEZ
ee capital stock of two billion pie en ‘ar
Se ee oe age of Ten pesos (P10.00) each the
of which shall be subscri id fo
the NG and the LGUs caleee Ge Bae. aa Sei er by

The capital of the BEZA shall consist of:

. +
(a) its assets and such other properties as may be

contributed to the BEZA
ie by the Government to form part of

(b) all capitalized surplus;

(©) any cash contribution by the Government; and

(@ any budgetary outlay allocated and released in favor
of the BEZA. :

Thereafter, any sum as may be necessary to augment
its capital outlay shall be included in the General
Appropriations Act to be treated as an equity of the NG.

The Board of Directors of the BEZA may, with the
authorization of the President, and subject to the concurrence
and prescribed manner of disposition by the Secretary of
Finance, sell shares representing not more than forty percent (40%)
of the capital stock of the BEZA to the general public, under
such policy as the Board and the Secretary of Finance may
determine. The NG and LGUs shall in no case own less than
sixty percent (60%) of the total issued and outstanding capital
of the BEZA: Provided, That the sale of shares to the public
shall, in no manner, alter the composition of the BEZA Board.

SEC. 11. Revenue Sharing. — To ensure sufficient funds,
the BEZA and the affected LGUs shall be entitled to a share
in the special corporate income tax (SCIT) under Title XII
of Republic Act No. 8424, otherwise known as the “National
Internal Revenue Code (NIRC) of 1997’, as amended, from all
registered business enterprises in the BEZA. For this purpose,
the said corporate income tax collected shall be divided as

follows:

(a) Forty percent (40%) to the NG, which shall be
directly remitted to the NG: Provided, That the revenue
sharing under this section shall be considered compliance with
Section 284 of Republic Act No. 7160, as amended, and shall
no longer be further divided for purposes of the National Tax
Allotment;

(b) Twenty percent (20%) to the BEZA, earmarked for
infrastructure development projects of the BEZA as determined
by its Board of Directors, consistent with the principles and
purposes of this Act; and

(©) Forty percent (40%) to the concerned LGUs:
Provided, That the local government share from revenues
derived from BEZA-registered locators who availed of incentives

under Republic Act No. 11534, in com iti
or hep is 4 ponent citie
municipalities shall be allocated among the LGUs of the ‘Buz

using the formula prescribed under Section 28: i
No. 7160, as-amended. See Sh Sepa

The share of the NG shall be paid by

y the locator direct]
to the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR). The seas of the
LGUs and the BEZA shall be collected by the latter. The

BEZA shall remit th
ee it the local government share on a quarterly

SEC. 12. Principal Office of the BEZA. — The BEZA
_ SEC. rinc = shall
maintain its principal office at the Airport City, but it may
establish liaison offices within the Philippines as may be
necessary for the proper conduct of its business.

SEC. 13. Powers and Functions of the BEZ.
‘A. — Th
BEZA shall have the following powers and functions: °

(a) Operate, administer, mana

a » adi ge and develop the BuZ

according to the principles and provisions set forth in this Act:

er ie ~— management and operations of the Airport
roject and the Airport City Project shall be i

with Republic Act No. 11506; , © 2 accordance

fs (b) Register, regulate and supervise the enterprises in
the BuZ in an efficient and decentralized manner subject to
existing laws; ,

©. Coordinate with LGUs and exercise general
supervision over the development plans, activities and
operations of the BuZ; and adopt, preqjare, and implement a
comprehensive and detailed development plan with timelines
and milestones that shall be consistent with the goals under
Section 9 of this Act. The development plan shall include a
list of projects for the sound and balanced operation of the BuZ
consistent with ecological and environmental standards proper
waste management practices, effective flood control and
management, mandatory water impoundment, and other
productive uses to promote the economic and social development

of the LGUs comprising the BuZ in parti
See particular and the country

se

(@) Construct, acquire, own, lease, operate, and
maintain, on its own or through contracts, franchise, licenses,
bulk purchase from the private sector or permits under any
of the schemes allowed in Republic Act No. 11966, otherwise
known as the “Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Code of the
Philippines”, adequate facilities and infrastructure required or
needed for the operation and development of the BuZ, in
coordination with appropriate national and local government
authorities and in conformity with applicable laws thereon;

(e) Approve plans, programs and projects of the BuZ, to
be submitted to the RDC for inclusion and inputs to the
overall regional development plan;

(@ Operate on its own, either directly or through
licenses to others, tourism-related activities, including games,
amusements, recreational and sports facilities: Provided, That
the BEZA shall not allow the registration of any business that
is engaged, hosts, or accommodates any form of gambling,
gaming-related activity, or any form of game of chance within
the BuZ;

(g) Raise or borrow, within the limitation provided by
law, and subject to the approval of the Monetary Board of the
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), as the case may be,
adequate and necessary funds from local or foreign sources,
to finance its projects and programs under this Act; and for
this purpose, to issue bonds, promissory notes and other forms
of securities, and to secure the same by a guarantee, pledge,
mortgage, deed of trust or an assignment of all or part of its
property or assets. In no instance shall the Philippine
Government guarantee any bonds issued by the BEZA;

(h) Protect, preserve, maintain, and sustainably develop
the forests, beaches, coral and coral reefs, terrestrial and
marine ecosystems, and maintain ecological balance within the
BuZ. The rules and regulations of the Department of
Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) and other
government agencies involved in the above functions shall be
implemented by the BEZA: Provided, That the DENR shall
continue to have primary authority and responsibility on
environment protection: Provided, further, That the monitoring
and issuance of leases, permits, certificates, clearances, and

Il

all other environment-related issuances by the DENR under
its mandate shall remain under the jurisdiction of the
Department: Provided, further, That upon a finding of any
part of the area as needed for critical habitat establishment
under Republic Act No. 9147, otherwise known as the “Wildlife
Resources Conservation and Protection Act”, the BEZA will
accommodate and integrate the requirements for range
habitat, feeding and roosting of the relevant species identified:
Provided, further, That the BEZA shall take into consideration
any new scientific information that comes to light on
requirements for endangered species and honor local and
national legislation for conservation that would support
conservation goals: Provided, further, That protected areas
declared by local legislation, and those registered with the
DENR pending enactment by national legislation, shall be
observed and respected: Provided, finally, That frameworks
tools, methods and skills including, but not limited to, the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EIT), shall be
utilized in order to improve governance and management of
natural resources within the BuZ;

; @ Create, operate or contract to operate such functional
units or offices of the BEZA as it may deem necessary;

G) Adopt, alter and use a corporate seal: contract, lease,
buy, acquire, own or otherwise dispose of personal and/or real
property of whatever nature; sue and be sued; and otherwise
carry out its functions and duties as provided for in this Act;

(k) Issue certificates of origin for products manufactured
or processed in the BuZ, in accordance with prevailing rules

of origin and the pertinent regulatio f the PEZA
ool ee a mg of the , the DTI,

@ Establish one-stop shops for the issuance of all
necessary permits, clearances, licenses, and other similar
certifications to conduct such activities intended to improve the
ease of doing business within the BuZ, in coordination with
government agencies having jurisdiction over activities therein:
Provided, That all government agencies are directed to provide
and extend utmost and full cooperation to the BuZ in the
establishment of such one-stop shops;

eatin nests emnadass tic WSA auto MohnaS LARA escnlbulinusenstsincnlasanainlninnarsgniauiianineiinlisidiiianAiniubiiinusinainiiustlatsiiinsiticnshntiidaiiaci hsstisinuitniatnsinitnnannntutasihinacntansot rem

(m) To provide internal security to the BuZ, in
coordination with the NG and affected LGU. For this purpose,
the BEZA shall provide and establish its own internal security
and firefighting forces, in accordance with Republic Act
No. 9514, otherwise known as the “Fire Code of the Philippines
of 2008”, or hire others to provide the same;

(a) Exercise such powers, subject to existing laws, rules,
and regulations, as may be essential, necessary or incidental
to the powers granted to it hereunder, including imposition of
reasonable fees and penalties, that shall enable it to carry out,
implement and accomplish the purposes, objectives and policies
of this Act; and

(©) Issue rules and regulations within the exercise of its
powers under this section, subject to existing laws, rules, and
regulations.

SEC. 14. Board of Directors of the BEZA. — The powers
of the BEZA shall be vested in and exercised by a Board of
Directors, composed of fifteen (15) members, hereinafter
referred to as the Board, which shall be composed of the
following:

(a) The Chairperson of the BEZA, who shall be appointed
by the President of the Philippines and who shall automatically
be a member of the Board;

(b) The Administrator of the BEZA, who shall be
appointed by the President of the Philippines and shall serve
as the Vice-Chairperson;

(c) Members consisting of:

(1) The Secretary or a designated representative of
the DOF;

(2) The Secretary or a designated representative of
the DTI;

(3) The Secretary or a designated representative of
the NEDA;

(4) The Secretary or a designated representative of
the DENR;

(5) The Secretary or a designated representative of
the Department of Transportation (DOTY);

(6) The Governor or a designated representative of
the Province of Bulacan;

(7) The Mayor of the Municipality of Bulakan and
two (2) designated representatives of the mayors of the
remaining cities and municipalities covering the BuZ, to be
elected among themselves;

(8) The Chairperson or a designated representative of the
RDC of Central Luzon;

(9) One (1) independent director representing the private
sector who has at least ten (10) years experience in any of
the following areas: business, trade, port and logistics
operations, and freeport or economic zone operations;

(10) One (1) representative from the workers in the BuZ;
and

(11) One (1) independent director representing the Airport
Project and the Airport City Project.

The Administrator and the members of the Board, except
the ex officio members, shall be appointed by the President
of the Philippines to serve for a term of six (6) years, unless
sooner separated from service due to death, voluntary
resignation or removal for cause. Inécase of death, resignation
or removal for cause, their replacements shall serve only the
unexpired portion of the respective terms.

No person shall be appointed by the President of the
Philippines as a member of the Board unless one is a Filipino
citizen, of good moral character, and of proven probity and
integrity. The Administrator and the independent director
representing the Airport Project and the Airport City Project
shall be a degree holder in any of the following fields:

ese eaeinteenssnsonecisSScsseeS A

economics, business, public administration, law, management,
or their equivalent, and with at least ten (10) years relevant
working experience, preferably in the field of management or
public administration.

All benefits and emoluments of the members of the Board
shall be subject to existing laws, rules, and regulations,
including those prescribed by the Governance Commission for
Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporations.

SEC. 15. Organization and Personnel. — The Board shall
provide for its organization and staff. The Board shall appoint
and fix the remuneration and other emoluments of its officers
and employees in accordance with existing laws on
compensation and position classification. The Board shall have
exclusive and final authority to promote, transfer, assign,
reassign, or remove officers of the BEZA, any provision of
existing law to the contrary notwithstanding. The
Administrator shall execute the decisions of the Board.

The officers and employees of the BEZA, including all
members of the Board except those holding elective offices,
shall not engage directly or indirectly in partisan political
activities nor take part in any election, except to vote.

No officer or employee of the BEZA shall be removed or
suspended, except for cause, as provided by civil service law
and regulations.

SEC. 16. Powers and Duties of the Chairperson. — The
Chairperson shall have the following powers and duties:

(a) Preside at all meetings of the Board;

(b) Ensure that all policies, directives, plans, and
programs formulated by the Board are faithfully carried out
by the Administrator as Chief Executive Officer of the BEZA;
and

(©) Exercise such powers and perform such functions
and duties as the President may direct, or as may be assigned
to him by the BEZA.

SEC. 17. Powers and Duties of the Administrator. — The
Administrator shall have the following powers and duties:

(a) As Chief Executive Officer of the BEZA, direct and
manage the Affairs of the BEZA in accordance with the policies
of the Board;

(b) Establish the internal organization of the BEZA under such conditions that the Board may prescribe;

() Submit an annual budget and necessary
supplemental budget to the Board for its approval;

() Submit, within thirty (30) days after the close of
each fiscal year, an annual report to the Board and such other
reports as may be required;

( Submit to the Board for its approval, policies,
systems, procedures, rules and regulations that are essential
to the operation of the BuZ;

() Execute, administer, and implement the policies and
measures approved and adopted by the Board;

(g) Directly administer and supervise the operations and
day-to-day business activities of the BEZA;

(a) Represent the BEZA in all dealings with offices,
agencies, and instrumentalities of the Government and with
all persons and entities, public or private, domestic or foreign,
unless otherwise directed by the President or by the Board;

@) Execute, on behalf of thé BEZA, all contracts,
agreements, and other instruments affecting the interests of
the BEZA duly approved by the Board;

G) Direct and supervise the preparation of the agenda
for the meetings of the Board;

(Kk) Preside at the meetings of the Board in the absence
of the Chairperson;

‘Sra EOP RS Pt a nan netieeeneieiasnsneenesaiadaeseeneameeecesbati

(@) Recommend to the Board the remuneration and other
emoluments of its officers and employees in accordance with
existing laws on compensation and position classification;

(m) Create a mechanism in coordination with relevant
agencies for the promotion of industrial peace, the protection
of the environment, and the advancement of the quality of life
in the BuZ; and

(m) Perform such other duties as may be assigned by
the Board, or which are necessary or incidental to the office.

SEC. 18. Legal Counsel. - The BEZA shall have its own
internal legal counsel under the supervision of the Government
Corporate Counsel. When the exigencies of its businesses and
operations demand, the BEZA may engage the services of an
outside counsel, either on a case-to-case or on a fixed retainer
basis, subject to compliance with existing laws, rules, and
regulations.

CHAPTER III

INCENTIVES TO ECOZONE ENTERPRISES/INVESTORS

SEC. 19. Investors and Other Special Visas. — Foreign
nationals, who either intend to invest in the BuZ or possess
highly specialized skills, can apply for a special resident visa
in the BuZ, subject to relevant labor and immigration laws,
rules and regulations. The special resident visa shall be of two
(2) types: (a) the special skills visa; and (b) the investor’s visa.

(a) Special Skills Visa. - The BEZA shall recommend
the issuance of special skills visas, renewable every three (3)
years, to foreign executives and foreign technicians with highly
specialized skills which no Filipino possesses, subject to the
issuance of the certification and alien employment permit by
the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE).
Applications for the special skills visa shall be sponsored by
the registered enterprises that require the expertise of the
applicants: Provided, That such enterprises shall formulate
and undertake an understudy or skills development program
to ensure the transfer of technology or skills to Filipino
workers.

Foreign nationals who may serve as faculty members of
Bulacan State University campuses and other government and
private higher educational institutions within the BuZ shall
also be eligible for the special resident visa, subject to the
provisions of Republic Act No. 11448, otherwise known as the
“Transnational Higher Education Act”, and the rule on
reciprocity. The educational institution, with concurrence from
the Commission on Higher Education (CHED), shall sponsor
the application of the applicant. The CHED shall promulgate
the guidelines and eligibility requirements for applicants of the
special skills visa who shall be faculty members of educational
institutions in the BuZ.

The BEZA, the DOLE, and the Bureau of Immigration
(BD shall formulate the necessary guidelines for the submission
and approval of applications, as well as the monitoring of visa
grantees under this subsection.

(b) Investors Visa. — Any foreign national who invests
an amount of Two hundred fifty thousand US dollars
(US$ 250,000.00), either in cash and/or equipment, in a
BEZA-registered enterprise shall be entitled to an investor’s
visa to be issued by the BI subject to the recommendation of
the BEZA and the endorsement of the Board of Investments:
Provided, That the foreign national:

() Must be at least eighteen (18) years of age;

(2) Must not have been convicted by final judgment of
a crime involving moral turpitude;

(3) Must not be afflicted with any loathsome, dangerous
or contagious disease; é

(4) Must not have been confined in an institution for
any mental disorder or disability; and

(6) Must be financially capable with legitimate sources
of income, as borne out by credible and verifiable evidence.

A foreign national shall be granted permanent resident
status within the territorial coverage of the BuZ while the
investment subsists. To prove this, the foreign national shall

submit an annual report in the form duly prescribed for the
purpose. In the event that the investments are withdrawn
from the Philippines, the investor’s visa issued to the foreign
national shall automatically expire or be withdrawn. The
authority to issue visas and work permits shall remain with
the BI and the DOLE, respectively: Provided, That the BI and
the DOLE shall implement measures to expedite the processing
of such visas and permits for workers in the BuZ and
coordinate with the BEZA for the purpose of improving ease
of doing business.

SEC. 20. Fiscal Incentives. — Registered enterprises
operating within the BuZ may apply for pertinent fiscal
incentives granted under Title XIII of Republic Act No. 8424,
as amended, and for such other fiscal incentives as may be
provided by law: Provided, That the grant of fiscal incentives
shall be subject to Section 292 of Republic Act No. 8424, as
amended.

SEC. 21. Administration, Implementation and Monitoring
of Incentives. — In the interest of enhancing transparency in
the management and accounting of tax incentives in the BuZ,
and ensuring the proper administration, enforcement,
implementation and monitoring of tax incentives, the BEZA
shall comply with the provisions of Republic Act No. 10708,
otherwise known as “The Tax Incentives Management and
Transparency Act (TIMTA)” and its implementing rules and
regulations; Republic Act No. 11534 and its implementing rules
and regulations; and other rules, regulations, and issuances
made by the Fiscal Incentives Review Board, pursuant to
Chapter III, Title XIII of Republic Act No. 8424, as amended.

The BOC shall set up and establish a customs-controlled
area outside the premises of the BuZ to facilitate payment of
duties and taxes on goods entering the Philippine customs
territory: Provided, That notwithstanding the limitations on
this Act, the BEZA and the BOC may coordinate and jointly
implement measures on border protection.

SEC. 22. Banking Rules and Regulations. — Banks and
financial institutions to be established in the BuZ shall be
under the supervision of the BSP and subject to existing
banking laws, rules and regulations.

SEC. 23. Remittances. — In the case of foreign
investments, a duly registered entity or enterprise within the
BuZ shall have the right to remit earnings from the
investment in the currency in which the investment was
originally made and at the exchange rate prevailing at the
time of remittance, subject to the provisions of Republic Act
No. 7653, otherwise known as “The New Central Bank Act’
as amended, the Manual of Regulations on Foreign Exchange
Transactions of the BSP, and other relevant laws, rules, and
regulations.

CHAPTER IV

NATIONAL GOVERNMENT AND OTHER ENTITIES

SEC. 24. Supervision and Control. — For purposes of
policy direction and coordination, the BuZ Plan shall be
approved by the President upon vetting of its overall economic
viability and prioritization of subprojects by the NEDA, the
DOF, and the DBM; the BEZA shall be under the direct
supervision and control of the OP: Provided, That the grant
of fiscal incentives shall be subject to the provisions of Title
XIII of Republic Act No. 8424, as amended.

SEC. 25. Relationship with LGUs and the NG. — Inter-local and -national relationship between the BEZA and the NG vis-a-vis LGUs shall be governed by existing laws, rules, and regulations.

SEC. 26. Audit. - The Commission on Audit (COA) shall
appoint a full-time auditor in the BEZA or may assign such
number of personnel as may be nedessary in the performance
of their functions. The BEZA shall be subject to the audit
mechanisms under Sections 24, 25, and 26 of Republic Act
No. 10149, otherwise known as the “GOCC Governance Act
of 2011”. All transactions of the BEZA shall be subject to
relevant accounting and auditing rules and regulations of
the COA.

CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 27. Interpretation and Construction. — The powers,
authorities and functions that are vested in the BEZA are
intended to establish national self-sufficiency and self-reliance
in the advancement and protection of national integrity,
enhancement of national security, decentralization of
governmental functions and authority, and promote an
efficient and effective working relationship among the BEZA,
the NG, and the LGUs. Any interpretation of this Act shall
consider such intentions. In the event of conflict of
interpretation and provided the intentions cannot be
harmonized, the provisions of this Act shall be construed in
favor of an interpretation that would tend to protect national
interest and security.

SEC. 28. Applicability Clause. — Insofar as these are
consistent with the provisions of this Act, the provisions of
Sections 30 to 41 of Republic Act No. 7916, otherwise known
as “The Special Economic Zone Act of 1995”, shall likewise
apply to the BuZ.

SEC. 29. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the DTI, in
consultation with the DOF, the NEDA, the Province of
Bulacan, and a representative from the Airport Project and
the Airport City Project, shall formulate the implementing
rules and regulations of this Act. Such rules and regulations
shall take effect fifteen (15) days following the completion of
its publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Philippines.

SEC. 30. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is declared unconstitutional, the remainder hereof not
otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 31. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential
decrees, executive orders, letters of instruction, proclamations
or administrative regulations that are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified
accordingly.

veers teint nets tv eM UR NE AHS Mh an ANA

Lommete mda eye saan omni it a PASI rN eRe

SEC. 32. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days following the completion of its publication in the
Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

FERDIN. G. RO] ALD x MIGUEL F. ZUBIRI

Speaker of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 2572 on March 18, 2024 and adopted by the
House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill
No. 8841 on March 20, 2024.

REG D S. VELASCO
Secretary General
House of Representatives

Lapsed ifio ww on SUN 1.3 2024
without the signature of the Presi
dent, in accordance with Article VI.

Section 27 (1) of the Constitution

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines

Office of the President

oO

|
G-2}--wy ACTING! DIRECTOR IV