S. No. 2415
H. No. 7292

Republic of the Philippines
Gougress of the Philippines

Metro Manila

Nineteenth Congress

hird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

—__5

[ Repusuic ActNo. 12079]

AN ACT CREATING A VAT REFUND MECHANISM FOR
NON-RESIDENT TOURISTS, ADDING A NEW SECTION
112-A TO THE NATIONALINTERNAL REVENUE CODE

“ OF 1997, AS AMENDED, FOR THE PURPOSE

Be it enacted by the Senate and, House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. A new section designated as Section 112-A
under Chapter I, Title IV of the National Internal Revenue
Code, as amended, is hereby inserted to read as follows:

“SEC. 112-A. VAT Refund for Tourists. —
(a) A tourist shall be eligible for a VAT refund
on locally purchased goods if the following requisites

are present:

(1) The goods are purchased in person by the
tourist in duly accredited stores;

(2) Such goods are taken out of the
Philippines by the tourist within sixty (60) days from
the date of purchase; and

(3) The value of goods purchased per
transaction is equivalent to at least Three thousand
pesos (P3,000.00): Provided, That such threshold
shall be subject to review and adjustment every three
(3) years by the Secretary of Finance, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner of Internal
Revenue, taking into consideration the Consumer
Price Index (CPI) as published by the Philippine
Statistics Authority (PSA).

(b) The Department of Finance shall engage
the services of one (1) or more reputable, globally
recognized, and experienced VAT refund operators to
provide end-to-end solutions to the government for the
establishment and operation of a VAT refund system
for tourists.

(c) The refund under this section may be made
either electronically or in cash.

(d) The amount necessary for the VAT refund
system for tourists under this Code shall be charged
against the special account in the General Fund as
provided under Section 106 of this Code.

For purposes of this section, the term ‘tourist’
means a non-resident foreign passport holder.”

SEC. 2. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) calendar days from the effectivity of this Act, the
Secretary of Finance shall, after due consultation with the
Department of Trade and Industry, Department of
Transportation, Department of Tourism, National Economic
and Development Authority, Bureau of Internal Revenue, and
Bureau of Customs, promulgate the necessary rules and
regulations to faithfully implement the intent and provisions
of this Act.

SEC. 3. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is declared unconstitutional, the remaining parts or
provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force
and effect.

SEC. 4. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive
orders, implementing rules and regulations, issuances, or any
part thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are
deemed repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

SEC. 5. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days following its publication in the Official Gazette or
in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,
FERD) G. JALDEZ — FRANCIS “CHIZ’ G. ESCUDERO
Speaker of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 2415 on September 23, 2024 and adopted by
the House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill
No. 7292 on September 24, 2024.

Ul

Ren

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

*

Approved: DEC 0 6 2024

  
 

REPUBLIC OF

PBBM| vi