H. No. 10619

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Mauls
Nineteenth Congress

Chird Regular Session
scsaosefoserscey

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 12285]

AN ACT CONVERTING THE EXTENSION CAMPUS OF THE
CEBU NORMAL UNIVERSITY IN THE MUNICIPALITY
OF BALAMBAN, PROVINCE OF CEBU INTO A REGULAR
CAMPUS AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title, — This Act shall be known as the
“Cebu Normal University (CNU)-Balamban Campus Act”,

SEO. 2. Conversion into a Regular Campus. — The CNU shall
convert the extension campus located in the Municip ality of
Balamban, Province of Cebu into a regular campus, to be known as
the “CNU-Balamban Campus”.

SEC. 3. General Mandate. —The CNU-Balamban Campus shall
offer undergraduate and graduate courses within their areas of
competencies and specialization, as the Board of Regents, hereinafter
referred to as the Board, may deem necessary for the accomplishment
of their objectives, and those which respond to the human resource
development needs of the Province of Cebu and Region VII. It is
mandated to undertake research and extension services in support of
the socioeconomic development and to provide progressive leadership
in these areas,

SEC. 4. Supervision and Management, —The CNU-Balamban
Campus shall be headed by a Campus Director who shall render
full-time service and shall be appointed by the Board, subject to
its guidelines, qualifications, and standards, and upon the
recommendation of a Search Committee duly constituted for the
purpose of selecting the Campus Director.

SEC. 5. Compliance with the Requirements of the Commission
on Higher Education (CHED). — The CNU shall ensure compliance
of the CNU-Balamban Campus with the policies, standards, and
guidelines of the CHED for the operation of a regular campus, including
those related to the offering of courses and the introduction of new or
revised programs prior to its conversion as a regular campus.

SEC. 6. Management of Personnel, Assets, and Records. ~ All
assets, both real and personal, personnel, and records of the
CNU-Balamban Campus, as well as its liabilities or obligations,
shall be transferred to the CNU. The positions, rights, and security
of tenure of faculty members and personnel therein employed under
existing laws prior to its conversion into a regular campus shall
be respected.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied by the
CNU-Balamban Campus shall be transferred to the CNU: Provided,
That should the campus or the CNU cease to exist or be abolished or
should such aforementioned parcels of land be no longer needed by the
CNU, the same shall revert to the local government unit concerned or
the Republic of the Philippines, as the case may be.

SEC. 7. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of Republic
Act No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher Education Modernization
Act of 1997”, shall form part of this Act.

SEC. 8. Appropriations. —The amount necessary to carry out
the provisions of this Act shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

SEC. 9. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Board shall, in
consultation with the CHED, issue rules and regulations to implement
its provisions.

SEC. 10. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any part or
provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the
remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force
and effect.

SEC. 11. Repealing Clause. — All other laws, presidential
decrees, executive orders, and rules and regulations contrary to
or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are repealed or
modified accordingly.

SEC. 12. Effectivity.—This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days
after its complete publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation.

Approved,
FRANCIS “CHIZ” G. ESCUDERO INAND Uy » ROMUALDEZ
President of the Senate Speaker of the House

of Representatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on August 7, 2024,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on June 3, 2025, and
which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives

Secretary General
House of Representatives

on June 9, 2025.

 

Approved:

— SEP 0 7 2025
GEESE BIO TW OR Scccesnesee ie
without the signature of the Presi
dent, in accordance with Article VI,
Section 27 (1), of the Constitution

FERDINAND RO!

Presiden

resident
RECORDS OFFICE

FIED COPY