H, No. 7397

Mepublic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila
Nineteenth Congress

Second Regular Session
-—#I——-

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand twenty-three.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 11972]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING IN THE CITY OF LIGAO, PROVINCE
OF ALBAY, A COLLEGE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE
OF THE BICOL UNIVERSITY, TO BE KNOWN AS THE
BICOL UNIVERSITY-COLLEGE OF VETERINARY
MEDICINE, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Jéstablishment. — There is hereby established
a College of Veterinary Medicine in the Bicol University, to be
located in the City of Ligao, Province of Albay, which shall be
known as the “Bicol University-College of Veterinary Medicine”.

Suc. 2. General Mandate, — The Bicol University
(BU)-College of Veterinary Medicine, hereinafter referred to as
the “College”, shall. primarily offer a Doctor of Veterinary Medicine

(DVM) Program. The program shall be a six-vear course consisting
of a two-year preparatory veterinary medicine curriculum,
including general education courses, and a four-year professional
veterinary medicine curriculum consisting of basic animal
sciences, and veterinary medical sciences, and using learning
competency-based standards and outcomes-based approach. The
primary goal of the College shall be to develop a corps of
rinary physicians who are adept in the prevention,
diagnosis, treatment, and control of animal diseases, including
terrestrial and aquatic animals.

  

professional yet

   

SEC. 3. Governance. — The governance of the College shall
be vested in the Board of Regents (the Board) of the BU, whose
powers are defined under Republic Act No. 5521, entitled “An Act
Establishing the Bicol University, Defining its Powers,
Functions, and Duties, Appropriating Funds Therefor, and for
Other Purposes”. The DVM Program, and all programs, projects,
and activities to be implemented in the College shall be in
accordance with State policies on education, other pertinent
provisions of the Philippine Constitution, as well as the policies,
standards, and the thrust of the Commission on Higher
Education (CHED).

SEC, 4. Compliance with CHED Requirements. —The BU,
prior to the establishment of the College and the offering of new
and revised courses and programs related thereto, shall ensure
compliance with the applicable policies, standards, and guidelines
of the CHED.

SEC. 5. Scholarship Programs and Admission. — The
College shall provide scholarships and other affirmative action
programs to assist poor but deserving students who qualify
for admission to the College. Students availing themselves
of nationally-funded scholarship programs to complete the
DVM Program under the College shall be required to render a
return service as provided for by applicable laws and

- regulations, or the contract to be signed between the student and
the College.

 

Cx)

No student shall be denied admission to the College by
reason of sex, gender, religion, cultural or community affiliation,
physical disability, ethnic origin, or any other forms of
discrimination.

 

SEC. 6. Duty and Tax Exemptions. — The importation by
the College of medical, scientific, and technical books or
publications, medical equipment or instruments which are for
medical, laboratory or scientific and technical purposes shall, upon
certification by the CHED, be exempt from customs duties
in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 10863,
otherwise known as the “Customs Modernization and Tariff
Act (CMTA)’,

All grants, bequests, endowments, donations, and
contributions made to and used actually, directly, and exclusively
for educational purposes by the College, shall be exempt from
donor’s tax and the same shall be considered as allowable
deductions from gross income for purposes of computing the taxable
income of the donor in accordance with the provisions of the
National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended.

SEC. 7. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to carry
out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 8. Suppletory Application. ~The provisions of Republic
Act No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher Education
Modernization Act of 1997”, shall form part of this Act.

SEC. 9. Separability Clause. —If, for any reason, any part
or provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional,
the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in
full force and effect.

SEC. 10. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential decrees,
executive orders, and rules and regulations contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are amended, repealed,
or modified accordingly.


SEC. 11. Eyjfectivity.—~Thig Act shall take effect fifteen (16)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation,

Approved,

  

YE
(UAN MIGUELF. ZUBIRI FERDINANI

- ROM! DEZ,
President of the Senate

Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on March 15, 2023,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on September 25, 2023,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on September 27, 2023,

oe

REGINAMS§, VELASCO
Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved: DEC 20 2923

é
hy

“ ‘
FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines
/

/

mh

 

oO

  

       
      

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPP:

1 AU TY

PBBM003581

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE {

CERTIFIED COPY |
Hew.0 QUE CARY,
Cran

DIRECTOR IV