H. No, 11302

Kopurhslic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philinpines
Motes Manila

Nineteenth Congress
Ohicd Regular Soseian

—-~§j§——

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four,

[ REPUBLIC ACT NO.12265]

AN ACT RECOGNIZING SINGAPORE SCHOOL MANILA GREEN
CAMPUS AS AN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION OF
INTERNATIONAL CHARACTER, AND GRANTING CERTAIN
PREROGATIVES CONDUCIVE TO ITS DEVELOPMENT
AND GROWTH

Be it enacied by the Senate and House of Represeniatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Singapore School Manila (SSM) Green Campus,
herein referred to as the School, is hereby recognized as an educational
institution of international character authorized to operate educational
programs that primarily and principally adhere to universally accepted
and recognized educational policies.

SEC. 2. The School shall use the registered name “SSM Green
Campus, Inc.” and be governed by a Board of Directors,
herein referred to as the Board, elected in accordance with its
corporate character.

bo

SEC. 3. To enable the School to continue carrying out its
educational program, improve its standard of instruction, and meet
the special needs of the foreign temporary resident community for
quality education, it shall:

(a) Accept applicants for admission, regardless of nationality,
in accordance with its own eligibility standards and rules for admission,
and grade placement: Provided, That no single alien nationality shall
ecnsist more than one-third of the entire student population in a given
school year, as stated in the records of the School, except in case
of dependents of foreign diplomatic personnel or other foreign
temporary residents, as may be provided by law:

(&) Whenever necessary to carry out its objectives, have the
right to obtain leases on real properties, acquire personal properties,
tangible ov intangible, or any interest in such properties other
than real, by purchase, lease, barter, donation, or gift, and dispose
of, mortgage, or encumber them for the benefit of the School concerned,
subject to the limitations provided by law;

 

 

fe) Be managed and administered by a Head of School who
is a Filipino citizen, and who possesses the qualifications prescribed
by the Board;

 
  

 

@) Upon consultation w: ne Secret the Departmen:
fUducation (Dep id), determine wa curriculum, teach whatever
language or languages it may deem proper, and determine the amount
of fees and assessments which may be reasonably imposed upon its
learners and students, to maintain or conform to the School's standards
of education;

   

(@) Maintain the international standards of education compatible
with those obtained in similar schools of generally recognized standing;

@ Employ its own teaching and management personnel selecied.
by the Board either locally or abroad, from the Philippines or other
countries or nationalities, such foreign personnel being exempt from
otherwise applicable laws and regulations attending their employment.
except laws that have been or will be enacted for the protection of
employees: Provided, That such exemption shall noi extend to their

Hability for income taxes, unless otherwise provided by a bilateral
agreement: Provided, further, That the School shall give priovity to
hiving locally qualified teaching and management personnel:

(g) Promote international friendship, goodwill, and
understanding among members of the foreign community and
he citizens of the Philippines: and

  

: ) Noi to teach anything derogatory to the prestige and
well-being of the Philippines and its people, nor those which will subvert
its institutions and government.

Sac. 4. Notwithstanding the recognition and prerogatives
under this Act, the School shall be under the supervision and
regulation of the DepEd and shall adhere to the basic laws an
the rules and regulations of the DepEd governing international or
foveign schools.

  

 

S&C. 5. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act

 

SEC. 7. Motwithstanding the non-issuance of the rules and
regulations under Section 5 herein, this Act shall take effeci
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette ov in a
newspaper of general circulation,

Approved,

  

= / a!
i ( ad :
FRANCIS"CHIZ" G, ESCUDERO FEI TM. TGSROMUALDEZ
President of the Senate “Speaker of the House

of Representatives

Ie a RRNA ALAS ASR BS

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on February 3, 2025,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on June 9, 2025, and which
amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives
on June 10, 2025.

REGINALD 47 VELASCO

Secretary General
House of Representatives

    

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines

 

a oF en PHILIPPINES

 

iH IN

PBBMO1

 

 

i it Office ofthe President