H. No. 9332

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meters Manils

Nineteenth Congress
Chirk Regular Sessinn

——

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 12282 ]

AN ACT CONVERTING THE ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR SCHOOL
OF ARTS AND TRADES LOCATED IN BARANGAY KAWIT,
PAGADIAN CITY, PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR
INTO A STATE COLLEGE TO BE KNOWN AS THE
ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR POLYTECHNIC STATE COLLEGE
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. ~ This Act shall be known as the
“Zamboanga del Sur Polytechnic State College Charter’.

SEC. 2. Conversion. — The Zamboanga del Sur School of Arts
and Trades (ZSSAT) located in Barangay Kawit, Pagadian City,
Province of Zamboanga del Sur, is hereby converted into a state
college to be known as the Zamboanga del Sur Polytechnic State
College (ZSPSC).

SEC. 3. General Mandate. -The ZSPSC shall primarily provide
advanced education, higher technological and professional courses,

and training programs in engineering, education, arts and sciences,
trade and the arts, vocational and technology courses, and other fields
of study. It shall promote research, extension and income-generating
services, and production activities, and shall provide progressive
leadership in its areas of specialization.

SEc. 4. Curricular Offerings. — The ZSPSC shall offer
short-term technical-vocational, undergraduate, and graduate courses
in the fields of engineering, education, agriculture, arts and sciences,
trade and the arts, vocational and technology courses in welding
technology, vocational technology, fishery technology, hotel and
restaurant services, hotel and household services, baking technology,
electronic services and repair, and other degree courses, as the Board
of Trustees may deem necessary to carry out its objectives, and those
which respond to the human resource development needs of the Province
of Zamboanga del Sur and the Zamboanga Peninsula: Provided, That
the ZSPSC shall comply with the policies, standards, and guidelines
of the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) for the offering of
courses and the introduction of new or revised programs.

The ZSPSC may continue to operate a reasonably-sized laboratory
junior and senior high school under the supervision of the College
of Education of the ZSPSC to serve the in-campus requirements of
its students.

SEC. 5. Administration. - The ZSPSC shall have the general
powers of a corporation set forth in Republic Act (RA) No. 11232,
otherwise known as the “Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines”.
The administration of the ZSPSC and the exercise of its corporate
powers shall be vested exclusively in the Board of Trustees and the
President of the ZSPSC.

SEC. 6. The Board of Trustees. - The governing body of the
ZSPSC shall be the Board of Trustees, hereinafter referred to as the
Board, which shall be chaired and vice chaired by the Chairperson of
the CHED and the President of the ZSPSC, respectively, and with the
following as members:

(a) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher, Technical and
Vocational Education of the Senate;

(b) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher and Technical
Education of the House of Representatives;

© Regional Director of the Department of Economy, Planning,
and Development (DEPDev);

@ Regional Director of the Department of Agriculture;
© Regional Director of the Department of Science and Technology;

@® President of the federation of faculty associations of the ZSPSC:

>

(g) President of the federation of student councils of the ZSPSC;
: (h) President of the federation of alumni associations of the ZSPSC;

@) Representative of the nonteaching or personnel association
of the ZSPSC; and

G) Two (2) prominent citizens from the private sector who have
distinguished themselves in their professions or fields of specialization.

The Board shall appoint two (2) prominent citizens who shall
be selected from a list of at least five (5) qualified persons from the
Province of Zamboanga del Sur, as recommended by a Search
Committee constituted by the President of the ZSPSC, in consultation
with the Chairperson of the CHED and other members of the Board,
based on the guidelines, qualifications, and standards for the position
set by the Board. They shall serve for a term of two (2) years from the
date of appointment.

The President of the federation of faculty associations, the
President of the federation of student councils, the President of the
federation of alumni associations, and the Representative of the
nonteaching personnel shall be coterminous with their terms of office,
as provided under their respective constitutions and bylaws.

Sec. 7. Powers and Duties of the Board. ~ In addition to its
general powers of administration and the powers granted to the Board
of Directors of a corporation under existing laws, the Board shall have
the following specific powers and duties:

(a) Promulgate and implement policies in accordance with the
declared State policies on education, other pertinent provisions of the
Constitution on education, agriculture, science and technology, and
the policies, standards, and thrusts of the CHED under RA No. 7722,
otherwise known as the “Higher Education Act of 1994”;

(b) Approve the curricula, instructional programs, and rules on
student discipline drawn by the Administrative and Academic Councils
as herein provided;

(©) Appoint, upon the recommendation of the President of the
ZSPSC, the vice presidents, chancellors, deans, directors, heads of
the campuses, faculty members, and other officials of the ZSPSC;

(@) Fix the tuition fees and other necessary school charges, such.
as matriculation fees, graduation fees, and laboratory fees, as the Board
may deem proper to impose, after due consultation with the concerned
sectors. The fees and charges, including government subsidies and
other income generated by the ZSPSC, shall constitute its funds to
be used exclusively in the pursuit of its mandate as a state college,
and shall be deposited in any authorized government depository bank.
All interests that shall accrue therefrom shall form part of the same
funds for the use of the ZSPSC;

The fees and charges collected by the ZSPSC, including
government subsidies and proceeds from other income sources, as well
as interests that would accrue therefrom, shall be retained by the
College: Provided, That in no case shall the said income be used for
the payment of allowances and other benefits not authorized by law:
Provided, further, That all fiduciary fees shall be disbursed for the
specific purposes for which they were collected.

Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Board
may authorize, for such reasonable and legal purposes for which it
deems necessary and urgent for the attainment of the objectives of
the ZSPSC, the use of: (i) any unexpended balance whose fiduciary
character has been ipso facto removed pursuant to the grant of
subsidy under RA No. 10931, otherwise known as the “Universal Access
to Quality Tertiary Education Act”; and/or (ii) any appropriation for
any project under the duly approved program of expenditures of the
ZSPSC, for reasons beyond its control, would not be able to pursue:
Provided, That funds collected from students for specific purposes
shall not be realigned or reprogrammed to other expenditures;

(©) Adopt and implement a socialized scheme of tuition and other
school fees for greater access of poor but deserving students in
accordance with RA No. 10981;

sissies

sa

@ Establish professorial chairs in the ZSPSC and provide
fellowships for qualified faculty members, and scholarships to
deserving students;

(® Receive and appropriate sums as may be provided by law for
the support of the ZSPSC, and all other sums, in the manner it may,
in its discretion, determine to carry out the purposes and functions of
the ZSPSC;

(h) Set the policies on admission and graduation of students;

: @) Award honorary degrees upon persons in recognition of their
outstanding contributions in the fields of education, public service,
arts, science and technology, sports and human kinetics, or any field
of specialization within the academic competency of the ZSPSC, and
authorize the awarding of certificates of completion of nondegree and
non-traditional courses;

G) Develop academic arrangements for institutional capability
building with appropriate institutions and agencies, whether public,
private, local or foreign, and appoint experts or specialists as
consultants, part-time, visiting or exchange professors, scholars or
researchers, as the case may be;

f

(&%) Adopt modern and innovative modes of transferring
knowledge to allow greater access to education such as the use of
information technology, online programs, the dual training system,
open distance learning, and community laboratory;

@ Absorb non-chartered tertiary institutions within the
Province of Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga Peninsula as branches,
extension or external centers, in coordination with the CHED and in
consultation with the Department of Budget and Management (DBM),
and offer therein programs or courses to carry out the constitutional
mandate of providing equal access to educational opportunities;

(m) Authorize an external management audit of the ZSPSC,
to be financed by the CHED, subject to the rules and regulations
of the Commission on Audit, and institute reforms, including
academic and structural changes, on the basis of the audit results
and recommendations;

(a) Develop consortia and other economic forms of linkages with
local government units, as well as public, private, local or foreign

institutions and agencies for the furtherance of the purposes and
objectives of the ZSPSC;

©) Import books or publications, instruments, equipment, and
apparatuses for economic, technical-vocational, scientific, medical,
philosophical, historical, legal or cultural purposes;

(p) Enter into joint ventures with business and industry, after
consultation with the DEPDev, for the profitable growth and
management of economic assets, the proceeds of which shall be used
for the development and strengthening of the ZSPSC;

@ Receive, in trust, all legacies, gifts, and donations of real
and personal properties of all kinds and administer and dispose of the
same, when necessary, for the benefit of the ZSPSC and subject to the
limitations, directions, and instructions of the donor, if any;

(rt) Extend the term of the President of the ZSPSC beyond the
age of retirement but not beyond the age of seventy (70), based on the
guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board: Provided,
That the President’s performance has been rated by the Board as
outstanding and a unanimous recommendation for such extension has
been decided upon by the Search Committee;

(8) Delegate any of its powers and duties to the President and
other officials of the ZSPSC, as it may deem appropriate, so as to
expedite the administration of the affairs of the ZSPSC;

(® Establish policy guidelines and procedures for participative
and transparent decision-making within the ZSPSC;

(u) Where most advantageous to the ZSPSC, outsource the
management of non-academic services such as health, food, building
or grounds or property maintenance, and such other similar activities;

(v) Authorize the construction or repair of its buildings,
machinery, equipment, and other facilities, and the purchase and
acquisition of real property, including the necessary supplies, materials,
and equipment; and

(w) Promulgate rules and regulations, as may be necessary, to
carry out the purposes and functions of the ZSPSC.

SEC. 8. Meetings of the Board. — The Board shall regularly
convene once every three (3) months. The Chairperson of the Board
may, however, call a. special meeting whenever necessary: Provided,
That members are notified in writing at least three (8) days prior to
the conduct of said meeting.

A quorum of the Board shall consist of a majority of all its
members holding office at the time of the meeting: Provided, however,
That the Chairperson of the Board or the President of the ZSPSC is
among those present in the meeting.

In case the Chairperson of the CHED cannot attend a meeting
of the Board, a CHED Commissioner duly designated by Chairperson
of the CHED as representative to the meeting, shall have all the
rights and responsibilities of a regular member: Provided, That
during the meeting, the President of the ZSPSC, as Vice Chairperson,
shall be the presiding officer: Provided, further, That this provision
notwithstanding, the Chairperson of the CHED may designate a CHED
Commissioner as the regular Chairperson of the Board, in which case,
the said CHED Commissioner shall act as the presiding officer.

In case the Chairpersons of the Senate Committee on Higher,
Technical and Vocational Education and the House Committee on

Higher and Technical Education cannot attend the Board meeting,

they may designate their respective representatives who shall have
the same rights and responsibilities as regular members of the Board.

The members of the Board shall serve without compensation
other than reimbursements for actual and necessary expenses incurred,
either for their attendance to the meetings of the Board or in connection
with other official business authorized by resolutions of the Board,
subject to existing laws and regulations.

SEC. 9. The College President. — The ZSPSC shall be headed
by a President who shall be appointed by the Board, subject to its
guidelines, qualifications, and standards, and based on the
recommendation of a Search Committee duly constituted for the
purpose of selecting the President. The ZSPSC President shall render
full-time service for a term of four (4) years, and may be reappointed
to another term.

Within six (6) months before the expiration of the term of office
of the incumbent President of the ZSPSC, the Board shall constitute

the Search Committee for the Presidency and shall ensure the
appointment or reappointment of a President on or before the expiration
of the term.

The powers and duties of the President of the ZSPSC, in addition
to those specifically provided in this Act, shall be those usually
pertaining to the Office of the President of colleges and those delegated
by the Board.

The salary of the President of the ZSPSC shall be in accordance
with RA No. 11466, otherwise known as the “Salary Standardization
Law of 2019”, and such other laws amendatory thereto, which may
hereinafter be enacted, and on the joint circular for state universities
and colleges’ leveling instruments, and guidelines of the CHED and
the DBM.

In case of vacancy in the Office of the President by reason of
death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal for cause, or
incapacity of the President to perform the functions of the office, the
Board shall designate an Officer-in-Charge of the ZSPSC, pending the
appointment of a new President.

The President of the ZSPSC shall be assisted by the following
officials: Vice President for Academic Affairs; Vice President for
Administration, Planning, and Finance; and Vice President for
Research, Development, and Extension. They shall all be appointed
by the Board upon the recommendation of the President of the ZSPSC.

SEC. 10. The Secretary of the ZSPSC. —'The Board shall appoint
a Secretary who shall serve as such for both the Board and the ZSPSC
and shall keep all records and proceedings of the Board in addition
to other duties and responsibilities. The Secretary of the ZSPSC
shall serve upon each member of the Board the appropriate notice of
Board meetings,

SEC. 11. The Treasurer of the ZSPSC. - The Treasurer of the
Philippines shall be the ex officio Treasurer of the ZSPSC.

SEC. 12. The Administrative Council. — There shall be an
Administrative Council consisting of the President of the ZSPSC, as
Chairperson, and the vice president, deans, director, and other officials
of equal rank, as members, whose duty is to review and recommend to
the Board such policies governing the administration, management,
and development planning of the ZSPSC.

SEC. 13. The Academic Council. - There shall be an Academic
Council consisting of the President of the ZSPSC, as Chairperson,
and all academic staff with the rank of at least an assistant professor,
as members.

The Academic Council shall review and recommend the
curricular offerings and rules on student discipline, fix the
requirements for the admission of students, as well as for their
graduation and conferment of degrees, exercise disciplinary power over
the students and shall formulate rules and regulations on student
discipline, subject to the review and approval of the Board through
the President of the ZSPSC.

It shall have disciplinary power over the students of the ZSPSC
and shall formulate rules and regulations on student discipline, subject
to the approval of the Board,

SEC. 14. Academic Freedom. - The ZSPSC shall enjoy
academic freedom pursuant to Paragraph 2, Section 5 of Article XIV
of the Constitution.

SEC. 15. The Faculty, — No political belief, sex, gender, cultural
or community affiliation, ethnic origin, nor religious opinion or

affiliation shall be a matter of inquiry in the appointment of faculty

members of the ZSPSC: Provided, That the appointment shall be
subject to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board:
Provided, further, That a member of the faculty shall not criticize,
vouch for, recruit members in behalf of, or preach about any particular
religious denomination.

SEC. 16. Scholarship Programs and Admission. - The ZSPSC
shall provide scholarship programs and other affirmative action
programs to assist poor but deserving students who qualify for
admission to the ZSPSC. No student shall be denied admission to the
ZSPSC by reason of sex, gender, religion, cultural community affiliation,
or ethnic origin, or any other forms of discrimination.

SEC. 17. Loan or Transfer of Supplies, Apparatuses, or
Equipmeni, or Detail of Personnel to the ZSPSC. - Heads of national
government agencies and instrumentalities may, upon the request of
the Board through the President of the ZSPSC, loan or transfer
supplies, apparatuses, or equipment, or detail personnel to the College:
Provided, That such loan, transfer or detail shall not be detrimental
to public service.


The personnel to be detailed to the College shall perform such
duties as may be deemed required by the President of the ZSPSC and
the time spent for such duties shall be counted as part of the detailed
personnel’s regular service.

SEC. 18. Assets, Liabilities, and Personnel. — All assets, both
real and personal, personnel, and records of the ZSSAT, as well as its
liabilities or obligations, shall be transferred to the ZSPSC: Provided,
That the positions, rights, and security of tenure of faculty members
and personnel therein employed under existing laws prior to the
conversion into a College shall be respected.

Allparcels of land belonging to the government occupied by the
ZSSAT are declared as property of the ZSPSC, and shall be titled
under its name: Provided, That all parcels of land of the ZSPSC shall
revert to the original owner or donor, or the Republic of the Philippines,
in the event that the College ceases to exist or be abolished, or should
the said parcels of land be no longer needed by the ZSPSC: Provided,
further, That such reversion shall not impair obligation of contracts.

SEC. 19. Duty and Tax Exemptions. —The importation of books
or publications, instruments, equipment, and apparatuses, which are
for economic, technical-vocational, scientific, medical, philosophical,
historical, legal or cultural purposes made by the ZSPSC, upon
certification by the CHED, shall be exempt from customs duties in
accordance with the provisions of RA No. 10863, otherwise known as
the “Customs Modernization and Tariff Act (CMTA)”.

All grants, bequests, endowments, donations, and contributions
made to and used actually, directly, and exclusively for educational
purposes by the ZSPSC shall be exempt from donor’s tax and the
same shall be considered as allowable deductions from gross income
for purposes of computing the taxable income of the donor in accordance
with the provisions of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997,
as amended.

SEC. 20. Compliance with the CHED Requirements. - The
provisions of this Act notwithstanding, the conversion of the ZSSAT
to a state college shall become effective only upon the determination
and declaration by the CHED, based on the recommendation of a
panel of experts constituted for the purpose, that the ZSSAT has
complied with the requirements for a college status based on CHED
Memorandum Order No. 46, series of 2012 (Policy-Standard ‘to
Enhance Quality Assurance in Philippine Higher Education Through

an Outcomes-Based and Typology-Based Quality Assurance):
Provided, That the panel may issue such recommendation when the
ZSSAT has substantially complied with the requirements for the grant
of college status.

The following operational requirements for a college, as
established by the CHED, shall be complied with:

(a) Employment of full-time, permanent faculty members who
possess relevant degrees, as required by the CHED, and with experience
in the subject areas they handle;

' (6) Offering of a comprehensive range of degree programs
characterized by a core curriculum that holistically develops thinking,
problem-solving, decision-making, communication, technical, and social
skills in line with the mission of the ZSPSC;

© Establishment and maintenance of comprehensive learning
resources and support structures that are appropriate for developing
knowledge and skills in the specific natural science, social science,
humanities, and professional disciplines offered by the ZSPSC,
including laboratories, books, and journals;

i @ Maintenance of linkage with the community that would
ensure the development of relevant academic and extension programs
and the application of their learning outcomes; and

©) Conduct of outreach programs involving students in social
development oriented experiences that allow them to contextualize their
knowledge within actual social and human experiences.

The CHED, through its regional office, shall regularly provide
technical assistance to the ZSPSC and monitor its compliance with
the requirements of the CHED.

The ZSSAT shall retain its status prior to the effectivity of this
Act until it is able to comply with the requirements provided herein.

SEC. 21. Development Plan and Organizational Structure. —
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after the approval of this Act,
the ZSPSC shall accomplish the following:

(a) Submit a five (5)-year development plan, including its
corresponding program budget to the CHED and the DBM;


(b) Submit the revised Land Use Development and
Infrastructure Plan (LUDIP) in accordance with RA No. 11396,
otherwise known as the “SUCs LUDIP Act”;

(©) Undergo a management audit in cooperation with the

CHED; and

@) Set up its organizational, administrative, and academic
structure, including the designation of the key officials and other
administrative personnel of the ZSPSC.

SEC. 22. Filing of Report. - On or before the fifteenth (15) day
of the second (2"*) month after the opening of regular classes each
year, the Board shall file a detailed report on its compliance with the
requirements for a college with the Office of the President of the
Philippines and both Houses of Congress, through the Chairperson of
the CHED.

SEC. 23. Appropriations. - The amount necessary to carry out
the initial implementation of this Act shall be charged against the
current year’s appropriation of the ZSSAT. Thereafter, such sums as
may be necessary for the continued implementation of this Act shall
be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 24. Suppletory Application. ~ The provisions of
RA No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher Education
Modernization Act of 1997”, shall form part of this Act.

SEC. 25. Implementing Rules and Regulations. —- Within
sixty (60) days from the approval of this Act, the Board shall, in
consultation with the CHED, issue rules and regulations to implement
its provisions.

SEC. 26. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any part or
provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the
remaining parts or provisions not affected are in full force and effect.

SEC. 27. Repealing Clause. ~ All other laws, presidential
decrees, executive orders, and rules and regulations contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are amended, repealed, or
modified accordingly.

SEC. 28. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its complete publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

FRANCIS “CHIZ” G. ESCUDERO FE) [AND MAR’ . ROMVALDEZ
President of the Senate Speaker of the House
j of Representatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on November 22, 2023,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on June 3, 2025, and which
amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives

on June 9, 2025.
ka S. VELASCO

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved:

cect ato tw om SEP_0 7 2008
without the signature of the Presi
dent, in accordance with Article VI,
Section 27 (1) of the Constitution

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippi