H. No. 9601

Republic of the Philippines
Gangress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Nineteenth Congress

Third Regular Session
a

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[REPUBLIC AcT No, $2289]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A HIGH SCHOOL FOR SPORTS IN THE
MUNICIPALITY OF BAGAC, PROVINCE OF BATAAN TO BE
KNOWN AS THE BATAAN HIGH SCHOOL FOR SPORTS,
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as the
“Bataan High School for Sports Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. —It is hereby declared the policy
of the State to promote the sustained development of young Filipinos
whose skills in the field of sports shall be encouraged and honed through
education and specialized training programs. To this end, the State
shall establish, maintain, and support a complete, adequate, and
integrated system of education and training to advance the athletic
talents and improve the skills among the youth and promote the growth
and development of young athletes nationwide.

SEC. 3. Establishment of the Bataan High School for Sports. —
There is hereby established a high school for sports in the Municipality
of Bagac, Province of Bataan to be known as the Bataan High School
for Sports, hereinafter referred to as the School.

The School shall be administered and supervised by the
Department of Education (DepEd), in close coordination with the
Philippine Sports Commission (PSC) and the National Academy of
Sports (NAS).

It shall be administered and operated in accordance with-the
policies, guidelines, and criteria to be issued by the NAS System Board
of Trustees, pursuant to Section 8(a) of Republic Act No. 11470
or “The National Academy of Sports” law.

Sec. 4. Mandate. — The School shall implement a general
secondary education, as prescribed by Republic Act No. 10533 or the
“Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013” to learners with considerable
potential in sports in the Province of Bataan. The curriculum shall
be contextualized in order to have significant emphasis on developing
the athletic skills of the learners through subjects pertaining to physical
education and sports.

Src. 5. Powers and Functions. —The School shall exercise the
following powers and functions:

(a) Formulate and implement policies, plans, and programs
that shall promote the development and harness the potential of
high school learners;

(b) Provide an integrated framework to optimize the potential
of its learners;

© Establish sports programs and facilities that shall be
accessible to learners;

(@) Promote strategic partnerships and alliances between and
among local and international sports organizations and educational
training institutions to enhance the competitiveness of learners
and personnel;

(e) Develop plans and programs that shall enhance the career
advancement opportunities of school personnel;

() Establish guidelines for public-private partnerships in the
implementation of sports programs of the School; and

(g) Perform such other functions as may be required to
implement the objectives of this Act.

SEC. 6. Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern. - The
organizational structure and staffing pattern of the School shall be
prescribed by the DepEd, subject to the approval of the Department of
Budget and Management.

SEc. 7. Sectoral and Industry Task Forces. —- The School may
create sectoral and industry task forces, technical working groups,
advisory bodies or committees for the furtherance of its objectives.

The members of the sectoral and industry task forces may come
from the agencies of the national government, government-owned and
-controlled corporations, local government units, the academe, civil
society organizations, sports organizations, and sports-related
industrial organizations. The manner of selection of such members
shall be provided under the implementing rules and regulations to be
formulated to implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 8. Appropriations, — The Secretary of Education shall

-immediately include in the Department’s program the

operationalization of the Bataan High School for Sports, the initial
funding of which shall be charged against the current year’s
appropriation of the Schools Division Office of the Province of Bataan.
Thereafter, the amount necessary for the continued operation of the
School shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 9. Implementing Rules and Regulations. —Within ninety (90)
days after the effectivity of this Act, the DepEd, in coordination with
the PSC, the NAS, and the local government of the Province of Bataan,
shall promulgate the rules and regulations implementing the provisions
of this Act. Such implementing rules and regulations shall provide for
the School’s organization, administration, operations, and
management, in accordance with Republic Act No. 9155 or the
“Governance of Basic Education Act of 2001”, Republic Act No. 10533,
Republic Act No. 11470, and other basic education-related laws.

SEC. 10. Separability Clause. —If any provision or part of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder thereof not
otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect.

Src. 11. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential decrees,
executive orders, letters of instruction, proclamations, or
administrative regulations that are inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 12. Effectivity.—This Act shall take effect after fifteen (15)
days following the completion of its publication in the Official Gazette
or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

FRANCIS “CHIZ” G, ESCUDERO FERDINAND MARTIN G. ROMUALDEZ
President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

~

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on December 12, 2023,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on June 9, 2025, and which
amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives
on June 10, 2025.

     
  
  
 

  

   

House of Representatives

RENATO N. BANTUG JR. REGINALD& VELASCO
precretary enate Secrefary General

Approved: aye 2 9 202

Offic
MALACANA

CERT