S. No. 2613
H. No. 9045

Republic of the Philippines
Gougress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila

Nincteouth Congress

Chird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[RepusuicActNo. 12304]

AN ACT PROVIDING FOR EQUITABLE ACCESS TO
SHARPAH COURTS, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9997, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS
THE “NATIONAL COMMISSION ON MUSLIM
FILIPINOS ACT OF 2009”

Be it enacied by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 8 of Republic Act No. 9997 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 8. Powers and Functions. — To
accomplish its mandate, the Commission shall have
the following powers and functions:

XXX

(p) Assist the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA)
in conducting census on the actual population of
Muslim Filipinos in the country;

X KX
(z) x & &

(aa) Facilitate the filing or submission of legal
documents for cases filed in the Shari’ah Courts:

(bb) Promulgate such rules and regulations and
exercise such powers and functions as may be
necessary to carry out the purposes and objectives
outlined in this Act; and

(cc) Perform such other functions as may be
necessary for its effective operations and continued
enhancement as a government entity.”

SEC. 2. Section 11 of the same Act is hereby amended
to read as follows:

“SEC. 11. Bureaus. — x x x

(g) Bureau of Legal Affairs. - The Legal Affairs
Bureau shall be responsible for providing Muslim
Filipinos with legal education and assistance in case
of litigation involving their persons or interests; act
as the legal counsel of the Commission: and
investigate cases involving its personnel and submit
appropriate recommendations pertaining thereto. The
Bureau shall also investigate valid complaints
brought before the Commission.

The Bureau shall also ensure equitable access
to Shari'ah Courts. It shall, upon request, facilitate
the filing or submission of pleadings and other court
submissions with the proper Shari'ah Court for
litigants who reside in a region where there is no
existing Shariah Court.

The Commission shall, in coordination with the
Supreme Court, establish a mechanism for the filing
or submission of legal documents within the
jurisdiction of the Shariah Circuit and District
Courts, including those provided under Title VI,
Chapter One of Presidential Decree No. 1083,

otherwise known as the ‘Code of Muslim Personal
Laws of the Philippines’. The mechanism shall be
facilitated and administered by the Commission
through the Bureau of Legal Affairs.

The number of personnel and legal officers
necessary for the effective implementation of this
subsection shall be determined by the Commission.”

by

SEC. 3. A new section designated as Section 11-A is

“SEC. 11-A. Digital Transformation for
Shariah Court Services. - The Commission and the
Department of Information and Communications
Technology (DICT) shall, in coordination with the
Supreme Court, create a digital platform that allows
paperless filing of pleadings and other court
submissions.

The Commission shall facilitate the paperless
filing of pleadings and other court submissions. The
Commission shall respect the right to privacy of the
parties concerned and shall not retain any copy of
the digital documents referred to herein.”

SEc. 4. A new section designated as Section 17-A i

“SEC. 17-A. Statistical Data on Muslim
Filipinos. — The Commission and the PSA shall
coordinate on the proper collection of statistical data
for Muslim Filipinos at the national, regional,
provincial, city, and municipal levels. The
Commission and the PSA shall prepare an annual
report which shall include the data on Muslim
births, marriages, and deaths for the year based on
the transmitted registered civil registry documents
from local civil registry offices, Shari’ah Circuit
Registrars, and the Philippine Foreign Service Posts
abroad.”

hereby inserted after Section 11 of the same Act to read as
follows:

w

hereby inserted after Section 17 of the same Act to read as
follows:

SEC. 5. A new section designated as Section 23-A is
hereby inserted after Section 23 of the same Act to read as
follows:

“SEC. 23-A. Reportorial Requirements. — The
Secretary shall submit an annual report on the
implementation of this Act to the President of the
Senate, the Speaker of the House of Representatives,
the Chairperson of the Senate Committee on Cultural
Communities and Muslim Affairs, and the
Chairperson of the House Committee on Muslim
Affairs.” iy

SEC. 6. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the approval of this Act, the
Commission, in coordination with the Department of Budget
and Management, the Supreme Court of the Philippines, and
the PSA, shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations
to implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 7. Repealing Clause. — All existing laws, executive
orders, presidential decrees, rules and regulations, or parts
thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby
repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

SEC. 8. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a

newspaper of general circulation.

G. R@MUALDEZ FRANCIS “CHIZ’ G. ESCUDERO
Spear of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

Approved,

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 2613 on June 9, 2025 and adopted by the
House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill

j No. 9045 on June 10, 2025.

REGIN. . VELASCO
Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

/
FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
Presidént of the Philippines

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

UY OT ini HT

PBBMO10106

 

 

NTINO-NAVA |