HL. No. 10730

Meteo Manila

Nineteenth Gougress

Chics Regular Session

day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

—__

[RepusuicAcrNo. 12180}

AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE MODERNIZATION OF
THE PHILIPPINE INSTITUTE OF VOLCANOLOGY AND
SEISMOLOGY (PHIVOLCS), AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as
the “PHIVOLCS Modernization Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is the policy of the
State to utilize scientific and technical knowledge and
information as effective instruments to ensure the safety,
well-being, and economic security of the people; safeguard the
environment; and promote national progress and sustainable

socio-economic development through various applications of
geosciences and allied sciences. The State adheres to existing
treaties and international agreements on geologic activities to
which the Philippines is a signatory, to ensure international
cooperation, peace, and security. The State recognizes the need
to strengthen the capability of government personnel tasked
to monitor volcanic and seismological activities, perform related
services, and provide adequate and timely information to the
public. Towards this end, the State shall undertake the
modernization of the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and
Seismology (PHIVOLCS) to improve its technological
operational capacity; strengthen its role as the principal
authority mandated to mitigate hazards of volcanic eruptions,
earthquakes, tsunamis, and other related geotectonic
phenomena through reliable and accurate detection, forecast,
and warning systems; and to attain its vision as a center of
excellence for geotectonic information services.

SEC. 3. Objectives. - A PHIVOLCS Modernization
Program shall be established to provide PHIVOLCS with
state-of-the-art equipment, highly trained personnel, and
more seismic stations that shall effectively increase the
capability to detect and locate earthquake, volcanic, and
tsunami events, particularly in communities at risk.

It shall be implemented in accordance with the following
objectives:

(a) Upgrade physical resources and operational standards
through the acquisition and development of state-of-the-art
instruments, equipment, facilities, and systems to enhance
capabilities in providing critical, timely, accurate, and reliable
volcanological and seismological data and localized warning and
information services for decision support in disaster
preparedness, climate change adaptation, water resources
security and management, agriculture, transportation, health,
tourism, and other sectors;

(b) Advance research and development capabilities by
adopting a systematic approach and integrating all developed
methodologies focused on the improvement of vital operations
and specialized functions and services;

(c) Expand volcanological and seismological monitoring
stations in strategic sites in the country to broaden the base
for the delivery of services in the countryside;

(d) Strengthen a state-of-the-art data center consistent
with international standards, in order to centralize the
provision of volcanic, earthquake, tsunami, and other related
information to the public and stakeholders involved in Disaster
Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM);

(e) Facilitate the appreciation and enhance the delivery
of information, products, and services, including education and
advocacy on geoscience and geotectonic phenomena, their
dangers and impacts, and the risks and vulnerabilities of
communities and the different sectors of society to decision
makers, national and local DRRM planning, media, and the
general public towards sustainable socio-economic development;

(f) Strengthen linkages and cooperation at the national
level among the various providers and users of geological,
seismological, and other services;

(g) Provide opportunities for continuous learning and
improvement of the knowledge, skills, and capacities of
PHIVOLCS personnel; and

(h) Provide a more competitive base pay and benefits for
the PHIVOLCS personnel to promote professionalism and
commitment to the service.

SEC. 4. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(a) Disaster Risk refers to the potential loss of life, injury,
or destruction or damage of assets, which could occur in a
system, society, or a community in a specific period of time,
determined probabilistically as a function of hazard, exposure,
vulnerability, and capacity;

(b) Hazard refers to a process, phenomenon, or human
activity that may cause loss of life, injury, or other health
impacts, property damage, social and economic disruption, or
environmental degradation;

(c) Risk transfer refers to the process of formally or
informally shifting the financial consequences of particular
risks from one (1) party to another whereby a household,
community, enterprise, or state authority will obtain resources
from the other party after a disaster occurs, in exchange for
ongoing or compensatory social or financial benefits provided
to that other party;

(d) Seismology refers to the scientific study of the sudden,
violent movements of the earth connected with earthquakes;

(e) Tsunami refers to a series of large waves of extremely
long wavelength and period usually generated by a violent,
impulsive undersea disturbance or activity near the coast or
in the ocean;

(f) Volcanology refers to the multidisciplinary study of
volcanoes, volcanic processes, eruptions, hazards, impacts, and
other related aspects including the monitoring, modeling,
assessment, and communication of the same;

(g) Vulnerability refers to the conditions determined by
physical, social, economic, and environmental factors or
processes which increase the susceptibility of an individual, a
community, asset, or system to the impacts of hazards;

(h) Whole-of-Government Approach refers to an approach
that instills and fosters collaboration among all the government
instrumentalities at both the national and local levels toward
shared sustainable development goals and outcomes; and

(i) Whole-of-Society Approach refers to an approach that
encourages the meaningful and active participation and
synergy of the different stakeholders of society toward climate
change adaptation and DRRM at the national and local levels.

SEC. 5. Mandate. - The PHIVOLCS is mandated to:
(a) Predict volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, tsunamis, and

related geotectonic phenomena through reliable and accurate
detection, forecast, and warning systems;

(b) Determine how volcanic eruptions, earthquakes,
tsunamis, and related geotectonic phenomena occur, the possible
hazards thereof, and the areas at risk; and

(c) Mitigate the impact of volcanic eruptions, earthquakes,
tsunamis, and related geotectonic phenomena by providing
appropriate volcano, earthquake, and tsunami information,
education, products, and services for disaster preparedness.

SEC. 6. Organizational Structure. — The PHIVOLCS shall
be an attached agency of the Department of Science and
Technology (DOST) for purposes of policy and program
coordination to ensure alignment with national science and
technology policies and priorities.

The PHIVOLCS shall be headed by an Executive Director,
with the rank and compensation of a Department
Undersecretary. The Executive Director shall be assisted by
three (3) Deputy Executive Directors with the rank and
compensation equivalent to a Department Assistant Secretary
under the following services:

(a) Operations;

(b) Research and Development and Science and
Technology (S&T); and

(c) Administration, Finance, and Information and
Communication Technology.

The Executive Director and Deputy Executive Directors
shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines upon
recommendation of the Secretary of the DOST.

SEC. 7. Qualifications. - The Executive Director shall
have the following qualifications:

(a) Must be a natural-born citizen permanently residing
in the Philippines;

(b) Must have good moral character; and

(c) Must have an advanced degree in geosciences,
engineering, or other related fields, and at least five (5) years

of expertise and competence in volcanology, geophysics, or allied
sciences: Provided, That the Executive Director and the three
(3) Deputy Executive Directors shall be Career Executive
Service Officers (CESOs).

SEC. 8. Components of Modernization. - The PHIVOLCS
Modernization Program shall have the following components:

(a) Upgrading and Maintenance of Physical Resources
and Operational Standards. - It shall entail the acquisition
and/or upgrade of. state-of-the-art instruments, equipment,
facilities, systems, and operational techniques, with emphasis
on volcano, earthquake, and tsunami monitoring and disaster-
resilient warning and communication systems: Provided, That
prior to such acquisition and/or upgrade, an inventory of
existing government volcanological and seismological
instruments nationwide shall be undertaken;

(b) Volcano Monitoring Network and Information System
Development. — It shall involve sustained development of
volcano monitoring networks and observatories for all active
volcanoes in the Philippines that will ensure early warning
of volcanic activity;

(c) Earthquake Monitoring Network and Information
System Development. — It shall entail the establishment,
operation, and maintenance of an advanced system for
earthquake and tsunami monitoring throughout the Philippines
that operates with high performance standards, gathers
critical data, and effectively provides information products and
services independently and directly to meet the needs of
the stakeholders;

(d) Reliable Monitoring. — It shall ensure uninterrupted
monitoring of volcanoes, earthquakes, and other related
geotectonic phenomena throughout the Philippines, including
earthquakes that may precede a volcanic eruption or cause a
tsunami, with special focus on regions of moderate to high
hazard and risk;

(e) Enhancement of Earthquake Monitoring Network for
the Protection or Conservation of the Built Environment. — It
shall thoroughly measure strong earthquake shaking at ground

sites and in buildings and critical structures, with focus on
urban areas and near major active fault zones to gather critical
data and information for reducing earthquake impacts on
buildings and structures;

(f) Development of Forecasting Capability for Impending
Major Earthquakes or Tsunami Events. — It shall develop
machine-learned capability to determine earthquake parameters.
The resulting information will automatically be broadcast on
mobile phones, social media accounts, and other platforms
whenever a significant earthquake or tsunami occurs:

(g) Enhancement of Research and Development Facility. —
It shall involve the enhancement of research and development
facilities including the establishment of state-of-the-art
earthquake and volcano research laboratories, focusing on the
transdisciplinary approach on the generation of knowledge for
the provision of science-based recommendations;

(h) Enhancement of Public Information and Linkages with
Local Government Units (LGUs) and Other Stakeholders. —
It shall include continuous sharing of information with LGUs
and other stakeholders to help in disaster planning,
preparation, and disaster mitigation, among others;

(i) Enhancement of Data and Information Dissemination
Services. — It shall involve the development of communication
strategies to ensure the use of easily understand&ble local
language, non-technical terms, and familiar graphical
presentations, in combination with science-based information
that will ensure the delivery of accurate, updated, and timely
earthquake-, tsunami-, and volcano-related information to
create greater public awareness and draw appropriate response
for disaster risk reduction: Provided, That the PHIVOLCS
shall partner with the Komisyon sa Wikang Filipino (KWF),
various Sentro ng Wika at Kultura institutions, Philippine
Commission on Women (PCW), and other rights-based
organizations for the development or enhancement of socially
inclusive products. The PHIVOLCS shall collaborate with
public and private organizations to effectively disseminate data
and products;

Gj) Strengthening of the Human Resource Development
Program (HRDP). — The HRDP shall be aligned with
PHIVOLCS'’ strategic goals. The PHIVOLCS, in consultation
with the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), shall
create new plantilla positions. The HRDP shall likewise ensure
that personnel have access to equal opportunities for continuous
learning to be competent, motivated, and rewarded.

It shall prioritize the complementation and capacity
building of a wide range of experts in volcanology, seismology,
engineering, information technology, communication, social and
other related sciences to efficiently develop, operate, and
maintain advanced monitoring systems and distill and
communicate accurate volcanic, earthquake, and tsunami
information for public guidance. Support for continued
professional learning shall ensure skills development and
motivation that will translate to better S&T services;

(k) Provision of Risk Information. — This involves the
sharing of risk information with LGUs and other stakeholders
in disaster planning, preparation, mitigation, and risk transfer,
among others, to provide social and economic protection and
increase resilience in times of disaster;

(1) International Cooperation. — It shall enhance
interaction and cooperation with the international community
and ensure that the Philippines has official representation in
the geoscientific community;

(m) PHIVOLCS Hazards and Risk Information Platforms. —
The PHIVOLCS shall exert sustained efforts to collaborate and
align with LGUs, including on platforms for information sharing
and monitoring, so that the agency’s hazards and risk
information systems, such as GeoRiskPH and Rapid
Earthquake Damage Assessment System (REDAS) platforms,
can be updated regularly for disaster planning, preparation,
disaster mitigation, among others; and

(n) Establishment of Permanent PHIVOLCS Main Office
Building and Facilities. — This includes land acquisition for
the Data Receiving/Operation Centers for real-time volcano,
earthquake, and tsunami monitoring, among others. This shall
ensure the stability and protection of government investments
in scientific, technical equipment, and research laboratories.

SEC. 9. Whole-of-Government and -Society Approach. —
This Act shall be implemented using a whole-of-government
and -society approach to ensure proper and effective
coordination of various aspects in disaster risk mitigation and
response across all areas of government policy spanning local
governance, education, communication, S&T, among others.
The PHIVOLCS shall engage with the private sector, civil
society, academic community, and other stakeholders to pursue
areas of collaboration consistent with Section 5 of this Act.
The PHIVOLCS Modernization Program shall be aligned with
national policies and priorities. Accordingly, the PHIVOLCS
shall: .

(a) Incorporate its latest geohazard maps and scientific
studies in the appropriate seismic provisions in the National
Structural Code of the Philippines and its future revisions;

(b) Include the teaching of volcano, earthquake, tsunami,
and other hazards related to geotectonic phenomena as part
of the regular school curriculum, in consultation with the
Department of Education (DepEd) and other concerned agencies;

(c) Support the development and promotion of volcanology,
seismology, and other related courses in state universities and
colleges (SUCs) and higher education institutions (HEIs) in
communities at risk to active volcanoes, earthquakes, and
tsunamis, in coordination with the Commission on Higher
Education (CHED); *

(d) Collaborate with academic institutions and research
organizations by providing technical assistance, sharing data
and resources, and supporting studies that promote disaster
risk reduction and resilience; and

(e) Closely coordinate with Telecommunications Service
Providers (TSPs) in the allocation of ports, Virtual Private
Networks (VPNs), and other related facilities that will help
ensure the unimpeded transmission of critical real-time data
to and from PHIVOLCS stations and equipment. The TSPs
shall assign a PHIVOLCS counterpart that will ensure the
expeditious resolution of concerns crucial to the effective
implementation of this Act.

SEC. 10. Collaboration or Linkages with LGUs. — The
PHIVOLCS shall develop and strengthen collaboration with
LGUs to cover the following areas:

(a) Disaster Risk Mitigation. — In the implementation of
the National Building Code of the Philippines and its
implementing rules and regulations, the PHIVOLCS shall
closely collaborate with LGUs to ensure that its geohazard
maps and other research outputs are incorporated in the
disaster risk mitigation plans such as the Comprehensive Land
Use Plan;

(b) Public Intermediary. — The local government, national
and local news media, and the emergency management
community shall act as intermediaries between the PHIVOLCS
and the general public, institutional decision makers, and
emergency responders in crafting plans attuned to the local
needs of its constituents, to increase public resilience to
earthquakes, tsunamis, and volcanic eruptions; reduce or
eliminate long-term risk to human life and property; and
shorten recovery periods based on risk assessments;

(c) Information Dissemination. — The PHIVOLCS shall
work closely with the national and local disaster agencies to craft
appropriate information messages, regularly test and evaluate
their dissemination communication channels, and help identify
gaps and dissemination problems, to ensure that accurate
information on volcanic unrest, earthquake, tsunami, and related
hazard reach the intended users in a timely manner;

(d) Awareness and Promotion. — The PHIVOLCS shall
encourage the LGUs and other stakeholders to promote their
own interfaces with the enhanced PHIVOLCS services in local
and international recognition programs, to help expand the
coverage and benefits to the public. In collaboration with the
PHIVOLCS, a regular public education and awareness
campaign on the hazards of volcanic eruptions, earthquakes,
tsunamis, and disaster risk reduction procedures shall be
designed and implemented by the LGUs concerned, considering
the special needs of different communities, such as the
marginalized, indigenous peoples, and persons with disabilities.

It

Information on volcanic, seismic, tsunami risks, and measures
taken in case a threat of a hazard is present in the area,
shall be simplified and made available in a commonly
understood local language or dialect;

(e) Data Inputs and Exchange. — The PHIVOLCS shall
enlist the contribution of LGUs in reviewing local research and
updating information used in DRRM to ensure that the
exposure database of PHIVOLCS is updated and the LGU is
kept abreast with the latest information to ensure readiness
so that appropriate guidelines are consistently crafted and local
support infrastructure to the enhanced PHIVOLCS systems
are funded; and

(f) Other Assistance. — The PHIVOLCS shall seek the
assistance of the LGUs in the identification and acquisition
of lands under their jurisdiction where new PHIVOLCS offices
and/or stations for equipment shall be established.

SEC. 11. Components of the HRDP. - The HRDP
component shall include:

(a) Increase in Plantilla Positions. - The PHIVOLCS,
subject to the review and approval of the DBM, and in
accordance with existing civil service laws, rules, and
regulations, shall determine the necessary human resource
requirements for the PHIVOLCS Modernization Program;

(b) New Salary Scale for PHIVOLCS Personnel. — The
DBM shall develop a new salary scale for the PHIVOLCS
personnel, in consonance with Republic Act No. 8439, otherwise
known as the “Magna Carta for Scientists, Engineers,
Researchers and other S & T Personnel in the Government”,
as amended, with a corresponding increase in base pay,
allowances, and other benefits;

(c) PHIVOLCS Personnel Retention Incentive. — An
additional incentive to be known as the “Personnel Retention
Incentive” shall be provided to qualified technical PHIVOLCS
personnel, as determined by the PHIVOLCS in consultation with
the DBM, in an amount not exceeding twenty percent (20%) of
the monthly basic salary, subject to the implementing rules and
regulations (IRR) which shall be hereafter formulated;

(d) Development of Regional and International Cooperation
Program. — This shall entail the development of appropriate
collaborative arrangements with relevant regional and
international bodies and government institutions to complement
the national effort for modernization; and

(e) Scholarship Program. — Not later than three (3) years
from the enactment hereof, scholarships shall be provided for
undergraduate and graduate studies in volcano- and
seismology-related fields, as well as for specialized training
programs, in coordination with the DOST, CHED, and HEIs.
Cooperation on human resources upgrading and capability
enhancement with regional and international organizations
shall also be undertaken.

SEC. 12. Disaster Preparedness, Public Information and
Dissemination Services. - The modernization of the PHIVOLCS
shall enhance public information, education, and advocacy
on earthquake, tsunami, and volcanic hazards and risks.
To facilitate the appropriate appreciation and delivery of
science-based information to target stakeholders for proper
response before, during, and after the occurrence of these
hazards, there shall be a:

(a) Data Receiving Center (DRC). — A fully equipped
state-of-the-art DRC shall serve as PHIVOLCS’ centralized
reception, processing, visualization, and dissemination hub
for real-time earthquake, tsunami, and volcano monitoring
and data;

(b) Modern Learning Hub. — The PHIVOLCS shall
establish a Modern Learning Hub consisting of the following:

(1) Library. — A state-of-the-art library that utilizes both
traditional and modern research and learning facilities. The
library shall continue to be updated with the most recent
scientific journals relevant to the mandate of the PHIVOLCS;

(2) Exhibit Area. — An exhibit area that can accommodate
large groups and is equipped with the latest audio-visual
equipment and simulation facility;

(3) Training Center. — A fully equipped and well-staffed
training center that shall serve as a platform for planning,
implementing, monitoring, and evaluating capacity
development programs for various stakeholders regarding
mitigation and preparedness for volcanic eruptions,
earthquakes, and tsunami-related hazards;

(c) Media Room. — A fully equipped media room that shall
serve as a venue for press conferences and interviews; and

(d) Other facilities that aim to improve and enhance the
dissemination of public information, education, and advocacy
on hazards and risks.

SEC. 13. Formulation and Submission of the PHIVOLCS
Modernization Program. — The Executive Director of the
PHIVOLCS, in coordination with the Secretary of the DBM and
the Director-General of the National Economic and Development
Authority (NEDA), shall formulate: the PHIVOLCS Modernization
Program and oversee its implementation based on the policy
objectives provided in this Act.

The PHIVOLCS Modernization Program shall, among
others, indicate the:

(a) PHIVOLCS’ requirements in terms of personnel,
equipment, and facilities during the various stages
of modernization; *

(b) Modernization projects, which shall indicate the
equipment and technology acquisitions, including major
construction or upgrade of facilities and the particular objective
and components for such intended acquisition, construction, and
upgrading; and

(c) Priorities, schedules, and estimated cost of each
modernization project.

Within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act,
the PHIVOLCS Modernization Program shall be submitted to
the President for approval.

SEC. 14. Period of Implementation. — The PHIVOLCS
Modernization Program shall be implemented for a period of
five (5) years: Provided, That payments for multi-year contract
obligations incurred under this Act may extend beyond this
period: Provided, further, That PHIVOLCS shall continue to
modernize and update its operational capabilities to keep pace
with best international practices.

SEC. 15. PHIVOLCS Modernization Fund. - There is
hereby created the PHIVOLCS Modernization Fund to be used
exclusively for the PHIVOLCS Modernization Program, which
shall be sourced from the following:

(a) An amount of Seven billion pesos (P7,000,000,000.00)
appropriated by Congress under the General Appropriations
Act (GAA) which shall be treated as a distinct and separate
budget item from the regular appropriation for the DOST. For
five (5) years following the effectivity of this Act, an amount
of One billion two hundred fifty million pesos
(P1,250,000,000.00) per year for the first four (4) years and
Two billion pesos (P2,000,000,000.00) for the fifth (5") year
shall be appropriated for the PHIVOLCS Modernization Fund.
The entire amount of Seven billion pesos (P7,000,000,000.00),
including any interest income thereon, shall be used
exclusively for capital outlay; and

(b) The Secretary of the DOST, with the approval of the
NEDA and subsequently, the Department of Finance (DOF),
is hereby granted the authority to enter into loan agreements
with foreign financial institutions, and to receive grants,
bequests, and donations, whether from local or foreign sources.

The PHIVOLCS Modernization Fund shall be
administered by the Executive Director of the PHIVOLCS in
accordance with existing government budgeting, accounting,
and auditing rules and regulations.

SEC. 16. Official Site. - The PHIVOLCS shall acquire
available land within the greater Metropolitan Manila as a first
choice for establishing its new headquarters under this Act.
Alternatively, an area under the administration of the Bases
Conversion Development Authority (BCDA) within the Clark
Special Economic Zone in Tarlac may be leased exclusively for

Is

the PHIVOLCS, with an option to purchase, based on terms
and conditions agreed upon by the BCDA and the PHIVOLCS,

SEC. 17. Tax Exemptions. — Donations, grants, gifts,
endowments, legacies, and contributions used actually, directly,
and exclusively by the PHIVOLCS shall be exempt from
donor’s tax and considered as allowable deduction from gross
income for purposes of computing the taxable income of the
donor, in accordance with Section 34(H)(2)(a) of the National
Internal Revenue Code.of 1997, as amended: Provided, That
such other transfers of ownership and/or possession of real or
personal properties of all kinds shall be exempt from all taxes.

SEC. 18. Simplification of Documentation Requirements. —

(a) Consignment of equipment sent by international
collaborative research partners shall be cleared or released
based on a simplified equipment declaration, which shall
contain the minimum information as may be required by the
Bureau of Customs (BOC), to identify the equipment and
object, accompanied by a Declaration of Undertaking to
complete the information or submit the necessary supporting
documents within a specified period;

(b) The requirements for the declaration, release, and
clearance for all import of equipment by or on behalf of
international collaborative research partners and any
supporting document relating thereto shall be simplified and
lodged without fee;

(c) Economic prohibitions and restrictions on designated
categories of special goods and equipment, as identified by the
PHIVOLCS, may be waived;

(d) Clearance for imported equipment shall be granted
without regard to the country of origin or the country from
which the goods have arrived, subject to monitoring for public
health and security;

(e) Urgent and necessary monitoring equipment required
during an ongoing volcanic eruption shall be immediately
released; and

(f) Scientific and technical equipment rendered
unrecoverable due to extreme and damaging volcanic eruptions,
earthquakes, tsunamis, and weather conditions shall not be
the accountability of the PHIVOLCS personnel handling such
equipment, unless there is fault or negligence on the part of
the relevant personnel. The Commission on Audit (COA) shall
. formulate rules and regulations for waiving accountabilities in
the above specific cases.

SEC. 19. Annual Report. — The Executive Director of the
PHIVOLCS shall prepare an annual report on the
implementation status of the PHIVOLCS Modernization
Program which shall be submitted through the DOST
Secretary, to the President of the Philippines, and to the
Chairpersons of the Committees on Science and Technology of
the Senate and the House of Representatives not later than
June 30 of the succeeding year.

SEC. 20. Appropriations. - The amount necessary to
carry out the initial implementation of this Act shall be
charged against the current year’s appropriations of the
DOST-PHIVOLCS. Thereafter, such amount needed for the
continued implementation of the PHIVOLCS Modernization
Program shall be included in the annual GAA.

SEC. 21. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the
PHIVOLCS, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, shall
formulate the rules and regulations to effectively implement
the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 22. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part
of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the remainder hereof
not otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 23. Repealing Clause. - All laws, presidential
decrees, executive orders, letters of instruction, proclamations,
or administrative regulations that are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified
accordingly.

I?

SEC. 24. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen. (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

V fp |- —K
INAND MARTIN [UALDEZ — FRANCIS “CHIZ’ G. ESCUDERO
Speaker of the House President of the Senate

of Representatives

This Act, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill
No. 2825 and House Bill No. 10730, was passed by the
Senate of the Philippines and the House of Representatives
on February 4, 2025.

REGINALBS. VELASCO
House of Representatives

{
FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
Presideyt of the Philippines

i oe ow
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPI!

U1 AN TT

PBEM008518