H. No. 10405

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metres Munils

Nineteenth Congress
Third Regular Session
—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 12299]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A STATE COLLEGE IN THE LONE
DISTRICT OF THE PROVINCE OF DINAGAT ISLANDS
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Establishment. — There is hereby established a
state college in the Province of Dinagat Islands, which shall be known
as the “Dinagat Islands State College (DISC)”.

Sec, 2. General Mandate, — The DISC shall primarily provide
advanced instruction and professional training in fisheries, agriculture,
environmental science, mining engineering, marine engineering,
hospitality management, food technology, education, engineering,
science and technology, arts and humanities, liberal arts, and other
fields of study. It shall promote research and extension services
and provide progressive leadership in its areas of specialization.

SEc. 3. Curricular Offerings. - The DISC shall offer
undergraduate and graduate courses in the fields of fisheries,
agriculture, environmental science, mining engineering, marine

engineering, hospitality management, food technology, education,
engineering, science and technology, arts and humanities, liberal arts,
and other degree courses, as the Board of Trustees may deem necessary
to carry out its objectives, and those which respond to the human
resource development needs of the Province of Dinagat Islands and
the Caraga Administrative Region: Provided, That the DISC shall
comply with the policies, standards, and guidelines of the Commission
on Higher Education (CHED) for the offering of courses and the
introduction of new or revised programs.

Sc. 4. Administration. — The DISC shall have the general
powers of a corporation set forth in Republic Act (RA) No. 11232,
otherwise known as the “Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines”.
The administration of the DISC and the exercise of its corporate powers
shall be vested exclusively in the Board of Trustees and the President
of the DISC.

Src. 5. The Board of Trusiees. — The governing body of the
DISC shall be the Board of Trustees, hereinafter referred to as the
Board, which shall be chaired by the Chairperson of the CHED
and vice-chaired by the President of the DISC, and with the following
as members:

(a) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher, Technical and
Vocational Education of the Senate;

() Chairperson of the Committee on Higher and Technical
Education of the House of Representatives;

© Regional Director of the Department of Economy, Planning
and Development (DEPDey);

@) Regional Director of the Department of Science
and Technology;

() President of the federation of faculty associations of the DISC;
() President of the federation of student councils of the DISC;
(g) President of the federation of alumni associations of the DISC;

(h) Representative of the non-teaching or personnel association of
the DISC; and

@ Two (2) prominent citizens from the private sector who have
distinguished themselves in their professions or fields of specialization.

The Board shall appoint two (2) prominent citizens who shall
be selected from a list of at least five (5) qualified persons from the
Province of Dinagat Islands, as recommended by a search committee
constituted by the President of the DISC, in consultation with the
Chairperson of the CHED and other members of the Board, based on
the guidelines, qualifications, and standards for the position set by
the Board. They shall serve for a term of two (2) years from the date
of appointment.

The terms of office of the presidents of the federation of faculty
associations, federation of student councils, federation of alumni
associations, and the representative of the non-teaching personnel
association shall be coterminous with their terms of office, as provided
under their respective constitutions and bylaws.

SEc, 6. Powers and Duties of the Board. — The administration
of the DISC and the exercise of its corporate powers are vested in the
Board, which shall have the following specific powers and duties in
addition to its general powers of administration and the exercise of all
the powers granted to the Board of Directors of a Corporation under
Section 35 of RA No. 11232:

(a) Promulgate and implement policies in accordance with the
declared State policies on education, other pertinent provisions of the
Constitution on education, agriculture, science and techriology, and
the policies, standards, and thrusts of the CHED under RA No. 7722,
otherwise known as the “Higher Education Act of 1994”;

(b) Approve the curricula, instructional programs, and rules on
student discipline drawn by the Administrative and Academic Councils,
as herein provided;

(©) Appoint, upon the recommendation of the President of
the DISC, the vice presidents, chancellors, deans, directors, heads of
the campuses, faculty members, and other officials and employees of
the DISC;

(a) Prescribe the salaries of faculty members and administrative
officials and employees, subject to the provisions of RA No. 11466,
otherwise known as the “Salary Standardization Law of 2019”, and
other laws amendatory thereto, civil service rules and regulations
governing hours of service and other requirements and conditions,
other pertinent laws, and rules and regulations;

(e) Fix the tuition fees and other necessary school charges, such
as matriculation fees, graduation fees, and laboratory fees, as the Board
may deem proper to impose, after due consultation with the concerned
sectors. The fees and charges, including government subsidies and
other income generated by the DISC, shall constitute its funds to be
used exclusively in the pursuit of its mandate as a state college, and
shall be deposited in any authorized government depository bank. All
interests that shall accrue therefrom shall form part of the same funds
for the use of the DISC;

The fees and charges collected by the DISC, including government
subsidies and proceeds from other income sources, as well as interests
that would accrue therefrom, shall be retained by the DISC: Provided,
That in no case shall the said income be used for the payment of
allowances and other benefits not authorized by law: Provided, further,
That all fiduciary fees shall be disbursed for the specific purpose for
which they were collected;

Ifthe DISC, for reasons beyond its control, would not be able to
pursue any project for which funds have been appropriated and
allocated under its approved program of expenditures, the Board may
authorize the use of said fund for any reasonable purpose for which it
deems necessary and urgent for the attainment of the objectives of
the DISC: Provided, That funds collected from students for specific
purposes shall not be realigned or reprogrammed to other expenditures;

() Adopt and implement a socialized scheme of tuition and
other school fees for greater access of poor but deserving students in
accordance with RA No. 10931, otherwise known as the “Universal
Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act”;

(g) Establish professorial chairs in the DISC and provide
fellowships for qualified faculty members, and scholarships to
deserving students;

(h) Receive and appropriate sums as may be provided for by law
for the support of the DISC, and all other sums in the manner it may,
in its discretion, determine to carry out the purposes and functions of
the DISC;

@) Set the policies on admission and graduation of students;

() Award honorary degrees upon persons in recognition of their
outstanding contributions in the fields of education, public service,
arts, science and technology, sports and human kinetics, or any field

of specialization within the academic competency of the DISC, and
authorize the awarding of certificates of completion of non-degree and
non-traditional courses;

(k) Develop academic arrangements for institutional capability
building with appropriate institutions and agencies, whether public,
private, local or foreign, and appoint experts or specialists as
consultants, part-time, visiting or exchange professors, scholars or
researchers, as the case may be;

@ Adopt modern and innovative modes of transferring
knowledge to allow greater access to education such as the use of
information technology, online programs, dual training system, open
distance learning, and community laboratory;

(m) Absorb non-chartered tertiary education institutions within
the Province of Dinagat Islands and Caraga Administrative Region as
branches, extension campuses, and external centers, in coordination
with the CHED and in consultation with the Department of Budget
and Management (DBM), and offer therein programs or courses to
carry out the constitutional mandate of providing equal access to
educational opportunities;

(n) Authorize an external management audit of the DISC,
to be financed by the CHED, subject to the rules and regulations
of the Commission on Audit, and institute reforms, including
academic and structural changes, on the basis of the audit results
and recommendations;

(©) Develop consortia and other economic forms of linkages with
local government units (LGUs), as well as public, private, local or
foreign institutions and agencies for the furtherance of the purposes
and objectives of the DISC;

(p) Import books or publications, instruments, equipment and
apparatuses for economic, technical-vocational, scientific, medical,
philosophical, historical, legal or cultural purposes;

(q) Enter into joint ventures with business industry, after
consultation with the DEPDev, for the profitable growth and
management of economic assets, the proceeds of which shall be used
for the development and strengthening of the DISC;

(®) Receive, in trust, all legacies, gifts, and donations of real
and personal properties of all kinds and administer and dispose of the

same, when necessary, for the benefit of the DISC and subject to the
limitations, directions, and instructions of the donor, if any;

(8) Extend the term of the President of the DISC beyond the age
of retirement but not beyond the age of seventy (70), based on the
guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board: Provided,
That such extension shall be subject to the term limits provided
in Section 8 of this Act: Provided, further, That the President’s
performance has been rated by the Board as outstanding and a
unanimous recommendation for such extension has been decided upon
by the Search Committee;

(t) Delegate any of its powers and duties to the President and
other officials of the DISC, as it may deem appropriate, so as to expedite
the administration of the affairs of the DISC;

(u) Establish policy guidelines and procedures for participative
and transparent decision-making within the DISC;

(v) Where most advantageous to the DISC, outsource the
management of non-academic services such as health, food, building
or grounds or property maintenance, and such other similar activities;

(w) Authorize the construction or repair of its buildings,
machinery, equipment, and other facilities, and the purchase and
acquisition of real property, including the necessary supplies, materials,
and equipment; and

(x) Promulgate rules and regulations as may be necessary to
carry out the purposes and functions of the DISC.

Suc. 7. Meetings of the Board. — The Board shall regularly
convene once every three (3) months. The Chairperson of the Board
may, however, call a special meeting whenever necessary: Provided,
That members are notified in writing at least three (3) days prior to
the conduct of said meeting.

A quorum of the Board shall consist of a majority of all its
members holding office at the time of the meeting: Provided, That
the Chairperson of the Board or the President of the DISC is among
those present in the meeting.

In case the Chairperson of the CHED cannot attend a meeting
of the Board, a CHED Commissioner duly designated by the
Chairperson of the CHED as representative to the meeting, shall have

all the rights and responsibilities of a regular member: Provided,
That during the meeting, the President of the DISC, as Vice
Chairperson, shall be the presiding officer: Provided, further, That
this provision notwithstanding, the Chairperson of the CHED may
designate a CHED Commissioner as the regular Chairperson of the
Board, in which case, the said CHED Commissioner shall act as the
presiding officer.

In case the Chairpersons of the Senate Committee on Higher,
Technical and Vocational Education and the House Committee on
Higher and Technical Education cannot attend the Board meeting,
they may designate their respective representatives who shall have
the same rights and responsibilities as regular members of the Board.

The members of the Board shall serve without compensation
other than reimbursements for actual and necessary expenses incurred,
either for their attendance to the meetings of the Board or in connection
with other official business authorized by resolutions of the Board,
subject to existing laws and regulations.

SEc. 8. The College President. —The DISC shall be headed by
a President who shall be appointed by the Board, subject to its
guidelines, qualifications, and standards, and based on the
recommendation of a search committee duly constituted for the purpose
of selecting the President. The DISC President shall render full-time
service for a term of four (4) years, and may be reappointed to another
term.

Within six (6) months before the expiration of the term of office
of the incumbent President of the DISC, the Board shall constitute
the Search Committee for the Presidency, and shall ensure the
appointment or reappointment of a President on or before the expiration
of the term.

The powers and duties of the President of the DISC, in addition
to those specifically provided in this Act, shall be those usually
pertaining to the Office of the President of colleges and those delegated
by the Board.

The salary of the President of the DISC shall be in accordance
with RA No. 11466, and such other laws amendatory thereto which
may hereinafter be enacted, the joint circular for state universities
and colleges’ leveling instruments, and guidelines of the CHED and
the DBM.

In case of vacancy in the Office of the President by reason of
death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal for cause, or
incapacity of the President to perform the functions of the office, the
Board shall designate an Officer-in-Charge (OIC) of the DISC, pending
the appointment of a new President: Provided, That the OIC shall
serve only during the unexpired portion of the term.

The President of the DISC shall be assisted by the following
officials: Vice President for Academic Affairs; Vice President for
Administration, Planning, and Finance; and Vice President for
Research, Development, and Extension. They shall all be appointed
by the Board upon the recommendation of the President of the DISC.

Src. 9. The Secretary. — The Board shall appoint a Secretary
who shall serve as such for both the Board and the DISC and shall
keep all records and proceedings of the Board in addition to other duties
and responsibilities. The Secretary of the DISC shall serve upon each
member of the Board the appropriate notice of Board meetings.

SEC. 10. The Treasurer. —The Treasurer of the Philippines shall
be the ex officio Treasurer of the DISC.

SEC. 11. The Administrative Council. ~ There shall be an
Administrative Council consisting of the President of the DISC, as
Chairperson, and the vice-president, deans, director, and other officials
of equal rank, as members, whose duty is to review and recommend to
the Board such policies governing the administration, management,
and development planning of the DISC.

SEc. 12. The Academic Council. —There shall be an Academic
Council consisting of the President of the DISC, as Chairperson, and
all academic staff with the rank of at least an assistant professor, as
members, which shall formulate academic policies.

The Academic Council shall review and recommend the
curricular offerings and rules on student discipline, fix the
requirements for the admission of students, as well as for their
graduation and conferment of degrees, exercise disciplinary power over
the students and formulate rules and regulations on student discipline,
subject to the review and approval of the Board through the President
of the DISC.

SEC. 13. Academic Freedom and Institutional Autonomy. ~The
DISC shall enjoy academic freedom and institutional autonomy
pursuant to Paragraph 2, Section 5 of Article XTV of the Constitution.

SEc. 14. The Faculty. — No political belief, sex, gender
preference, cultural or community affiliation, ethnic origin, or religious
opinion or affiliation shall be a matter of inquiry in the appointment
of faculty members of the DISC: Provided, That the appointment shall
be subject to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the
Board: Provided, further, That a member of the faculty shall not
criticize, vouch for, recruit members in behalf of, or preach about any
particular religious denomination.

SEC. 15. Scholarship Programs and Admission. — The DISC
shall provide scholarship programs and other affirmative action
programs to assist poor but deserving students who qualify for
admission to the DISC. No student shall be denied admission to
the College by reason of sex, gender, religion, political, cultural
or community affiliation, ethnic origin, or any other form
of discrimination.

SEC. 16. Assets, Liabilities, and Personnel. ~ All assets, both
real and personal, personnel, and records of the DISC, as well as its
liabilities or obligations, shall be titled under or named after the DISC.

All parcels of land belonging to the government that shall be
occupied by the DISC shall be the property of the DISC and shall be
titled under its name: Provided, That should the DISC cease to exist

. or be abolished or should such aforementioned parcels of land be no

longer needed by the DISC, the same shall revert to the LGUs concerned
or to the Republic of the Philippines, as the case may be.

SEC. 17. Duty and Tax Exemptions. — The importation of books
or publications, instruments, equipment, and apparatuses which are
for economic, technical-vocational, scientific, medical, philosophical,
historical, legal, or cultural purposes made by the DISC, upon
certification by the CHED, shall be exempt from customs duties in
accordance with the provisions of RA No. 10863, otherwise known as
the “Customs Modernization and Tariff Act (CMTA)”.

All grants, bequests, endowments, donations, and contributions
made to and used actually, directly, and exclusively for educational
purposes by the DISC, shall be exempt from donor's tax and the same
shall be considered as allowable deductions from gross income for
purposes of computing the taxable income of the donor in accordance
with the provisions of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997,
as amended.


SEC. 18. Compliance with the CHED Requirements. —
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Act, the establishment of
the DISC shall become effective only upon the determination and
declaration by the CHED, based on the recommendation of a panel
of experts constituted for the purpose, that the DISC has complied
with the requirements for a college status based on the CHED
Memorandum Order No, 46, series of 2012 or the “Policy-Standard to
Enhance Quality Assurance (QA) in Philippine Higher Education
Through an Outcomes-Based and Typology-Based QA”: Provided,
That the panel may issue such recommendation when the DISC
has substantially complied with the requirements for the grant of
college status.

The following operational requirements for a college, as
established by the CHED, shall be complied with:

(a) Employment of full-time, permanent faculty members who
possess relevant degrees, as required by the CHED, and with experience
in the subject areas they handle;

(b) Offering of a comprehensive range of degree programs
characterized by a core curriculum that holistically develops thinking,
problem-solving, decision-making, communication, technical, and social
skills in line with the mission of the DISC;

(c) Establishment and maintenance of comprehensive learning
resources and support structures that are appropriate for developing
knowledge and skills in the specific natural science, social science,
humanities, and professional disciplines offered by the DISC, including
laboratories, books, and journals;

(@) Maintenance of linkage with the community that would
ensure the development of relevant academic and extension programs
and the application of their learning outcomes; and

(e) Conduct of outreach programs involving students in social
development-oriented experiences that allow them to contextualize their
knowledge within actual social and human experiences.

The CHED, through its regional office, shall regularly provide
technical assistance to the DISC and monitor its compliance with the
requirements of the CHED.

SEc. 19. Development Plan and Organizational Structure. —
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after the approval of this Act,
the DISC shall accomplish the following:

(a) Submit a five (5)-year development plan, including its
corresponding program budget to the CHED and the DBM;

(b) Submit the revised Land Use Development and
Infrastructure Plan in accordance with RA No. 11396, otherwise
known as the “SUCs Land Use Development and Infrastructure
Plan (LUDIP) Act”;

(c) Undergo a management audit in cooperation with the
CHED; and

@) Set up its organizational, administrative, and academic
structure, including the designation of key officials and other
administrative personnel of the DISC.

Suc. 20. Filing of Report. — On or before the fifteenth (15") day
of the second (2™) month after the opening of regular classes each
year, the Board shall file a detailed report on its compliance with the
requirements for a college status with the Office of the President of
the Philippines and both Houses of Congress, through the Chairperson
of the CHED.

SEC. 21. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to carry out
the implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

SEC. 22. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of RA No. 8292,
otherwise known as the “Higher Education Modernization Act of 1997”,
shall form part of this Act.

SEc. 23. Implementing Rules and Regulations, ~- Within
sixty (60) days from the approval of this Act, the Board shall, in
consultation with the CHED, issue rules and regulations to implement
its provisions.

SEc. 24. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any part or
provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the
remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force
and effect.

Sxc. 25. Repealing Clause. — All other laws, presidential
decrees, executive orders, and rules and regulations contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are amended, repealed, or
modified accordingly.

 

SEC, 26. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days
after its complete publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation.

Approved,

 
   

FRANCIS “CHIZ” G, ESCUDERO_ FE!
President of the Senate

 

of Representatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on July 30, 2024,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on June 9, 2025, and which
amendment was concurred in by the House of Representatives

on June 10, 2025.

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved: SEP 15 200
without the signature of the Presi.
dent, in accordance with Article VI,
Section 27 (1), of the Constitution.

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines

  
  

  

of the President
ING RECORDS OFFICE

  

CER’
ATTY. LOV

    
  

     

DIRECTOR IV

  
 

 

TED COPY

. TOLENTING-RAYA
HI