H. No, 7087

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Nineteenth; Congress

Servnd Regular Sessian
_—/

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand twenty-three.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 11971]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A COLLEGE OF MEDICINE IN THE
SOUTHERN LUZON STATE UNIVERSITY-MAIN
CAMPUS LOCATED IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF LUCBAN,
PROVINCE OF QUEZON, TO BE KNOWN AS THE
SOUTHERN LUZON STATE UNIVERSITY-COLLEGE OF
MEDICINE, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Establishment. —There is hereby established
a medical school in the Southern Luzon State University
(SLSU)-Main Campus located in the Municipality of Lucban,
Province of Quezon, to be known as the “Southern Luzon State
University-College of Medicine”.

Suc. 2. General Mandate. — The Southern Luzon State
University-College of Medicine, hereinafter referred to as
the “College”, shall primarily offer a Doctor of Medicine Program,
including an Integrated Liberal Arts and Medicine Program,

consisting of basic science and clinical courses, and using a
learner-centered, competency-based, and community-oriented
approach. The primary goal of the College shall be to develop
a corps of professional physicians to strengthen the healthcare
system of the country, as well as to respond to the human resource
development needs of the Province of Quezon and Region IV-A.

 

Th also mandated to undertake research
and extension services and provide progressive leadership in
these areas.

SEC. 8. Governance. ~The governance of the College shall
be vested in the Board of Regents of the SLSU, hereinafter referred
to as the Board, whose powers are defined under Republic Act
No. 9395, entitled “An Act Converting the Southern Luzon
Polytechnic College in the Municipality of Lucban, Province of
Quezon, its Units and Satellite Campuses in the Municipalities
of Sampaloo, Infanta, Poliilo, Tagkawayan, Alabat and Tiaong,
and the Lucena Dual-Tech Livelihood and Training Center
in the City of Lucena, All in the Province of Quezon, Into a
State University to be Known as the Southern Luzon State
University (SLSU) and Appropriating Funds Therefor”, and
other applicable laws and regulations, unless otherwise
provided or amended elsewhere in this Act.

SEC. 4. Administration. — The administration of the
College shall be vested in the Dean of the College insofar as
may be authorized by its Board.

SEC. 5. The College Dean. — The College shall be headed
by a Dean who shall be appointed by the Board, subject to the
guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board,
and upon the recommendation of the President, following a
process of consultation with the constituents of the College.
The Dean shall render full-time service, serve a term of three (3)
years, and may be reappointed to another term.

Within six (6) months from the effectivity of this Act,
the President of the SLSU shall constitute the search committee
for the deanship.

The powers and duties of the Dean of the College, in
addition to those specifically provided for in this Act, shall

include those usually pertaining to the Office of the Dean of
similar state universities and colleges and those delegated by
the President.

The salary of the Dean of the College shall be in accordance
with Republic Act No. 11466, otherwise known as the “Salary
Standardization Law of 2019”, and such other laws amendatory
thereto, which may hereinafter be enacted, and shall be
comparable to that being received by the Deans of similar
educational institutions.

  

In case of vacancy in the Office of the Dean by reason of
death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal for cause,
or incapacity of the Dean to perform the functions of the Office,
the Board shall, upon the recommendation of the President,
designate an Officer-in-Charge of the College, pending the
appointment of anew Dean: Provided, That the Officer-in-Charge
shall serve only during the unexpired portion of the term.

The Dean of the College shall be assisted by a College
Secretary, who shall be appointed by the Board.

SEC. 6. The Faculty. - The Board shall, upon the
recommendation of the President of the SLSU, appoint the
faculty members of the College: Provided, That no political
belief, sex, gender, cultural or community affiliation or ethnic
origin, nor religious opinion or affiliation shall be a matter
of inquiry in the appointment of faculty members of the
College: Provided, further, That said appointment shall be
subject to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the
Board: Provided, finally, That no member of the faculty shall
teach for or against any particular religious denomination.

SEC. 7. Scholarship Programs and Admission. — The
College shall provide scholarships and other affirmative
action programs to assist poor but deserving students who
qualify for admission to the College. Students who have availed
themselves of the scholarship program under Republic Act
No. 11509, otherwise known as the “Doktor Para sa Bayan Act”,
shall render a return service in accordance with the said law.
Students availing themselves of other nationally-funded
scholarship programs to complete the medicine degree

program under the College may be required to render a
return service depending on the contract to be signed between
the student and the College.

No student shall be denied admission to the College by
reason of sex, gender, religion, cultural or community
affiliation, physical disability, ethnic origin, or any other
forms of discrimination.

SEC. 8. Academic Freedom and Institutional Autonomy.
~The College shall enjoy academic freedom and institutional
autonomy, pursuant to Paragraph 2, Section 5 of Article XIV
of the Constitution.

Sze. 9. Loan or Transfer of Supplies, Apparatuses, or
Equipment, and Detail of Personnel to the College. — Heads of
national government agencies and instrumentalities may,
upon the request of the Board through the President of the
SLSU, loan or transfer supplies, apparatuses, or equipment,
and detail personnel to the College: Provided, That such loan,
transfer or detail shall not be detrimental to public service.

The personnel to be detailed to the College shall perform
such duties as may be deemed required by the Dean of the
College and the time spent for such duties shall be counted as

eof se)

part of the detailed personnels regular service.

SEC. 10. Assets, Liabilities, and Personnel. — All
appropriations, assets, both real and personal, personnel,
and records of the College, as well as its liabilities or obligations,
shall be titled or named after the SLSU.

All parcels of land belonging to the government to be
occupied by the College shall be the property of the SLSU,
and titled under its name: Provided, That should the SLSU
cease to exist or be abolished or should such aforementioned
parcels of land be no longer needed by the SLSU, the same
shall revert to the Municipality of Lucban or to the Republic of
the Philippines, as the case may be.

SEC. 11. Duty and Tax Exemptions. — The importation
by the College of medical books or publications, medical

equipment or instruments which are for medical, laboratory
or scientific purposes shall, upon certification by the Commission
on Higher Education (CHED), be exempt from customs
duties in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act
No. 10863, otherwise known as the “Customs Modernization and
Tariff Act (CMTA)”.

All grants, bequests, endowments, donations, and
contributions made to and used actually, directly, and exclusively
for educational purposes by the College, shall be exempt from
donor’s tax and the same shall be considered as allowable
deduction from gross income for purposes of computing the taxable
income of the donor in accordance with the provisions of the
National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended.

SEC. 12. Compliance with CHED Requirements. — The
SLSU, prior to the establishment of the College and the offering
of new and revised courses and programs related there io,
shall ensure compliance with the applicable policies, standards,
aud guidelines of the CHED.

SEC. 18. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of
Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher Education
Modernization Act of 1997”, shall form part of this Act.

SEC. 14, Appropriations, — The amount necessary to carry
out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 15. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days from the approval of this Act, the Board shall, in
consultation with the CHED, issue rules and regulations to
implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 16. Separability Clause. —If, for any reason, any part
or provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional,
the remaining parts or provisions not affected are in full force
and effect.

SEC. 17. Repealing Clause.—Alllaws, presidential decrees,
executive orders, and rules and regulations contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are amended, repealed,
or modified accordingly.

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PH.

 

 

SEC. 18. Effectivity.-This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation.

Approved,

   

MIGUEL F, ZUBIRI i Vag RO! _—

President of the Senate Speaker of the Hou:
of Representatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on February 22, 2028,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on September 25, 2028,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on September 27, 2023.

eae

RSccrelory General
House of Representatives

 

Approved: BEC 20 pr

Ch,

/

Ne

/
FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines

O

 
 
  
 
  
   

PBBM003549

 

 

hd

 

 

met mst tensa wares es tenennee neanenrer
Office of the President |
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

-
Y. DAA TIN. EM,
SCTING DIRECTOR IV

cis J