H. No. 6704

Repblir of the Philippines
@angress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila
Miueteenth Congress

Serond Regular Session
—

Begun and held in‘Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand twenty-three.

{ REPUBLIC ACT No. 41970]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A COLLEGE OF MEDICINE IN
THE BENGUET STATE UNIVERSITY LOCATED IN
THE MUNICIPALITY OF LA TRINIDAD, PROVINCE
OF BENGUET, TO BE KNOWN AS THE BENGUET
STATE UNIVERSITY-COLLEGE OF MEDICINE, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Lstablishment. — There is hereby established
a medical school in the Benguet State University (BSU) located
in the Municipality of La Trinidad, Province of Benguet, to be
known as the “Benguet State University-College of Medicine”.

SEC. 2. General Mandate. — The Benguet State
University-College of Medicine, hereinafter referred to as the
“College”, shall primarily offer a Doctor of Medicine Program,
including an Integrated Liberal Arts and Medicine Program,
consisting of basic science and clinical courses, and using a

learner-centered, competency-based, and community-oriented
approach. The primary goal of the College shall be to develop
a corps of professional physicians to help strengthen the
healthcare system of the country, as well as to respond to
the human resource development needs of the Province of
Benguet and the Cordillera Administrative Region.

The College is also mandated to undertake research
and extension services and provide progressive leadership in
these areas.

SEC. 8. Governance. — The governance of the College shall
be vested in the Board of Regents of the BSU, hereinafter
referred to as the Board, whose powers are defined under
Presidential Decree No. 2010, entitled “Converting the
Mountain State Agricultural College in the Municipality of
La Trinidad, Province of Benguet, into a University, to be
Known as the Benguet State University, and Appropriating
Funds Therefor’, and other applicable laws and regulations,
unless otherwise provided or amended elsewhere in this Act.

Src. 4. Administration. — The administration of the
College shall be vested in the Dean of the College insofar as
may be authorized by its Board.

Suc. 5. The College Dean. — The College shall be headed
by a Dean who shall be appointed by the Board, subject to
the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board,
and upon the recommendation of the President, following a
process of consultation with the constituents of the College.
The Dean shall render full-time service, serve a term of three (3)
years, and may be reappointed to another term.

Within six (6) months from the effectivity of this Act,
the President of the BSU shall constitute the search committee
for the deanship.

The powers and duties of the Dean of the College, in addition
to those specifically provided for in this Act, shall include those
usually pertaining to the Office of the Dean of similar state
universities and colleges and those delegated by the President.

 

 

 

 

The salary of the Dean of the College shall be in
accordance with Republic Act No. 11466, otherwise known as
the “Salary Standardization Law of 2019”, and such other
laws amendatory thereto, which may hereinafter be enacted,
and shall be comparable to that being received by the Deans
of similar educational institutions.

In case of vacancy in the Office of the Dean by reason of
death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal for cause,
or incapacity of the Dean’ to perform the functions of the
office, the Board shall, upon the recommendation of the
President, designate an Officer-in-Charge of the College.
pending the appointment of anew Dean: Provided, That the
Officer-in-Charge shall serve only during the unexpired portion
of the term.

The Dean of the College shall be assisted by a College
Secretary, who shall be appointed by the Board.

SEC. 6. The Faculty. - The Board shall, upon the
recommendation by the President of the BSU, appoint the
faculty members of the College: Provided, That no political
belief, sex, gender, cultural or community affiliation
or ethnic origin, nor religious opinion or affiliation shall
be a matter of inquiry in the appointment of faculty members
of the College: Provided, further, That said appointment
shall be subject to the guidelines, qualifications, and
standards set by the Board: Provided, finally, That no member
of the faculty shall teach for or against any particular
religious denomination.

SEC. 7. Scholarship Programs and Admission. — The
College shall provide scholarships and other affirmative
action programs tc assist poor but deserving students who
qualify for admission to the College. Students who have
availed themselves of the scholarship program under
Republic Act No. 11509, otherwise known as the “Doktor Para
sa Bayan Act”, shall render a return service in accordance
with the said law. Students availing themselves of other
nationally-funded scholarship programs to complete the medicine
degree program under the College may be required to render a
return service depending on the contract to be signed between
the student and the College.

No student shall be denied admission to the College by
reason of sex, gender, religion, cultural or community affiliation,
physical disability, ethnic origin, or any other forms of discrimination.

SEC. 8. Academic Freedom and Institutional Autonomy.
— The College shall enjoy academic freedom and institutional
autonomy, pursuant to Paragraph 2. Section 5 of Article XIV
ot the Constitution.

SEC. 9. Loan or Transfer of Supplies, Apparatuses, or
Equipment, and Detail of Personnel to the College. — Heads
of national government agencies and instrumentalities may,
upon the request of the Board through the President of the
BSU, loan or transfer supplies, apparatuses, or equipment, and
detail personnel to the College: Provided, That such loan, transfer

or detail shall not be detrimental to public service.

The personnel to be detailed to the College shall perform
such duties as may be deemed required by the Dean of the
College and the time spent for such duties shall be counted
as part of the detailed personnel’s regular service.

SEC. 10. Assets, Liabilities, and Personnel. — All
appropriations, assets, both real and personal, personnel, and
records of the College, as well as its liabilities or obligations,
shall be titled or named after the BSU.

All parcels of land belonging to the government to be
occupied by the College shall be the property of the BSU,
and titled under its name: Provided, That should the BSU cease
to exist or be abolished or should such aforementioned parcels
of land be no longer needed by the BSU, the same shall revert
to the Municipality of La Trinidad or to the Republic of the
Philippines, as the case may be.

SEC. 11. Duty and Tax Exemptions. — The importation by
the College of medical books or publications, medical equipment
or instruments which are for medical, laboratory or scientific
purposes shall, upon certification by the Commission on Higher
Education (CHED), be exempt from customs duties in accordance

with the provisions of Republic Act No. 10863, otherwise known
as the “Customs Modernization and Tariff Act (CMTA)”.

All grants, bequests, endowments, donations, and
contributions made to and used actually, directly, and exclusively
for educational purposes by the College, shall be exempt from
donor’s tax and the same shall be considered as all le
deduction from gross income for purposes of computing the taxable
income of the donor in accordance with the provisions of the

National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended.

SEC. 12. Complian

f

 
  

BSU, prior to the establis.

of new and revised courses and programs related thereto,
shall ensure compliance with the applicable policies,
standards, and guidelines of the CHED.

SEC. 13. Suppletory Application, — The provisions of
Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher
Education Modernization Act of 1997”, shall form part of
this Act.

SEC. 14. Appropriations. - The amount necessary to
carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the
annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 15. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days from the approval of this Act, the Board shall,
in consultation with the CHED, issue rules and regulations
to implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 16. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any
part or provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional,
the remaining parts or provisions not affected are in full force
and effect.

 

SEC. 17. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential
decrees, executive orders, and rules and regulations contrary to
or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are amended,
repealed, or modified accordingly.

SEC. 18. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,
: /
=a
ec rmeumn “kes Ore
[AN MIGUEL F, ZUBIRI RDIN. » ROMYJALDEZ
President of the Senate Speaker of the House

of Representatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on January 31, 2023,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on September 25, 2023,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on September 27, 2023.

a
, ) mapa ate

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

 

Approved: DEC 29 2023

Ag

FERDINAND ROM! SALDEZ, MARCOS JR.
President gf the Philippines

 

oO

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINE:

QA 0

PBBM003536

   
  
  

 

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

  

~~ +
rr CHINO EAT IDA
NG DIRECTOR IV