H, No, 4122
8. No, 2528

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Aletes Manila
Nineteenth Congress

Third Regular Session
a ,

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 12023]

AN ACT AMENDING SECTIONS 105, 108, 109, 110, 118, 114, 115,
128, 236, AND 288 AND ADDING NEW SECTIONS 108-A AND
108-B OF THE NATIONAL INTERNAL REVENUE CODE
OF 1997, AS AMENDED

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 105 of the National Internal Revenue Code
of 1997, as amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 105. Persons Liable. - Any person who, in
the course of trade or business, sells, barters, exchanges,
| leases goods or properties, renders services, including
i digital services, and any person who imports goods
shall be subject to the value-added tax imposed in Sections

106 to 108 of this Code.

“The value-added tax is an indirect tax and the
amount of tax may be shifted or passed on to the buyer,
transferee or lessee of the goods, properties or services.
This rule shall likewise apply to existing contracts of sale
or lease of goods, properties or services at the time of the
effectivity of Republic Act No, 7716.

“The phrase ‘in the course of trade or business’ means
the regular conduct or pursuit of a commercial or
an economic activity, including transactions incidental
thereto, by any person regardless of whether or not the
person engaged therein is a nonstock, nonprofit private
organization (irrespective of the disposition ofits net income
and whether or not it sells exclusively to members or their
guests), or government entity.

“The rule of regularity, to the contrary
notwithstanding, services as defined in this Code rendered.
in the Philippines by nonresident foreign persons shall be
considered as being rendered in the course of trade or
business: Provided, That digital services delivered by
nonresident digital service providers shall be considered
performed or rendered ‘in the Philippines if the digital
services are consumed in the Philippines.”

SEC. 2. Section 108 of the National Internal Revenue Code of
1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“Src, 108, Value-added Tax on the Sale of Services,
Including Digital Services, and the Use or Lease of
Properties. -

“(A) Rate and Base of Tax. —There shall be levied,
assessed and collected, a value-added tax equivalent to
twelve percent (12%) of the gross sales derived from the
sale or exchange of services, including digital services,
and the use or lease of properties.

“The phrase ‘sale or exchange of services’ means
the performance of all kinds of services in the Philippines
for others for a fee, remuneration, or consideration,

including those performed or rendered by construction and
service contractors; stock, real estate, commercial,
customs and immigration brokers; lessors of property,
whether personal or real; warehousing services: lessors
or distributors of cinematographic films; persons engaged
in milling, processing, manufacturing or repacking goods
for others; proprietors, operators or keepers of hotels,
motels, rest houses, pension houses, inns, resorts;
proprietors or operators of restaurants, refreshment
parlors, cafes and other eating places, including clubs and
caterers; dealers in securities; lending investors;
transportation contractors on their transport of goods or
cargoes, including persons who transport goods or cargoes
for hire and other domestic common carriers by land
relative to their transport of goods or cargoes; common
carriers by air and sea relative to their transport of
passengers, goods or cargoes from one place in the
Philippines to.another place in the Philippines; sales of
electricity by generation companies, transmission by any
entity, and distribution companies, including electric
cooperatives; services of franchise grantees of electric
utilities, telephone and telegraph, radio and television
broadcasting and all other franchise grantees except those
under Section 119 of this Code, and non-life insurance
companies (except their crop insurances), including surety,
fidelity, indemnity and bonding companies; digital service
providers; and similar services regardless of whether or
not the performance thereof calls for the exercise or use of
the physical or mental faculties. The phrase ‘sale or
exchange of services’ shall likewise include:

“Y)xxx
“(Q) xxx:
"6) xe ax
“(4) XXX}
“(Sx xx

6) x xxy

“(7 The supply of digital services; “(4) Online media and advertising;
“(8) The lease of motion picture films, films, tapes,

d dis nd “(5) Online platform; or
and discs; a:

“@) The lease or the use of or the right to use radio, (6) Digital goods.

isi tellite transmission, and cable television time. , .
Aclescbton) oe “(B) The term ‘digital service provider’ refers to

a resident or nonresident supplier of digital services
to a consumer who uses digital services subject to
value-added tax in the Philippines.

“Lease of properties shall be subject to the tax herein
imposed irrespective of the place where the contract of
lease or licensing agreement was executed if the property

i din the Philippines. . Ls .
da lense) or neediorthe BP “(C) The term ‘nonresident digital service provider’

“ > means a digital service provider that has no physical
: presence in the Philippines.”

Sec. 8. A new section designated as Section 108-A under
Chapter I, Title IV, of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as
amended, is hereby inserted to read as follows:

SEc. 4, A new section designated as Section 108-B under
Chapter I, Title IV, of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as
amended, is hereby inserted to read as follows:

“Suc. 108-A. Liability of Persons Providing Digital
Services. — The digital service provider, whether resident
or nonresident, shall be liable for assessing, collecting, and
remitting the value-added tax on the digital services
consumed in the Philippines, subject to the provision on
withholding of value-added tax on digital services under
Section 114(D).

“When used in this title:

“(a) The term ‘digital service’ shall refer to any service
that is supplied over the internet or other electronic network
with the use of information technology and where the supply
of the service is essentially automated. Digital services
shall include:

“(1) Online search engine;
“(2) Online marketplace or e-marketplace;

“(3) Cloud service;

“SEC. 108-B. Liability of a Nonresident Digital
Service Provider to Withhold and Remit Value-Added Tax.
~— A nonresident digital service provider required to be
registered for value-added tax (VAT) under Section 236(F)
of this Code shall be liable for the remittance of value-added
tax on the digital services that are consumed in the
Philippines if the consumers are non-VAT registered:
Provided, That if the consumers are VAT-registered, the
provision of Section 114(D) shall apply.

“If a VAT-registered nonresident digital service
provider is classified as an online marketplace or
e-marketplace, it shall also be liable to remit the
value-added tax on the transactions of nonresident sellers
that go through its platform: Provided, That it controls
key aspects of the supply and performs any of the following:

“(a) It sets, either directly or indirectly, any of the
terms and conditions under which the supply of goods is
made; or

“(b) It is involved in the ordering or delivery of goods,
whether directly or indirectly.”

SEC. 5. Section 109 of the National Internal Revenue Code of
1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC, 109. Exempt Transactions. —

“The following transactions shall be exempt from the
value-added tax:

“A) XXX

"By axkx

“(C) xxx

“(D) xxx

“(E) xxx

“PYXxx

“(G) xxx

“(H) Educational services, including online courses,
online seminars, and online trainings, rendered by
private educational institutions, duly accredited by the
Department of Education (DepEd), the Commission on
Higher Education (CHED), the Technical Education and
Skills Development Authority (TESDA), and those rendered
by government educational institutions; and sale of
online subscription-based services to DepEd, CHED,
TESDA, and educational institutions recognized by said
government agencies;

“Dxxx

“J)xxx

i :9)> pap.

“L)xxx
“M) xxx
“NM xxx
“(O)xxx
“P)xxx
“Q) xxx
“R) xxx
“@)xxx
“OE xxx
“U)xxx

“(V) Services of bank, non-bank financial
intermediaries performing quasi-banking functions, and
other non-bank financial intermediaries, including those
rendered through different digital platforms;

“(W) xxx
“(X) xxx
“Y) xxx
“QZ) EEX
“(AA) xxx
“(BB) xxx
{(CO) xx

SEC. 6. Section 110 of the National Internal Revenue Code of
1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 110, Tax Credits, -
“(A) Creditable Input Tax, —
“Q) xxx

“(2) The input tax on domestic purchase or importation
of goods or properties by a VAT-registered person shall be
creditable:

“(a) To the purchaser upon consummation of sale and
on importation of goods or properties; and

“(b) To the importer upon payment of the value-added
tax prior to the release of the goods from the custody of the
Bureau of Customs.

“Provided, That the input tax on goods purchased or
imported in a calendar month for use in trade or business
for which deduction for depreciation is allowed under this
Code shall be spread evenly over the month of acquisition
and the fifty-nine (59) succeeding months if the aggregate
acquisition cost for such goods, excluding the VAT
component thereof, exceeds One million pesos (P1,000,000):
Provided, however, That if the estimated useful life of the
capital good is less than five (5) years, as used for
depreciation purposes, then the input VAT shall be spread
over such a shorter period: Provided, further, That the
amortization of the input VAT shall only be allowed until
December 31, 2021 after which taxpayers with unutilized
input VAT on capital goods purchased or imported shall be
allowed to apply the same as scheduled until fully utilized:
Provided, finally, That in the case of purchase of services,
lease or use of properties, the input tax shall be creditable
to the purchaser, lessee or licensee upon payment of the
compensation, rental, royalty or fee.

“Notwithstanding the foregoing, nonresident digital
service providers shall not be allowed to claim creditable
input tax.

«,

XXX.

”

SEC. 7. Section 118 of the National Internal Revenue Code of
1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 118. Invoicing and Accounting Requirements
for VAT-Registered Persons. —

“(A) Invoicing Requirement. — A VAT-registered
person shall issue a VAT invoice for every sale, barter,
exchange, or lease of goods or properties, and for every sale,
barter, or exchange of services: Provided, That a digital
sales or commercial invoice shall be issued for every sale,
barter, or exchange of digital services made by a
VAT-registered nonresident digital service provider.

“(B) Information Contained in the VAT Invoice. —
xeX .

“Q) xxx
“() xxx
“(8) xxx
“(4) xxx

“(6) The digital sales or commercial invoice issued by
a VAT-registered nonresident digital service provider
shall indicate the following information in lieu of the
requirements under Section 113, Subsection (b),
paragraphs 1 to 4:

“(a) Date of the transaction;
“(b) Transaction reference number;
“© Identification of the consumer;

“(@ Brief description of the transaction; and


“(e) The total amount with the indication that such
amount includes the value-added tax:

“Provided, That if the sale of digital services includes
some services which are subject to VAT, and some that are
VAT zero-rated, or VAT-exempt, the invoice shall clearly
indicate the breakdown of the sale price by its taxable,
VAT-exempt, and VAT zero-rated components: Provided,
further, That the calculation of the value-added tax on each
portion of the sale shall be shown on the invoice.

“(C) Accounting Requirements. — Notwithstanding the
provisions of Section 233, all persons subject to the
value-added tax under Sections 106 and 108 shall, in
addition to the regular accounting records required,
maintain a subsidiary sales journal and subsidiary purchase
journal on which the daily sales and purchases are recorded.
The subsidiary journals shall contain such information as
may be required by the Secretary of Finance: Provided,
That this subsection shall not apply to VAT-registered
nonresident digital service providers.

“(D) xxx

“@) xxx.

SEC. 8. Section 114 of the National Internal Revenue Code of
1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 114. Return and Payment of Value-Added Tax.

“(A) In General. -xxx

“(B) Where to File the Return and Pay the Tax. -
xs

i

“(C) Withholding of Value-Added Tax. —
The Government or any of its political subdivisions,
instrumentalities or agencies, including government-owned
or -controlled corporations (GOCCs) shall, before making
payment on account of each purchase of goods and services
which are subject to the value-added tax imposed in Sections
106 and 108 of this Code, deduct and withhold a final
value-added tax at the rate of five percent (5%) of the
gross payment thereof: Provided, That beginning
January 1, 2021, the VAT withholding system under this
subsection shall shift from final to a creditable system:
Provided, further, That the payment for lease or use of
properties or property rights to nonresident owners and
payments for services to nonresident suppliers who are not
registered under Section 236 shall be subject to twelve
percent (12%) withholding tax at the time of payment:
Provided, finally, That payments for purchases of goods
and services arising from projects funded by Official
Development Assistance (ODA) as defined under Republic
Act No. 8182, otherwise known as the ‘Official Development
Assistance Act of 1996’ as amended, shall not be subject to
the final withholding tax system as imposed in this
subsection. For purposes of this section, the payor or person
in control of the payment shall be considered as the
withholding agent.

“(D) Reverse Charge Mechanism in Digital Services.
—AVAT-registered taxpayer shall be liable to withhold and
remit the value-added tax due on its purchase of digital
services consumed in the Philippines from nonresident
digital service providers to the Bureau of Internal Revenue,
within ten (10) days following the end of the month the
withholding was made.”

SEC. 9. Section 115 of the National Internal Revenue Code of
1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 115. Power of the Commissioner to Suspend
the Business Operations of a Taxpayer. —
ex

“a) xxx. —


(1)xxx
(2)xxx

. (8) xxx

“(b) Failure of any Person to Register as Required
under Section 286.

“The temporary closure of the establishment shall be
for the duration of not less than five (5) days and shall be
lifted only upon compliance with whatever requirements
prescribed by the Commissioner in the closure order.

“The power of the Commissioner to suspend shall
include the blocking of digital services performed or rendered
in the Philippines by a digital service provider, This shall
be implemented by the Department of Information and
Communications Technology (DICT), through the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC).”

SEC. 10. Section 128 of the National Internal Revenue Code of
, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 128. Returns and Payment of Percentage
Taxes, —

“(A) Returns of Gross Sales or Earnings and Payment
of Tax. —

“() Persons Liable to Pay Percentage Taxes. —Every
person subject to the percentage taxes imposed under this
Title shall file, either electronically or manually, a quarterly
return of the amount of the person’s gross sales or earnings
and pay, either electronically or manually, to any authorized
agent bank, Revenue District Office through Revenue
Collection Officer or authorized tax software provider, the
tax due thereon within twenty-five (25) days after the
end of each taxable quarter: Provided, That the Secretary
of Finance may, upon the recommendation of the
Commissioner, require the withholding of percentage taxes

imposed under this Title: Provided, further, That in the
case of a person whose VAT registration is cancelled and
who becomes liable to the tax imposed in Section 116 of this
Code, the tax shall accrue from the date of cancellation
and shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of
this section.

“(2) Person Retiring from Business. — Any person
retiring from a business subject to percentage tax shall
notify the nearest internal revenue officer, file, either
electronically or manually, the person’s return and pay,
either electronically oy manually, the tax due thereon within
twenty (20) days after closing the business.

“(8) Determination of Correct Sales. — When itis found
that a person has failed to issue invoices, or when no return
is filed, or when there is reason to believe that the books of
accounts or other records do not correctly reflect the
declarations made or to be made in areturn required to be
filed under the provisions of this Code, the Commissioner,
after taking into account the sales or other taxable base of
other persons engaged in similar businesses under similar
situations or circumstances, or after considering other
relevant information, may prescribe a minimum amount
of such gross sales and taxable base and such amount so
prescribed shall be prima facie correct for purposes of
determining the internal revenue tax liabilities of such
person.

“(B) Where to File. —xx x.”

SEC. 11. Section 236 of the National Internal Revenue Code of
1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 236, Registration Requirements. —
“A) XXX
“(B) xxx

“(C) xxx

#(D) xx x
“H) XxX

“(F) Persons Required to Register for Value-Added
Tax, —

“(1) Any person who, in the course of trade or business,
sells, barters, exchanges, or leases goods or properties,
including those digital in nature, any person who renders
services, including digital services, or engages in the sale
or exchange of services, shall be liable to register, either
electronically or manually, for value-added tax if:

“(a) The person’s gross sales for the past twelve (12)
months, other than those that are exempt under Section
109(A) to (CC), have exceeded the threshold as provided in
Section 109(CC); or

“(b) There are reasonable grounds to believe that the
gross sales for the next twelve (12) months, other than those
that are exempt under Section 109(A) to (CC), will exceed
the threshold as provided in Section 109(CC):

“Provided, That the BIR shall establish a simplified
automated registration system for nonresident digital service
providers, which shall be prescribed by the Secretary of
Finance, upon the recommendation of the Commissioner.

«, ”

XXX.

SEC. 12. Section 288 of the National Internal Revenue Code of
1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 288. Disposition of Incremental Revenues. —

«,

XXX

“(AD Incremental Revenues from the Value-added Tax
on Digital Service Providers. — Five percent (5%) of the
incremental revenue from the value-added tax on digital
service providers under Section 108 shall be allocated to
and used exclusively for the development of creative
industries, as defined under Republic Act No. 11904,
otherwise known as the “Philippine Creative Industries
Development Act,” for five (5) years from the effectivity of
this Act.

“Upon the lapse of the five(5)-year period, all such
incremental revenues shall accrue to the General Fund.”

SEC. 18. Mode of Correspondence. — Any communication, notice,
or summons to a nonresident digital service provider can be made via
electronic mail messaging.

SEC. 14, Transitory Clause. — Nonresident digital service
providers shall immediately be subject to value-added tax under this
Act after one hundred twenty (120) days from the effectivity of the
implementing rules and regulations.

SEC. 15. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
Department of Finance (DOF), upon the recommendation of the BIR,
and in coordination with the DICT and the NTC, and upon consultation
with the stakeholders, shall issue rules and regulations for the effective
implementation of this Act not later than ninety (90) days from the
effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 16. Separability Clause. — Should any provision of this Act
or any part thereof be declared invalid, the other provisions, so far as
they are separable from the invalid ones, shall remain in force and
effect,

Sic, 17. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders, and
issuances, or portions thereof, which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, are hereby repealed, amended, or modified
actordingly.


SEC. 18. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days
after its publication in the Official Gazette or ina newspaper of general
circulation,

Approved,

   

FRANCIS “CHIZ” G.ESCUDERO FERDINAND MARTING. RO}
President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

‘DEZ

This Act, which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 4122 and
Senate Bill No. 2528, was passed by the House of Representatives and
the Senate of the Philippines on July 30, 2024 and July 29, 2024,
respectively,

  

REGINALDS. VELASCO
Secretary General
House of Representatives

    

Approved: OCT 02 2026

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPP:

U1 A 0

PBBMO05766

Office of the President -
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE