H. No. 9642

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Nineteenth Congress

Chird Regular Session
ac i,

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four,

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 12298]

AN ACT CONVERTING THE AURORA STATE COLLEGE OF
TECHNOLOGY IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BALER,
PROVINCE OF AURORA INTO A STATE UNIVERSITY TO
BE KNOWN AS THE AURORA STATE UNIVERSITY OF
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as the
“Aurora State University of Science and Technology Charter”.

SEC. 2. Conversion. — The Aurora State College of Technology
(ASCOT) in the Municipality of Baler, Province of Aurora, including
its satellite campuses in the Municipalities of Maria Aurora, Casiguran,
and San Luis, all located in the Province of Aurora, is hereby converted
into a state university to be known as the Aurora State University of
Science and Technology (ASUST). Its main campus shall be in the
Municipality of Baler, Province of Aurora.

SEc. 3. General Mandate. — The ASUST shall primarily
provide advanced education, higher technological and professional
courses, and training programs in marine sciences, forestry,

environmental science, arts and sciences, information and
communications technology, education, engineering, health
profession education, architecture, social sciences, agri-business and
entrepreneurship, business and management, multi- and
interdisciplinary courses, law, and other fields of study. It shall
promote research, extension and income-generating services, and
production activities, and provide progressive leadership in its areas
of specialization,

SEc. 4. Curricular Offerings. - The ASUST shall offer
short-term technical vocational, undergraduate, and graduate courses
in the fields of marine education and other related programs, forestry
and environmental sciences, disaster risk management, data science
and analytics, meteorology, geology, oceanography, cybersecurity,
fisheries technology, agriculture, veterinary medicine, behavioral and
social sciences, medicine and other health sciences, law, culture and
arts, human services and other related courses, business-related
programs, agribusiness, nautical and maritime programs, industrial
technology, aviation-related programs, chemistry, chemical, structural,
geodetic and petroleum engineering, robotics, renewable and
sustainable energy, statistics and mathematics, research and
development communication, urban and environmental planning,
urban planning and landscape architecture, interior design, liberal
arts programs, education and teacher training, information and
communications technology, library and information science,
developmental management, leadership management programs,
human kinetics, and other degree courses as the Board of Regents
may deem necessary to carry out its objectives, and those which respond
to the human resource development needs of the Province of Aurora
and the Central Luzon Region: Provided, That the ASUST shall
comply with the policies, standards, and guidelines of the Commission
on Higher Education (CHED) for the offering of courses and the
introduction of new or revised programs.

The ASUST may operate a reasonably sized laboratory high
school under the supervision of the College of Education of the ASUST
to serve the in-campus requirements of its students.

SEc. 5. Administration. —The ASUST shall have the general
powers of a corporation set forth in Republic Act (RA) No. 11232,
otherwise known as the “Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines”.
The administration of the ASUST and the exercise of its corporate
powers shall be vested exclusively in the Board of Regents and the
President of the ASUST.

Src. 6. The Board of Regents. — The governing board of the
ASUST shall be the Board of Regents, hereinafter referred to as the
Board, which shall be chaired and vice-chaired by the Chairperson
ofthe CHED and the President of the ASUST, respectively, and with
the following as members:

(a) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher, Technical and
Vocational Education of the Senate;

(b) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher and Technical
Education of the House of Representatives;

(©) Regional Director of the Department of Economy, Planning,
and Development (DEPDev);

(a) Regional Director of the Department of Science and Technology;
) Regional Director of the Department of Agriculture;

() President of the federation of faculty associations of the ASUST;
(g) President of the federation of student councils of the ASUST;
(h) President of the federation of alumni associations of the ASUST;

@ Representative of the non-teaching personnel association of
the ASUST; and

G) Two (2) prominent citizens from the private sector who have
distinguished themselves in their professions or fields of specialization.

The Board shall appoint two (2) prominent citizens who shall be
selected from a list of at least five (5) qualified persons from the Province
of Aurora, as recommended by a search committee constituted by the
President of the ASUST, in consultation with the Chairperson of the
CHED and other members of the Board, based on the guidelines,
qualifications, and standards for the position set by the Board. They
shall serve for a term of two (2) years from the date of appointment.

The terms of office of the presidents of the federation of faculty
associations, federation of student councils, and federation of alumni
associations, and the representative of the non-teaching personnel shall
be coterminous with their terms of office, as provided under their
respective constitutions and bylaws.

In case of vacancy among appointive positions in the Board,
the vacancy shall be filled by the Board following guidelines set by it
and the appointee shall hold office only for the unexpired portion of
the term.

Src. 7. Powers and Duties of the Board.~ The administration
of the ASUST and the exercise of its corporate powers are vested in
the Board, which shall have the following specific powers and duties
in addition to its general powers of administration and the exercise of
all the powers granted to the Board of Directors of a Corporation under
Section 35 of RA No. 11232:

(a) Promulgate and implement policies in accordance with
the declared State policies on education, other pertinent provisions
of the Constitution on education, agriculture, science and technology,
and the policies, standards and thrusts of the CHED under
RA No. 7722, otherwise known as the “Higher Education Act of 1994”;

(b) Approve the curricula, instructional programs, and rules on
student discipline drawn by the Administrative and Academic Councils,
as herein provided;

(©) Appoint, upon the recommendation of the President of
the ASUST, the vice presidents, chancellors, deans, directors, heads
of the campuses, faculty members, and other officials of the ASUST;

(d) Prescribe the salaries of faculty members and administrative
officials and employees, subject to the provisions of RA No. 11466,
otherwise known as the “Salary Standardization Law of 2019”, civil
service rules and regulations governing hours of service and such
other requirements and conditions, and other pertinent laws, rules
and regulations;

(e) Fix the tuition fees and other necessary school charges, such
as matriculation fees, graduation fees, and laboratory fees, as the Board
may deem proper to impose, after due consultation with the concerned
sectors. The fees and charges, including government subsidies and
other income generated by the ASUST, shall constitute its funds to be
used exclusively in the pursuit of its mandate as a state university
and shall be deposited in any authorized government depository bank.
All interests that shall accrue therefrom shall form part of the same
funds for the use of the ASUST;

The fees and charges collected by the ASUST, including
government subsidies and proceeds from other income sources, as well
as interests that would accrue therefrom, shall be retained by the

University: Provided, That in no case shall the said income be used
for the payment of allowances and other benefits not authorized by
law: Provided, further, That all fiduciary fees shall be disbursed for
the specific purposes for which they were collected.

Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Board
may authorize, {gr such reasonable and legal purposes it deems
necessary and urgent for the attainment of the objectives of the ASUST,
the use of: (i) any unexpended balance whose fiduciary character has
been ipso facto removed pursuant to the grant of subsidy under RA
No. 10981, otherwise known as the “Universal Access to Quality
Tertiary Education Act”; and/or (ii) any appropriation for any project
under the duly approved program of expenditures of the ASUST, which
the ASUST, for reasons beyond its control, would not be able to pursue:
Provided, That funds collected from students for specific purposes
shall not be realigned or reprogrammed to other expenditures;

@ Adopt and implement a socialized scheme of tuition and other
school fees for greater access of poor but deserving students in
accordance with RA No. 10931;

(@ Establish professorial chairs in the ASUST and provide
fellowships for qualified faculty members, and scholarships to
deserving students;

(h) Receive and appropriate sums as may be provided for by law
for the support of the ASUST, and all other sums in the manner it
may, in its discretion, determine to carry out the purposes and functions
of the ASUST;

@ Set the policies on admission and graduation of students;

() Award honorary degrees upon persons in recognition of their
outstanding contributions in the fields of education, public service,
arts, science and technology, sports and human kinetics, or any field
of specialization within the academic competency of the ASUST,
and authorize the awarding of certificates of completion of non-degree
and non-traditional courses;

(k) Develop academic arrangements for institutional capability
building with appropriate institutions and agencies, whether public,
private, local or foreign, and appoint experts or specialists as
consultants, part-time, visiting or exchange professors, scholars or
researchers, as the case may be;

@ Adopt modern and innovative modes of transferring
knowledge to allow greater access to education such as the use of
information technology, online programs, dual training system, open
distance learning, and community laboratory;

(m) Absorb non-chartered tertiary education institutions within
the Province of Aurora and Central Luzon Region as branches,
extension campus, and external centers, in coordination with the
CHED and in consultation with the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM), and offer therein programs or courses to carry
out the constitutional mandate of providing equal access to
educational opportunities;

(n) Authorize an external management audit of the ASUST,
to be financed by the CHED, subject to the rules and regulations
of the Commission on Audit, and institute reforms, including
academic and structural changes, on the basis of the audit results
and recommendations;

(©) Develop consortia and other economic forms of linkages with
local government units, as well as public, private, local or foreign
institutions and agencies for the furtherance of the purposes and
objectives of the ASUST;

(p) Import books or publications, instruments, equipment, and
apparatuses for economic, technical-vocational, scientific, medical,
philosophical, historical, legal, or cultural purposes;

(@ Enter into joint ventures with business and industry, after
consultation with the DEPDev for the profitable growth and
management of economic assets, the proceeds of which shall be used
for the development and strengthening of the ASUST;

(x) Receive, in trust, all legacies, gifts, and donations of real
and personal properties of all kinds and administer and dispose of the
same, when necessary, for the benefit of the ASUST and subject to the
limitations, directions, and instructions of the donor, if any;

(s) Extend the term of the President of the ASUST beyond the
age of retirement but not beyond the age of seventy (70), based on the
guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board: Provided,
That the President's performance has been rated by the Board as
outstanding and a unanimous recommendation for such extension has
been decided upon by the Search Committee;

(t) Delegate any of its powers and duties to the President and
other officials of the ASUST, as it may deem appropriate, so as to
expedite the administration of the affairs of the ASUST;

(u) Establish policy guidelines and procedures for participative
and transparent decision-making within the ASUST;

(v) Where most advantageous to the ASUST, outsource the
management of non-academic services such as health, food, building
or grounds or property maintenance, and such other similar activities;

(w) Authorize the construction or repair of its buildings,
machinery, equipment, and other facilities, and the purchase and
acquisition of real property, including the necessary supplies, materials,
and equipment; and

(x) Promulgate rules and regulations as may be necessary to
carry out the purposes and functions of the ASUST.

SEC. 8. Meetings of the Board. — The Board shall regularly
convene once every three (3) months. The Chairperson of the Board
may, however, call a special meeting whenever necessary: Provided,
That members are notified in writing at least three (3) days prior to
the conduct of said meeting.

A quorum of the Board shall consist of a majority of all its
members holding office at the time of the meeting: Provided, That the
Chairperson of the Board or the President of the ASUST is among
those present in the meeting.

Incase the Chairperson of the CHED cannot attend a meeting
of the Board, a CHED Commissioner duly designated by the
Chairperson of the CHED as representative to the meeting, shall have
all the rights and responsibilities of a regular member: Provided,
That during the meeting, the President of the ASUST, as
Co-Chairperson, shall be the presiding officer: Provided, further, That
this provision notwithstanding, the Chairperson of the CHED may
designate a CHED Commissioner as the regular Chairperson of the
Board, in which case, the said CHED Commissioner shall act as the
presiding officer.

In case the Chairpersons of the Senate Committee on Higher,
Technical and Vocational Education and the House Committee on
Higher and Technical Education cannot attend the Board meeting,
they may designate their respective representatives who shall have
the same rights and responsibilities as regular members of the Board.

The members of the Board shall serve without compensation
other than reimbursements for actual and necessary expenses incurred,
either for their attendance to the meetings of the Board or in connection
with other official business authorized by resolutions of the Board,
subject to existing laws and regulations.

Src. 9. The University President. - The ASUST shall be
headed by a President who shall be appointed by the Board, subject to
its guidelines, qualifications, and standards, and based on the
recommendation of a search committee duly constituted for the purpose
of selecting the President. The ASUST President shall render
full-time service for a term of four (4) years, and may be reappointed
to another term.

Within six (6) months before the expiration of the term of office
of the incumbent President of the ASUST, the Board shall constitute
the Search Committee for the Presidency and shall ensure the
appointment or reappointment of a President on or before the expiration
of the term.

The powers and duties of the President of the ASUST, in addition
to those specifically provided in this Act, shall be those usually
pertaining to the Office of the President of universities and those
delegated by the Board.

The salary of the President of the ASUST shall be in accordance
with RA No. 11466, and such other laws amendatory thereto, which
may hereinafter be enacted, the joint circular for state universities
and colleges’ leveling instruments, and guidelines of the CHED and
the DBM.

In case of vacancy in the Office of the President by reason of
death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal for cause, or
incapacity of the President to perform the functions of the office, the
Board shall designate an Officer-in-Charge of the ASUST, pending
the appointment of a new President.

The President of the ASUST shall be assisted by the following
officials: Vice President for Academic Affairs; Vice President for
Administration, Planning, and Finance; and Vice President for
Research, Development, and Extension. They shall all be appointed
by the Board upon the recommendation of the President of the ASUST.

SEC. 10. The Secretary of the ASUST. — The Board shall
appoint a Secretary who shall serve as such for both the Board and
the ASUST and shall keep all records and proceedings of the Board in
addition to other duties and responsibilities. The Secretary of the
ASUST shall serve upon each member of the Board the appropriate
notice of Board meetings.

SEC. 11. The Treasurer of the ASUST. — The Treasurer of
the Philippines shall be the ex officio Treasurer of the ASUST.

SEC. 12. The Administrative Council. - There shall be an
Administrative Council consisting of the President of the ASUST, as
Chairperson, and the vice president, deans, director, and other officials
of equal rank, as members, whose duty is to review and recommend to
the Board such policies governing the administration, management,
and development planning of the ASUST.

SEC. 13. The Academic Council. —There shall be an Academic
Council consisting of the President of the ASUST, as Chairperson,
and all academic staff with the rank of at least an assistant professor,
as members.

The Academic Council shall review and recommend the
curricular offerings and rules on student discipline, fix the
requirements for the admission of students, as well as for their
graduation and conferment of degrees, exercise disciplinary power
over the students, and formulate rules and regulations on student
discipline, subject to the review and approval of the Board through
the President of the ASUST.

SEC. 14. Academic Freedom and Institutional Autonomy. —
The ASUST shall enjoy academic freedom and institutional
autonomy pursuant to Paragraph 2, Section 5 of Article XIV of
the Constitution.

SEC. 15. The Faculty. —No political belief, sex, gender, cultural
or community affiliation, ethnic origin, or religious opinion or
affiliation shall be a matter of inquiry in the appointment of faculty
members of the ASUST: Provided, That the appointment shall be
subject to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board:
Provided, further, That a member of the faculty shall not criticize,
vouch for, recruit members in behalf of, or preach about any particular
religious denomination.


Sc. 16, Heads of Campuses. — The Campus Directors shall
respectively serve as heads or administrators of the ASUST’s campuses
and render full-time service for a term of two (2) years eligible for
reappointment to another term.

They shall be appointed or designated by the Board, upon
recommendation of the Search Committee and the President, subject
to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board:
Provided, That upon the effectivity of this Act, the incumbent Campus
Directors of the existing campuses of the ASCOT shall continue to
serve as such,

SEC. 17. Scholarship Programs and Admission. — The ASUST
shall provide scholarship programs and other affirmative action
programs to assist poor but deserving students who qualify for
admission to the ASUST. No student shall be denied admission to the
ASUST by reason of sex, gender, religion, cultural or community
affiliation, or ethnic origin, or any other form of discrimination.

SEc. 18. Loan or Transfer of Supplies, Apparatuses, or
Equipment, or Detail of Personnel to the ASUST. — Heads of national
government agencies and instrumentalities may, upon the request of
the Board through the President of the ASUST, loan or transfer
supplies, apparatuses, or equipment, or detail personnel to the
University: Provided, That such loan, transfer, or detail shall not be
detrimental to public service.

The personnel to be detailed to the University shall perform
such duties as may be deemed required by the President of the ASUST
and the time spent for such duties shall be counted as part of the
detailed personnel’s regular service.

SEC. 19. Assets, Liabilities, and Personnel. — All assets, both
real and personal, personnel, and records of the ASCOT, as well as its
liabilities or obligations, shall be transferred to the ASUST: Provided,
That the positions, rights, and security of tenure of faculty members
and personnel therein employed under existing laws prior to the
conversion into a university shall be respected.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied by the
ASCOT and all its satellite campuses are declared as property of the
ASUST, and shall be titled under its name: Provided, That all parcels
of land of the ASUST shall revert to the original owner or donor, or
the Republic of the Philippines, in the event that the University ceases

to exist or be abolished, or should the said parcels of land be no longer
needed by the ASUST: Provided, further, That such reversion shall
not impair obligation of contracts.

SEC. 20. Duty and Tax Exemptions. —The importation of books
or publications, instruments, equipment, and apparatuses, which are
for economic, technical-vocational, scientific, medical, philosophical,
historical, legal, or cultural purposes made by the ASUST, upon
certification by the CHED, shall be exempt from customs duties in
accordance with the provisions of RA No. 10863, otherwise known as
the “Customs Modernization and Tariff Act (CMTA)”.

All grants, bequests, endowments, donations, and contributions
made to and used actually, directly, and exclusively for educational
purposes by the ASUST, shall be exempt from donor’s tax and the
same shall be considered as allowable deductions from gross income
for purposes of computing the taxable income of the donor in accordance
with the provisions of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997,
as amended.

SEC. 21. Compliance with CHED Requirements. — The
provisions of this Act notwithstanding, the conversion of the ASCOT
toa state university shall become effective only upon the determination
and declaration by the CHED, based on the recommendation of a panel
of experts constituted for the purpose, that the institution has complied
with the requirements for a university status based on the CHED
Memorandum Order No. 46, series of 2012 or the “Policy Standard to
Enhance Quality Assurance (QA) in Philippine Higher Education
Through an Outcomes-Based and Typology-Based QA”: Provided, That
the panel may issue such recommendation when the ASCOT has
substantially complied with the requirements for the grant of
university status.

The following operational requirements for a university, as
established by the CHED, shall be complied with:

(a) Employment of full-time, permanent faculty members who
possess relevant degrees in their areas of specialization, as required
by the CHED, and shall have participated in research and development
activities in their respective disciplines, as evidenced by refereed
publications and other scholarly outputs;

(b) Offering of a comprehensive range of degree programs in all
levels, from basic post-secondary to doctoral programs;


(c) Conduct of viable research programs in specific disciplinal
and multidisciplinary areas of study that produce new knowledge, as
evidenced by refereed publications, citations, inventions, and patents,
among others;

(@ Establishment of comprehensive learning resources and
support structures, to include libraries, practicum laboratories,
relevant educational resources, and linkages with relevant disciplinal
and professional sectors, so as to allow students to explore basic,
advance, and even cutting-edge knowledge in a wide range of disciplines
or professions;

() Maintenance of linkages and affiliation with other research
institutions in various parts of the world to ensure that the research
activities of the ASUST are functioning at current global standards; and

() Conduct of outreach activities to allow the students, faculty,
and research staff to apply the new knowledge they generate to address
specific social development problems.

The CHED, through its regional office, shall regularly provide
technical assistance to the ASUST and monitor its compliance with
the requirements of the CHED.

The ASCOT shall retain its status prior to the effectivity of this
Act until it is able to comply with the requirements provided herein.

Src. 22. Development Plan and Organizational Structure. —
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after the approval of this Act,
the ASUST shall accomplish the following:

(a) Submit a five (5)-year development plan, including its
corresponding program budget, to the CHED and the DBM;

(b) Submit the revised Land Use Development and Infrastructure
Plan in accordance with RA No. 11396, otherwise known as the “SUCs
Land Use Development and Infrastructure Plan (LUDIP) Act”;

(c) Undergo a management audit in cooperation with the CHED;
and

@) Set up its organizational, administrative, and academic
structure, including the designation of the key officials and other
administrative personnel of the ASUST.

SEc. 23. Filing of Report.—On or before the fifteenth (15%) day
of the second (2) month after the opening of regular classes each
year, the Board shall file a detailed report on its compliance with the
requirements for a university status with the Office of the President
of the Philippines and both Houses of Congress, through the
Chairperson of the CHED.

SEC. 24. Appropriations. - The amount necessary to carry
out the initial implementation of this Act shall be charged against the
current year’s appropriation of the ASCOT. Thereafter, such sums as
may be necessary for the continued implementation of this Act shall
be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

Src. 25. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of
RA No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher Education Modernization
Act of 1997”, shall form part of this Act.

SEc. 26. Implementing Rules and Regulations. ~ Within
sixty (60) days from the approval of this Act, the Board shall, in
consultation with the CHED, issue rules and regulations to implement
its provisions.

SEC. 27. Separability Clause. —If, for any reason, any part or
provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the
remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force
and effect.

SEC. 28. Repealing Clause. — Republic Act No. 7664, entitled
“An Act Establishing the Aurora State College of Technology and
Authorizing the Appropriation of Funds Therefor”, and all other laws,
presidential decrees, executive orders, and rules and regulations
contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are amended,
repealed, or modified accordingly,

SEc. 29. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its complete publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

 
    

FRANCIS “CHIZ” G. 'UDERO FE!
President of the Senate
of Representatives


This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on January 23, 2024,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on June 9, 2025, and which

amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives
on June 10, 2025.

ae = J
REGINALD S. VELASCO

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved:

inguin at 15 2025

eevee eee et nde toe ee ae Gers |
without the signature of the Presi -
dent, in accerdance with Article VI,
Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines

 
 
 
 

     
 

e President
CORDS OFFICE

Db COPY