hr sili = pac

 

S. No. 1594
H. No. 1171

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila

Nineteenth Congress
h First Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth
day of July, two thousand twenty-two.

[ Repusic Act No. 11960 ]

AN ACT INSTITUTIONALIZING THE ONE TOWN, ONE
PRODUCT (OTOP) PHILIPPINES PROGRAM,
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

: CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “OTOP Philippines Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is hereby declared the
policy of the State to develop a self-reliant and independent
national economy effectively controlled by Filipinos through
policies and programs that drive inclusive local economic

 

 

 

 


activity and boost national economic growth. The State also
recognizes the indispensable role of the private sector and
private enterprises and the necessity to provide incentives to
foster advancement among businesses, especially local micro,
small and medium enterprises (MSMEs).

Towards this end, the State shall equip MSMEs to
progressively improve product and service quality and to utilize
new technologies to pursue innovation and diversification. The
State shall likewise promote the preferential use of Filipino
labor, domestic materials, and locally produced goods, and adopt

measures to make them competitive. The State shall further :

provide adequate and effective support services for MSMEs to
enable communities to determine, develop, and promote products
and services that are rooted in their culture, community
resources, creativity, connection, and competitive advantage.

SEC. 3. Objectives. — The objectives of this Act are as follows:

(a) To provide a package of assistance for MSMEs with
viable products in order to develop new, innovative, and more
complex products, with significant improvement in the areas
of quality, product development, design, packaging, standards
and regulatory compliance, marketability, production capability,
and brand development, among others;

(b) To assist rural communities in growing the local
economy and being more market-oriented and innovation-driven;

(c) To promote the convergence of initiatives from local
government units (LGUs), national government agencies, and
the private sector in developing and promoting Philippine
products, whether for export or the domestic market; and

@ To formulate a national OTOP Strategic Development
Plan.

SEC. 4. One Town, One Product (OTOP) Philippines. —
To meet the declared policy of the State, the OTOP
Philippines Program is hereby institutionalized and shall be
one of the government's stimulus programs that will encourage
the growth of MSMEs in the countryside through the
development of indigenous raw materials, utilizing local skills
and talents and featuring local traditions and cultures across

the country: Provided, That simplified requirements and
procedures shall be adopted for beneficiaries to easily access the
components of the Program, in accordance with Republic Act
No. 11032, otherwise known as the “Ease of Doing Business
and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act of 2018”.

SEC. 5. OTOP Philippines Trustmark. — The Department
of Trade and Industry (DTI) is hereby authorized to establish
the OTOP Philippines Trustmark, an assurance that the
products under the Program represent the country’s best. The
OTOP Philippines Trustmark shall signify that the business
and products have been marked as excellent in terms of
quality, design, value, and marketability.

SEC. 6. Products and Services Covered. - The OTOP
Philippines Program shall cover products and skills-based
services known to an area or locality. This shall include, but
not be limited to, the following products and services:

(a) Processed foods such as fruits and nuts, local
delicacies, juices, wines, tea, and other beverages, pastries and
baked goods, preserved food sauces, cakes and dessert products,
food supplements, and culinary-based specialty products;

(b) Agricultural-based products such as coffee, cacao, and
other agricultural produce, agri-processed products like
processed meats, coconut oil, and preserved and processed
seafood products;

(c) Home and fashion, and creative artisanal products
such as gifts, souvenir items, furniture, ornaments, houseware,
garments, fabrics, and textiles;

(@) Arts and crafts such as coco coir, weaves, bamboo
products, paper artistry, and wood;

(@) Skills-based services and other products such as hilot
or traditional Filipino massage, sculpting, essential oils and
other wellness products, industrial goods, soaps, and other
personal care goods, and cosmetics; and

() Such other goods and services that are eligible under
Section 7 of this Act and as approved by the DTI.

 

SEC. 7. Qualifications. - OTOP products included
in the Program must meet a set of criteria to be established
by the DTI: Provided, That they are consistent with the
following elements:

(a) Culture — This shall pertain to cultural values rooted
in the following: heritage, living traditions, customs and

rituals, recipes passed on from generation, narratives, history,
and beliefs;

(b) Community Resource — The locality’s selected
products shall be based on the availability of local resources,
raw materials, skills, and network resources within
a community;

(ec) Connection — The selected product shall be able to
evoke a sense of pride or emotional connection among
the locals;

@ Creativity — The products selected for a locality shall
be able to exemplify the Filipino people’s creativity and
innovation; and

(=) Competitive Advantage — The product or service
selection shall be based on a locality’s innate or endemic
strengths anchored on several variables such as topography,
climate, geographical location, and proximity to resources,
among others.

Provided, further, That preference shall be given to goods
or services that form part of the supply chain of
OTOP products.

 

SEC. 8. Beneficiaries. — The regional and provincial offices
of the DTI shall, in cooperation with the concerned LGUs,
determine the beneficiaries of the OTOP Program: Provided,
That the beneficiaries shall be limited to MSMEs as defined
under Republic Act No. 6977, as amended by Republic Act
No. 9501. The guidelines and mechanism for the selection of
beneficiaries shall be formulated by the implementing agencies
identified by this Act.

 

 

 

SEC. 9. OTOP Program Components. — A comprehensive
package of assistance to OTOP Philippines Program
beneficiaries shall be provided such as, but not limited to, the
following areas:

(a) Product Development, including:

(1) Product Design — design assistance to new products,
product adaptation, product diversification, and expansion of
existing product lines;

(2) Packaging and Labeling assistance to new
packaging, improvement of package design, or labeling;

(3) Technology Updating — conduct workshops on new
technology procedures, materials, and processing to increase
production quality and quantity; and

(4) Product Enhancement — provide seminars to increase
design awareness and appreciation of product or merchandise
development and the industrial design profession.

The DTI and the Department of Science and Technology
(DOST), in coordination with the concerned LGU, shall
provide the means to facilitate knowledge sharing and
technology transfer in all areas related to product
development.

(b) Capacity Building through training opportunities
focusing on improving the human aspect of OTOP Philippines,
including business skills training and business counseling in
coordination with the DTI, Cooperative Development Authority
(CDA) and the Technical Education and Skills Development
Authority (TESDA);

(©) Standards and Market Compliance where
beneficiaries shall be trained and capacitated to observe
standards and comply with the requirements of the
DTI-Bureau of Philippine Standards (DTI-BPS), Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), Department of Agriculture (DA) and
the Intellectual Property Office of the Philippines (POPHL),
and other concerned government agencies. Monitoring and
evaluation schemes shall be developed and maintained in
consultation with these agencies to ensure that products under
the OTOP Philippines conform to these standards;

(a) Market Access and Product Promotion where
beneficiaries shall receive support in market access and
promotion of products across different platforms. These
platforms may include multimedia advocacy campaigns, trade

 


fairs, and OTOP Philippines Hubs. The DTI, Philippine
Information Agency (PIA), Department of Tourism (DOT), and
Philippine International Trading Corporation (PITC) shall
therefore implement a promotional campaign in local and
international markets for OTOP Philippines products; and

(e) Eligibility for government assistance which includes
a minimal set of rules and simplification of procedures and
requirements for government agencies dealing with OTOP
beneficiaries and as provided under Section 4 of Republic Act
No. 9501.

The DTI, in coordination with other government agencies,
shall also formulate a program to provide the OTOP
beneficiaries with easier access to credit or capital infusion for
the establishment, development, or growth of their business,
if necessary.

SEC. 10. Lead Implementing Agency. — The DTI shall
serve as the lead agency for this Act. An OTOP Management
Committee shall be created and designated by the DTI
Secretary, which shall have the main responsibility of directing
the implementation of the provisions of this Act. The OTOP
Management Committee shall be composed of offices and
attached agencies under the DTI such as, but not limited to,
the DTI-BPS and IPOPHL. The DTI Secretary shall create
the OTOP Management Committee within fifteen (15) working
days from the effectivity of this Act.

The following agencies shall also assist and coordinate
with the DTI in the implementation of the provisions of this
Act to achieve convergence and ensure efficient use of
resources:

(a) Cooperative Development Authority (CDA);

(b) Department of Agriculture (DA);

(©) Department of Information and Communications
Technology (DICT);

(d) Department of the Interior and Local Government

(DILG);

(e-) Department of Health (DOH);

() Department of Science and Technology (DOST);

(g) Department of Tourism (DOT);

(h) Department of Transportation (DOTr);

@ National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA);

G) National Commission for Culture and the
Arts (NCCA);

(k) Philippine Information Agency (PIA);

Q) Philippine International Trading Corporation (PITC);
and

(m) Technical Education and Skills Development
Authority (TESDA).

SEC. 11. Creation and Formalization of OTOP Program
Office. — In order to strengthen its capacity to implement this
Act, the DTI is hereby authorized to create the OTOP
Program Management Office (OTOP-PMO) which shall oversee
and direct the OTOP Program on the national level. The
OTOP-PMO shall be headed by a Director, and its
organizational structure and staffing complement shall be
determined by the DTI Secretary in consultation with the
Department of Budget and Management and in accordance
with civil service rules and regulations.

There is hereby created the OTOP Local Program Office
(OTOP-LPO) in each LGU which shall direct, supervise, and
implement the OTOP Program on the local level.

Within one (1) year, the DTI, through the OTOP-PMO,
shall develop a six (6)-year National OTOP Strategic Plan,
hereinafter referred to as the Plan, in consultation with
concerned stakeholders, which shall be validated and
updated annually.

The Plan, which shall be approved by the President of
the Philippines, shall define the OTOP Program’s annual and .

 

 


medium-term targets, as well as develop and implement
programs and strategies to support the OTOP Program’s
thrusts. The Plan shall also identify priority OTOP products and
services, which shall be characterized by high value-added and
have a high potential for attaining the objectives of this Act.

SEC. 12. Establishment of OTOP Philippines Hubs. — The
DOT, the Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines (CAAP),
the Philippine Ports Authority (PPA), the Land Transportation
Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB), and other similar
agencies shall support the construction and allocation of spaces
for the establishment of OTOP Philippines Hubs.

To promote access to the market, the DTI shall ensure
that the OTOP Philippines Hubs are established in strategic
ports of entry such as, but not limited to, airports, seaports,
bus terminals, high-traffic retail outlets like malls, tourist
destinations, and other consumer-frequented locations.

All LGUs shall establish their own LGU OTOP Hub in
any location that has high foot traffic preferably in the city
or municipal hall or any LGU facility or location that has
high foot traffic or is frequented by locals.

The DTI, in coordination with the agencies, shall
formulate a comprehensive marketing and operations plan for
the establishment of the OTOP Philippines Hubs.

SEC. 13. Appropriations. —- The amount necessary to
carry out the initial implementation of this Act shall be
charged against the current year’s appropriations of the DTI.
Thereafter, such amount as may be necessary for the continued
implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

 

The LGUs concerned shall set aside the amount needed
for the operation of the OTOP-LPO and OTOP Hubs under
Sections 11 and 12 hereof.

SEC. 14. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) working days from the effectivity of this Act, the
DTI, in coordination with the other implementing agencies
identified in Section 10, shall formulate and promulgate the
necessary rules and regulations to effectively implement the
provisions of this Act.

 

SEC. 15. Separability Clause. — If any portion or
provision of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the
remainder of this Act or any provision not affected thereby
shall remain in force and effect.

SEC. 16. Repealing Clause. — Any law, decree,
proclamation, issuance, or ordinance that is contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act is hereby amended,
repealed, or modified accordingly.

SEC. 17. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days following its complete publication in the Official
Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

 

Speaker of the House
of Representatives

President of the Senate

This Act, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1594
and House Bill No. 1171, was passed by the Senate of the Philippines
and the House of Representatives on May 31, 2023.

a

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved: 2 4 ALG 2023

 

ll ti

 

FERDINAND RO i
President of the Ph VPP gees TT a

 

REPUBLIC OF THE Srrpriies

III ll i

PBBM002709

 

lil