Meteo Manila

Hirst Regular Seasion

day of July, two thousand twenty-two.



[RepusuicAcrNo. 11954]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE MAHARLIKA INVESTMENT
FUND, PROVIDING FOR THE MANAGEMENT,
INVESTMENT, AND USE OF THE PROCEEDS OF
THE FUND, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Title. — This Act shall be known as the
“Maharlika Investment Fund Act of 2023”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. - It is the policy of the
State to generate, preserve and grow national wealth, create
jobs, promote trade and investments, foster technological
transformation, strengthen connectivity, expand infrastructure,
and achieve energy, water, and food security.

The State recognizes the vital role of various investments
in financial assets in promoting economic growth, accelerating
job creation, and improving the welfare of Filipinos. The State

ST RI RTT NT Re ENT UE RAT ME °

acknowledges the need to preserve and optimize the use of
government financial assets to generate returns, and support
the infrastructure development agenda of the government,
thereby promoting efficient intergenerational management of
wealth.

The State further recognizes the country’s natural capital
and its role as the basis for the economy, hence the need to
ensure its integrity and measure its contribution in national
income accounting to improve decision making, and
investments in conservation and protection of natural resources
and biodiversity.

Towards this end, the State shall establish a Maharlika
Investment Fund by investing national funds, and coordinating
and strengthening the investment activities of the country’s
top-performing government financial institutions to promote
economic growth and social development.

ARTICLE I
DEFINITION OF TERMS

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — The following terms as
used in this Act and the implementing rules and regulations
shall be understood as follows:

(a) Advisory Body refers to the body established under
this Act which shall provide guidance, counsel and advice to
the Board of Directors of the Maharlika Investment
Corporation, and all other functions as provided for in this Act;

(b) Board of Directors (Board) refers to the governing
body of the Maharlika Investment Corporation;

(c) Divestment refers to the transfer of title or disposal
of interest in property by voluntarily, completely, and actually
depriving or dispossessing oneself of his right or title to it in
favor of a person or persons other than his spouse or any
relative within the fourth civil degree of consanguinity
or affinity;

@) Founding Government Financial Institutions
(Founding GFIs) refer to the Land Bank of the Philippines
(LBP) and Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP);

© Independent Director refers to a person who is
independent of management and the controlling shareholder,
and is free from any business or other relationship which
could, or could reasonably be perceived to, materially interfere
with his exercise of independent judgment in carrying out his
responsibilities as a director;

() Maharlika Investment Corporation (MIC) refers to
the State investment body, a government-owned and -controlled
corporation (GOCC) created under this Act, which shall be
responsible for the overall governance and management of the

MIF;

(g) Maharlika Investment Fund (MIF or Fund) refers
to the fund created under this Act;

(h) Regular Director refers to a director appointed by the
President of the Philippines who shall serve in the Board
full-time, and shall not hold any other public office during his
tenure, unless otherwise provided under this Act; and

(@) Santiago Principles refers to the twenty-four (24)
Generally Accepted Principles and Practices (GAPP) voluntarily
endorsed by the International Forum of Sovereign Wealth
Funds (IFSWF) members. The GAPP for Sovereign Wealth
Funds (SWFs) are designed as guidelines that assign best
practices for the operations of SWF's. They are the rules
followed by SWF that promote stability in the global financial
system, set proper controls on investment risks, and
implement sound governance structure.

ARTICLE II
MAHARLIKA INVESTMENT CORPORATION

SEC. 4. Establishment of the Maharlika Investment
Corporation. - There is hereby created a corporate body to
be named as the “Maharlika Investment Corporation”. The
MIC shall act as the sole vehicle for the purpose of mobilizing
and utilizing the MIF for investments in transactions in order
to generate optimal returns on investments (ROIs), while
contributing to the overall goal of reinvigorating job creation
and accelerating poverty reduction by sustaining the economy’s
high growth trajectory, while ensuring sustainable development.

The MIC shall govern and manage the Fund in
accordance with the objectives and purposes set forth in this
Act, and other laws, rules and regulations, and it shall adhere
to the Santiago Principles and other internationally-accepted
standards of transparency and accountability: Provided, That
the MIC shall coordinate with all relevant institutions to
ensure harmonization of policies.

SEC. 5. Place of Business. - The MIC shall have its
principal place of business in Metro Manila, but may maintain
branches, and agencies in such other places, within and
outside the Philippines, as the proper conduct of its business
may require.

SEC. 6. Capitalization and Initial Funding. - The MIC
shall have an authorized capital stock of Five hundred billion
pesos (P500,000,000,000.00) to be divided into five (5) billion
shares, with a par value of One hundred pesos (P100.00) per
share which shall have the following classifications and
features:

(1) Common shares of three billion seven hundred fifty
million (3,750,000,000) equivalent to Three hundred seventy
five billion pesos (P375,000,000,000.00), to be subscribed by the
National Government, its agencies or instrumentalities,
including government-owned and -controlled corporations
(GOCCs) or government-financial institutions (GFIs): Provided,
That one billion two hundred fifty million (1,250,000,000)
shares equivalent to One hundred twenty-five billion pesos
(P125,000,000,000.00) shall initially be subscribed by the
following:

(a) Land Bank of the Philippines — Fifty billion pesos
(P50,000,000,000.00);

(b) Development Bank of the Philippines — Twenty-five
billion pesos (P25,000,000,000.00); and

() National Government — Fifty billion pesos
(P50,000,000,000.00):

Provided, further, That of the One hundred twenty-five
billion pesos (P125,000,000,000.00), Seventy-five billion pesos

(P75,000,000,000.00) pertaining to the contributions of the
Founding GFIs shall be fully paid by them; and

(2) Preferred shares of one billion two hundred fifty
million (1,250,000,000) equivalent to One hundred twenty-five
billion pesos (P125,000,000,000.00) to be made available for
subscription by the National Government, its agencies or
instrumentalities, GOCCs or GFIs, except Social Security
System (SSS), Government Service Insurance System (GSIS),
Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth), Home
Development Mutual Fund (Pag-IBIG Fund), Overseas Workers
Welfare Administration (OWWA), and Philippine Veterans
Affairs Office (PVAO) Pension Fund: Provided, That preferred
shares shall be non-voting, non-participating, non-convertible,
and may be issued from time to time by the Board of
Directors in one or more series, specifying the relative rights,
preferences and further limitations thereof. For this purpose,
a single private sector shareholder's interest includes the direct
or indirect shareholdings in MIC held by the shareholder, as
well as those held by the corporation, its subsidiaries, affiliates,
and related parties that are owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by the shareholder.

The contribution of the National Government shall come
from the following sources:

(a) Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) Dividends. For
the first and second fiscal years upon the effectivity of this
Act, One hundred percent (100%) of the BSP’s total declared
dividends, as computed under Republic Act No. 7653 also
known as the “New Central Bank Act”, as amended by
Republic Act No. 11211, shall be remitted to the National
Government for the capitalization of the MIC, in the amount
not exceeding the Fifty billion pesos (P50,000,000,000.00) initial
subscription of the National Government to the capitalization
of the MIC under this section: Provided, That the Monetary
Board may recommend to the President of the Philippines the
reduction of BSP’s dividend contribution to the MIC whenever
economic conditions may warrant. Thereafter, the dividends of
the BSP shall be remitted to the National Government to fund
the increase in the capitalization of the BSP in accordance
with Section 2 of Republic Act No. 7653, as amended by
Republic Act No. 11211.

(b) Government Share in Philippine Gaming Corporation
(PAGCOR). Ten percent (10%) of the National Government’s
share from the income of the PAGCOR, as provided for in
Presidential Decree No. 1869, as amended: Provided, That the
share earmarked for the Universal Health Care Act under
Sec. 37(b) of Republic Act No. 11223 shall not in any manner
be diminished: Provided, further, That the above funding from
PAGCOR will be for a period of five (5) years. Other
government-owned gaming operators and/or regulators shall
also contribute ten percent (10%) of their revenues from
gaming operations. Within thirty (30) days from the effectivity
of the Implementing Rules and Regulations, the Governance
Commission for GOCCs (GCG) shall submit the list of
government-owned gaming operators and/or regulators that
should remit to the MIC. The list shall be updated annually,
or as often as necessary. The remittance of revenues of gaming
operators and/or regulators shall be for five (5) years.

PAGCOR and other government-owned gaming operators
and/or regulators shall remit the National Government’s share
to the Bureau of the Treasury (BTr). Thereafter, the BTr shall
immediately release and transfer the portion intended for the
MIF to the MIC, subject to the usual budgeting, accounting,
and auditing rules and regulations.

(c) Department of Finance — Privatization and
Management Office (DOF-PMO).

@) Properties, real and personal, identified by the
Privatization Council. The real and personal properties to be
identified by the Privatization Council to be contributed to the
MIC shall be directly related to its mandate. The properties
to be contributed to the MIC shall be appraised at their fair
market value at the time of their transfer. The title, as well
as all rights and obligations pertaining thereto, shall be
transferred to the MIC: Provided, That the MIC shall in no
case be held liable for outstanding tax liabilities of the
properties; and

(ii) Proceeds from the privatization of government assets,
the amount of which shall be determined by the Privatization
Council consistent with the fiscal program of the government.

Z

@) Other sources, such as royalties and/or special
assessments based on the fiscal regime to be implemented by
the National Government.

The Founding GFIs and the National Government may,
upon recommendation of the Advisory Body, and without
prejudice to additional subscription and payment, use its stock
dividends from its unappropriated retained earnings in the
MIC, to subscribe and pay for the balance of the authorized
capital stock.

The government agencies and GOCCs providing for the
social security and public health insurance of government
employees, private sector workers and employees, and other
sectors and subsectors such as, but not limited to, the SSS,
GSIS, PhilHealth, Pag-IBIG Fund, OWWA, and PVAO
Pension Fund shall be absolutely prohibited, whether
mandatory or voluntary, to contribute to the capitalization of
the MIC.

SEC. 7. Increase in Capitalization. - The Board, upon the
recommendation of the Advisory Body, shall request Congress
for legislation to increase the capitalization of the MIC up to
such an amount, as may be necessary to attain the objectives
of this Act.

The increase in the authorized capital stock may be
subscribed and paid for by the Founding GFIs and/or the
National Government from the unappropriated retained
earnings of the MIC: Provided, That payment for subscription
by the National Government of the increase in authorized
capital stock, other than those subscribed and paid from its
share in the unappropriated retained earnings, shall be
appropriated by Congress.

SEC. 8. Corporate Powers. — The MIC is hereby
authorized to adopt, alter, and use a corporate seal which shall
be judicially noticed; to enter into contracts; to lease or own
real and personal property, and to sell or otherwise dispose
of the same; to sue and be sued: and otherwise to do and
perform any and all things that may be necessary or proper
to carry out the purposes of this Act.

The MIC may acquire and hold such assets and incur
such liabilities in connection with its operations authorized by
the provisions of this Act, or as are essential to the proper
conduct of such operations.

The MIC may compromise or release, in whole or in part,
any claim of or settled liability to the MIC, under such terms
and conditions as may be prescribed by the Board, upon
favorable recommendation of the Advisory Body, to protect the
interests of the MIC and the integrity of the MIF: Provided,
That in no event shall the MIC compromise or release any
claim or liability in excess of the amount as prescribed under
relevant laws, rules and regulations.

SEC. 9. Functions of the Maharlika Investment
Corporation. — In carrying out its objectives and functions,
the MIC shall:

(a) Establish a diversified portfolio of investments in the
local and global financial markets and in other assets that
promote the objectives of the Fund;

(b) Manage and invest the initial and future
contributions to the Fund in accordance with this Act;

(c) Accept and manage investment mandates whose
investment purpose is to increase income for development goals;

@ Develop and foster skills in finance, economics, risk
mitigation, good governance, and other related areas, consistent
with the capacity and capabilities build-up of human resources
in the industry; and

(e) Implement international best practices in investing
and managing assets in accordance with the Santiago
Principles and other internationally-accepted standards and
principles of transparency and accountability.

SEC. 10. Issuance of Bonds. — The MIC may issue all
kinds of bonds, debentures, and securities, and/or the renewal
or refunding thereof (hereinafter called “Bonds”), within
and/or outside the Philippines, at such terms, rates, and
conditions as the Board of Directors may determine, subject
to compliance with the provisions of applicable law, and rules
and regulations promulgated by the Monetary Board.

The MIC shall provide for appropriate reserves for the
redemption or retirement of the Bonds. These Bonds and other
obligations shall be redeemable at the option of the MIC at
or before maturity and in such manner as may be stipulated
therein and shall bear such rate of interest as may be fixed
by the MIC.

Such obligations shall be secured by the assets under the
management of the MIC, including the stocks, bonds,
debentures, and other securities purchased or held by it under
the provisions of this Act. These bonds and debentures may
be long-term, medium, or short-term, with fixed interest rate
or floating interest rate.

In no instance shall the Philippine government guarantee
any Bonds issued by the MIC.

SEC. 11. Administrative and Operational Expenses of the
Maharlika Investment Corporation. — The Board of the MIC
is authorized to disburse from the Fund such amounts as may
be necessary for administrative and operating expenses, the
total of which shall not exceed two percent (2%) of funds
managed: Provided, That the Board of Directors shall set
annual targets to reduce operating and administrative expenses
as a share of funds managed: Provided, further, That the
foregoing ceiling shall decrease as the size of the Fund
increases based on industry practice.

ARTICLE III
MAHARLIKA INVESTMENT FUND

SEC. 12. Establishment of the Maharlika Investment
Fund. — There is hereby created a Maharlika Investment Fund
(MIF), a Fund that adheres to the principles of good
governance, transparency, and accountability. The Fund shall
initially be sourced from the capitalization of the MIC, as
provided for in this Act; the investible funds of select GFIs
and from contributions of the National Government, as well
as other sources of funds, as provided in this Act: Provided,
That other GFIs and GOCCs may invest into the MIF, subject
to their respective investment and risk management strategies,
and approval of their respective boards: Provided, further,
That government agencies and GOCCs providing for the social

security and public health insurance of government employees,
private sector workers and employees, and other sectors and
subsectors such as, but not limited to, the SSS, GSIS,
PhilHealth, Pag-IBIG Fund, OWWA, and PVAO Pension
Fund, shall be absolutely prohibited, whether mandatory or
voluntary, to invest in the MIF: Provided, furthermore, That
the investments from LBP, DBP, and other GFIs shall not
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of their net worth.

Additional investments may likewise be sourced from
investments of reputable private and State-owned financial
institutions and corporations in the form and under the terms
and conditions that the Board of Directors may prescribe.

The Fund shall be used to invest on a strategic and
commercial basis in a manner designed to promote fiscal
stability for economic development, and strengthen the
top-performing GFIs through additional investment platforms
that will help attain the National Government's priority plans.

SEC. 13. Objective of the Maharlika Investment
Fund. — The objective of the MIF is to promote socioeconomic
development. This will be achieved by making strategic and
profitable investments in key sectors to preserve and enhance
long-term value of the Fund; to obtain the optimal absolute
return and achievable financial gains on its investments; and
to satisfy the requirements of liquidity, safety/security, and
yield in order to ensure profitability. In pooling the investible
funds from the GFIs, and channeling them to diversified
financial assets and development projects, the MIC’s activities
shall contribute to a prudent and-transparent management of
the government resources.

ARTICLE IV
INVESTMENTS

SEC. 14. Allowable Investments. — Subject to strict
compliance with the Investment and Risk Management
Guidelines, the Board of Directors of the MIC may engage in
the following investments:

(a) Cash, foreign currencies, metals, and other tradeable
commodities;

(b) Fixed income instruments issued by sovereigns,
quasi-sovereigns and supranationals;

(©) Domestic and foreign corporate bonds;

(d) Listed or unlisted equities, whether common,
preferred, or hybrids;

(e) Islamic investments, such as Sukuk bonds;

(@) Joint ventures or co-investments, mergers and
acquisitions;

(g) Mutual and exchange-traded funds invested in
underlying assets;

(h) Real estate and infrastructure projects: Provided,
That investments in infrastructure projects shall be directed
towards the fulfillment of national priorities such as the
national infrastructure program of the Department of Public
Works and Highways (DPWH) and other infrastructure
agencies, the inclusive innovation industry strategy of the
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), and the public
investment programs of the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA);

@) Programs and projects on health, education, research
and innovation, and other such investments that contribute
to sustainable development;

G) Loans and guarantees to, or participation into joint
ventures or consortiums with Filipino and foreign investors,
whether in the majority or minority position in commercial,
industrial, mining, agricultural, housing, energy, and other
enterprises, which may be necessary or contributory to the
economic development of the country, or important to the
public interest; and

(k) Other investments with sustainable and
developmental impact aligned with Section 17 of this Act, as
may be approved by the Board.

Investments in real estate, including agro-industrial
estates and economic zones, estate infrastructure and other

development projects, whether alone or in partnership with
other corporate entities, shall be limited to high-impact projects
as approved by the appropriate approving body, to ensure that
these are in line with the socioeconomic development program
of the government.

The Board of Directors of the MIC shall likewise ensure
that all allowable investments as provided in this section are

SEC. 15. Forms of Joint Ventures and Co-Investments.
— In line with Section 14(f) of this Act, the Board shall
prescribe the form, as well as the terms and conditions, of
the joint venture and/or co-investment, subject to pertinent
laws, rules and regulations: Provided, That the Board and
management of the MIC shall ensure that all transactions
with private and other State-owned entities in a joint venture
or co-investment are not prejudicial to the interest of the
government and complies with the principles under the last
paragraph of Section 12 of this Act.

To ensure transparency and accountability, the MIC shall
regularly publish the terms and conditions of the
arrangement, in the form and manner as determined by the
Board, as well as all financial statements and reports relative
to the operations of the joint venture and/or co-investment on
its website, which shall be immediately updated and made
easily accessible to the public.

SEC. 16. Prohibited Investments. — In no case shall the
MIC, in whatever manner or devise, invest in areas that are
explicitly prohibited under existing laws and conventions to
which the Philippines is a party.

SEC. 17. Investment Policy. - The Board of Directors
shall formulate written policies in relation to the following
matters:

(a) Directions on the acceptable balance between risk and
return of the overall portfolio;

(b) Investment policies, including policies that promote
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) principles,
mandates, strategies, and guidelines on financing infrastructure
projects and other investments;

(c) Risk management for the investments, including
prudential standards and concentration limits, to avoid undue
risk concentration from excessive exposures;

@ Standards for assessing the investment performance;

© Matters relating to international best practices for
institutional investments;

() Matters specific to rules and regulations where
investments are domiciled;

(g) Procedural framework and cooperation among
investors, including fund commitments, co-investments, voting
requirements, exit mechanisms, and other matters pertaining
to the pooling of funds and the management thereof;

(h) Matters relating to the procedure for assessing,
deploying, and liquidating investments;

@) Disclosure and transparency mechanisms to oversee
compliance by various departments of the MIC with the
standards, procedures and policies set by the Board;

G) Aside from the potential earnings, the Board shall
take into account risks other than economic, such as climate
risks and those that are reported under rules and regulations
of government agencies requiring ESG reporting as well as
resource valuation studies and natural capital accounting in
making investment decisions; and

(k) All other matters needed to be discussed to guarantee
compliance with the objectives of the MIF.

In the formulation of its investment policies, the Board
of Directors shall be guided by the principle that priority must
be given to investing in government infrastructure and other
developmental projects which would yield the highest return
on investment coupled with the developmental impact of lower
cost of living and lower cost of basic commodities, as well as
in those investments that incorporate ESG considerations and
sustainable practices. The Board of Directors shall ensure that

policies formulated are consistent with the objectives of the
Fund, and the same shall be subject to periodic review.

All investment policies approved by the Board of the MIC
shall be posted on its website which shall be immediately
updated and be made easily accessible to the public.

SEC. 18. Limitations and Safeguards on the Maharlika
Investment Fund. - The management of the MIF shall be
subject to a set of investment policies, guidelines, and risk
management limits and procedures, as approved by the Board
of Directors, upon due consideration of the recommendations
of the Advisory Body. Investment and risk management
strategies of the MIC shall be in line with the policies and
objectives hereunder stated to ensure the long-term viability
of the Fund.

Investment and risk management plans, strategies and
activities of the MIC, involving the MIF, shall be disclosed and
published on its website that will be immediately updated and
made easily accessible to the public.

No guarantee involving financial liability arising from
any action of the MIC shall be binding upon the Philippine
government without obtaining the written authority of the
proper authorities under existing laws.

SEC. 19. Fees and Charges on the Establishment of the
Maharlika Investment Fund. — Third-party fees and all
charges incurred in connection with the establishment and
effective management of the MIF, such as custody fees,
transaction fees, clearing fees, and management fees payable
to external fund managers, shall be charged against the MIF,
disbursements.

ARTICLE V
GOVERNANCE

SEC. 20. Board of Directors. —- There shall be nine (9)
members of the Board of Directors composed as follows:

(a) The Secretary of Finance shall sit as the Chairperson
in an ex officio capacity;

(b) President and Chief Executive Officer (PCEO) of the
MIC as Vice-Chairperson;

(©) President and CEO of the LBP;
(d) President and CEO of the DBP;
(e) Two (2) Regular Directors; and

(f) Three (3) Independent Directors from the private
sector.

Provided, That, in case of a merger, consolidation,
abolition, or dissolution of any of the Founding GFls, the seat
in the Board of the absorbed, dissolved, or abolished GFI shall
be filled by the next highest ranking officer of the GFI
who has assumed the rights of the absorbed, dissolved, or
abolished GFI.

The Regular Directors shall be citizens of the Philippines,
at least thirty-five (35) years of age, and must be of good moral
standing and reputation, of recognized probity and
independence, and have substantial experience and expertise
in any of the following: (a) corporate governance and
administration, (b) investment in financial assets, and
(c) management of investments in the global and local
markets. The Regular Directors shall be appointed by the
President of the Philippines upon recommendation of the
Advisory Body for a term of three (3) years. In case of removal
or resignation, the appointment to any vacancy shall only be
for the unexpired term of the predecessor. The appointment
of a Regular Director to fill such vacancy shall be in
accordance with the manner provided for regular nomination,
shortlisting and appointment of Regular Directors.

The Regular Directors shall serve in the Board full-time,
and shall not hold any other public office during their tenure.
Neither will the Regular Directors have or possess any private
financial and business interest while in office. In this regard,
Regular Directors shall be required to resign from, and divest
themselves of any and all interests in any private institution
that would put them in conflict with the interests of the MIC
before assumption to their office.

The Independent Directors shall be appointed by the
President of the Philippines, upon the recommendation of the
Advisory Body, for a term of one (1) year. The Independent
Directors shall be eligible for reappointment: Provided, That
the cumulative term of an Independent Director shall not
exceed nine (9) years. The Advisory Body shall ensure that
the selected members of the Board of Directors are with proven
probity, competence, expertise and experience in finance,
economics, investments, business management, or law, and are
highly capable to contribute to the attainment of the objectives
and purposes of the MIF.

The Independent Directors shall not hold any business
or financial interests and other relationships which could, or
could reasonably be perceived to, materially interfere with their
exercise of independent judgment in carrying out their
responsibilities as directors.

At least one (1) year from the end of their tenure, the
Regular and Independent Directors shall be barred from
employment, whether in full-time or advisory capacity, in any
private company and institution, the interests of which directly
compete with or are in conflict with the MIC.

A person shall be disqualified from being a director, if
within five (5) years prior to his appointment as such, the
person was:

(a). Convicted by final judgment of an offense punishable
by imprisonment for a period exceeding six (6) years;

(b) Found administratively lable for any offense
involving fraudulent acts;

(c) Convicted by final judgment or found liable by a
foreign court or equivalent foreign regulatory authority for
acts, violations, or misconduct similar to those enumerated in
paragraphs (a) and (b) above; or

@ Has a pending administrative, civil or criminal case
relating to fraud, plunder, corrupt practices, money laundering,
tax evasion, or any similar crimes involving misuse of fund
in the person’s possession or breach of trust.

The foregoing grounds are without prejudice to
qualifications or other disqualifications, which the Board of
Directors may impose in its promotion of good corporate
governance.

All members of the Board of Directors shall be bonded
to the government for the faithful performance of all duties
imposed upon him by law and for the faithful accounting of
all funds and public properties coming into his custody or
control in accordance with the Public Bonding Law under the
Revised Administrative Code, Executive Order No. 449 s. 1997,
and related laws and issuances. Prior to the discharge of
duties, each member shall be required to secure a fidelity bond
of Ten million pesos (P10,000,000.00).

The specific guidelines in this section, including the rules
on appointment, election and termination of membership in the
Board, shall be provided in the implementing rules and
regulations of this Act, to ensure that only those eligible and
qualified shall be appointed to the Board.

SEC. 21. Powers and Functions of the Board of
Directors. - The primary function of the Board of Directors
is to govern and manage the MIC, its assets, and investments
shall include the following:

(a) To direct the management and operations, and
administration of the MIC;

(b) To approve and implement the Investment and Risk
Management Guidelines and such other investment policies,
guidelines, and parameters to effectively carry out the purposes
of this Act;

() To set minimum criteria and targets for
investments;

(@) To oversee the investment processes which may include asset allocation, portfolio construction, monitoring, and risk management;

() To approve the issuance of debt and debt-like
instruments;

() To develop short, medium, and long-term strategies
appropriate for investments;

(g) To regularly meet and consult with the Advisory
Body;

(h) To engage as may be necessary an International
Advisory Consultant whose main responsibility is to advise the
Board on its development strategy and investment business,
equip executives and management with insights on geopolitical
and macro-economic issues, international financial market
conditions, and global investment trends;

@) To engage external fund managers and investment
advisors, as may be necessary, to manage the MIF;

G) To declare dividends in accordance with law and
subject to the provisions of Republic Act No. 7656;

(k) To determine in accordance with Republic Act No.
10149, or the “GOCC Governance Act of 2011”, the
organizational structure, staffing pattern, number of personnel
of the MIC, and define their duties and responsibilities as well
as their compensation and other emoluments: Provided, That
the Board shall determine the positions that are highly
technical, including their compensation and other emoluments,
and bonuses: Provided, further, That in all cases, such
compensation and emoluments shall be comparable with the
prevailing rates in the private sector. The organizational
structure, staffing pattern and compensation structure of the
MIC shall be subject to the approval of the President of the
Philippines;

@ To exclusively prescribe a system for performance
standards and evaluation for officials and employees of MIC;

(m) To set the criteria and procedures for termination
of employment of officials and employees for:

(1) Gross violation of the provisions in this Act or
investment policies and guidelines set by the Board of
Directors;

(2) Commission of acts inimical to the MIF or the
Republic of the Philippines, such as any loss suffered by the

Ra

Fund caused by negligence, willful misconduct, fraud, or
actions in breach of any Investment Agreement; and/or

(8) Failure to meet performance standards set by the
Board of Directors;

(a) To appoint key and critical officials and employees
as may be necessary to assist the Board of Directors in
carrying out its functions;

©) To submit semestral reports on investment
performance to the Advisory Body and to the President of the
Philippines;

(p) To review and certify the MIC/MIF financial
statements;

(q To act as Trustee of the MIF and such other assets
as may be assigned to it and direct how its assets are
managed;

(t) To constitute an Audit Committee from among its
members. The Audit Committee shall recommend to the Board
the engagement of an external auditor and oversee the internal
and external audits mandated under this Act;

(s) To perform other functions, duties and
responsibilities necessary, related and incidental to the
performance of the above-mentioned powers and functions; and

(t) To create, set up, and launch one or more sub-funds
within the Fund, each of which shall have its specific
investment objectives and strategies to be determined by the
Board of Directors in line with the investment objectives and
policies of the Fund.

SEC. 22. Removal of Members of the Board of
Directors. — The President of the Philippines may remove the
PCEO, as well as the Regular and Independent Directors, for
any of the following reasons: (a) if he subsequently possesses
the disqualifications under Section 20 of this Act; or (b) if he
is physically or mentally incapacitated that he cannot properly
discharge his duties and responsibilities and such incapacity
has lasted for more than six (6) months; or (c) if the member

is guilty of acts or operations which are of fraudulent or illegal
character or which are manifestly opposed to the aims and
interests of the MIC.

SEC. 23. Duties and Qualifications of the President and
Chief Executive Officer. - The PCEO shall direct and supervise
the operations and internal administration of the MIC, and
shall be charged with the risk management, financial
performance, human resources, accounting and legal affairs of
the MIC. He shall have the following powers and duties:

(a) Prepare the agenda for the meetings of the Board
of Directors and to submit for the consideration of the Board
of Directors the policies and measures which are necessary to
carry out the purposes and provisions of this Act;

(b) Execute and administer the policies and measures
approved by the Board of Directors;

(c) Develop the MIC’s business prospects by studying
economic trends and revenue opportunities; projects acquisition
and expansion prospects; and oversee financial performance and
risk profiles while ensuring that all of regulatory obligations
are met; and

(@) Exercise such other powers as may be vested by the
Board of Directors.

The PCEO, in the discharge of its functions, may delegate
administrative responsibilities to other officers of the MIC.

The PCEO shall work closely with the executive
management and the Board and must have (a) exceptional
experience and expertise in corporate management, financial
planning strategy, strategic planning and vision, market and
business development, budget development; (b) has at least ten
(10) years management experience, including extensive
commercial lending/credit administration experience;
(c) in-depth understanding of the industry, including risk
management, compliance, and regulatory requirements; and
(d) strategic knowledge of cash flow and capital planning
management.

The PCEO shall be appointed by the President of the
Philippines, as recommended by the Advisory Body, for a term
of three (3) years.

SEC. 24. Duties and Qualifications of the Chief
Investment and Operating Officer (CIOO). - The CIOO is
responsible for regular administration duties of all investment
files, communicating investment strategy and policies,
managing and developing a team of financial analysts and
investment professionals, supervising risk management across
portfolios and that sound investment policies are followed.

The CIOO shall be appointed by the Board of Directors
and terminated for a term as provided for in the implementing
rules and regulations.

The CIOO must have a degree in finance or a relevant
experience in the field and has proven expertise in managing
a team of financial analysts and investment professionals.

SEC. 25. Quorum and Meetings of the Board. — The
Board of Directors shall meet at least once every two (2) weeks,
or as often as may be necessary upon its constitution. It may
hold special meetings to consider urgent matters upon call of
the Chairperson or upon initiative of at least two (2) members
of the Board of Directors.

In order to constitute a quorum in Board meetings, a
majority of the total membership of the Board shall be present.
The approval by a majority of all members of the Board of
Directers shall be required to constitute a decision of the Board
of Directors.

The Board of Directors shall maintain and preserve a
complete record of the proceedings and deliberations of the
Board of Directors, including the minutes, transcripts, and
records, either in original or digital form. The meetings of the
Board of Directors may be conducted through modern
technologies such as teleconferencing and videoconferencing.

SEC. 26. Risk Management Committee. - The Board shall
organize a Risk Management Committee composed of five (5)
members as follows:

(a) One (1) Independent Director as Chairperson;
(b) One (1) ex officio member of the Board;
() One (1) Regular Director; and

(2 Two (2) senior executives of the MIC, one of whom
is the key risk management officer.

The Risk Management Committee shall ensure that the
MIC is taking the appropriate measures to achieve a prudent
balance between risk and reward in both ongoing and new
business activities, taking careful consideration of risk
identification, measurement and assessment, mitigation,
reporting and monitoring.

SEC. 27. Advisory Body. — An Advisory Body is hereby
created which shall be composed of the Secretary of the
Department of Budget and Management, the Secretary of
NEDA, and the Treasurer of the Philippines.

SEC. 28. Powers and Functions of the Advisory
Body. - The Advisory Body shall exercise the following powers
and functions:

(a) Advise and assist the Board of Directors in the
formulation of the general policies related to investment and
risk management, and other matters as may be necessary to
carry out the provisions and purposes of this Act;

(b) Advise and provide guidance on issues pertaining or
related to the plans and projects of the MIC;

(c) Recommend Regular and Independent Director
candidates who shall be appointed by the President of the
Philippines pursuant to Section 20 of this Act; and

( Perform other functions, duties and responsibilities
necessary to effectively carry out its mandate.

Except as otherwise provided under this Act, the Advisory
Body shall not take part in the management of the MIC.

ARTICLE VI
APPLICABILITY

SEC. 29. Applicability of the GOCC Governance Act of
2011. —- The MIC shall be subject to the provisions of Republic
Act No. 10149 or the “GOCC Governance Act of 2011”.

SEC. 30. Applicability of the Government Procurement
Reform Act. — All procurement activities of the MIC shall be
subject to, and governed by, the provisions of Republic Act
No. 9184, otherwise known as the “Government Procurement
Reform Act” and its implementing rules and regulations,
except the engagement of professional, or technical services
necessary for the selection of investments under Section 8
hereof, such as fund management, investment analysis,
advisory and underwriting, securities brokerage and dealership,
and capital market and equity research analysis: Provided,
That the selection process to be adopted by the MIC for the
engagement of the foregoing professional and technical services
shall be open and competitive, and approved by the Board.

SEC. 31. Designation and Secondment. — For the first
five (5) years of its operations, the MIC Board, upon the
recommendation of the PCEO, shall authorize GFI
non-executive personnel to the MIC, as may be necessary,
subject to existing guidelines on secondment of the Civil
Service Commission.

The designation of the respective GFIs’ personnel to the
MIC involves the imposition of additional and/or higher duties
to be performed by said personnel for the MIC which is
temporary and can be terminated anytime at the pleasure of
the appointing officer/authority. Designated personnel shall
continue to receive their salaries, benefits, and emoluments
from their respective offices or agencies: Provided, That they
shall be paid honoraria for the additional and/or higher duties
to be performed for the MIC.

The secondment of the GFIs’ personnel to the MIC
involves the movement of said personnel from their mother
agencies and offices to the MIC, which is temporary in nature,
which may or may not require the issuance of an
appointment, and which may or may not involve increase in

compensation and benefits. Seconded personnel shall receive,
in lieu of their respective compensation from their respective
agencies or offices, the salaries, emoluments and all other
benefits which their positions are entitled to receive from

the MIC.

SEC. 32. Applicability of Republic Act No. 7656. —- The
MIC shall be subject to the provisions of Republic Act No. 7656
or “An Act Requiring Government-Owned or -Controlled
Corporations to Declare Dividends Under Certain Conditions
to the National Government, and for Other Purposes”.

ARTICLE VII

FINANCIAL REPORTING FRAMEWORK AND
AUDIT OF RECORDS

SEC. 33. Financial Reporting Framework. — The financial
statements and reports shall be prepared, in accordance with
the relevant Financial Reporting Standards and Principles.

SEC. 34. Engagement of an Internal Auditor. — The
Board shall appoint an internal auditor, who shall provide
audit reports to the Board of Directors. The internal auditor
shall be independent from the management of the MIC and
shall be under the direct control and supervision of the Board
of Directors. The PCEO shall ensure that the internal auditor,
including the staff, shall have access to all documents and
information pertinent to the audit.

SEC. 35. Engagement of an External Auditor. — The
Board shall engage, for each accounting period or as soon as
practicable after the commencement of the relevant accounting
period, an internationally recognized auditing firm to be the
external auditor of the Fund and to audit its financial
statements.

The external auditor shall conduct annual audit for a
maximum engagement period of three (3) consecutive years
under such terms and conditions as may be determined by
the Board of Directors.

SEC. 36. Audit by the Commission on Audit. - The books
and accounts of the MIC shall be subject to the examination

and audit of the Commission on Audit (COA) pursuant to
Article IX of the 1987 Philippine Constitution. All financial
transactions shall be governed by the applicable government
laws, rules and regulations. The COA shall prescribe the
guidelines of the audit of the MIC and the Fund under its
management in accordance with international best practices.
In defining the scope of its audit, the COA shall coordinate
with the external auditor as provided under Section 35 of this
Act. The COA shall conduct a special audit every five (5) years.

SEC. 37. Disposal of Investment Assets. — Notwithstanding
any law, rules, regulations, or other issuances to the contrary,
the disposal by MIC, pursuant to its mandate and functions,
of shares, securities, and other interests and investments,
shall not be covered by existing laws and regulations on
disposal of government assets.

ARTICLE VIII
REPORTS AND RECORDS

SEC. 38. Joint Congressional Oversight Committee. -
There shall be created a Maharlika Investment Fund Joint
Congressional Oversight Committee (MIF-JCOC) to oversee,
monitor, and evaluate the implementation of this Act. The
MIF-JCOC shall be composed of seven (7) members each from
the House of Representatives and the Senate. The MIF-JCOC
shall be co-chaired by the Chairpersons of the House
Committee on Banks and Financial Intermediaries and the
Senate Committee on Banks, Financial Institutions and
Currencies.

The Speaker and the Senate President shall designate the
other six (6) members of the MIF-JCOC of the House and the
Senate from among the members of the House Committee on
Banks and Financial Intermediaries and the Senate Committee
on Banks, Financial Institutions and Currencies, at least one
(1) member of which shall be from the Minority.

The MIC shall make a quarterly confidential submission
of all investments, whether planned or under negotiation by
the MIC and on the portfolio of the MIF, to the MIF-JCOC.

Se aha et

All audit reports of the internal and external auditors for
each accounting period shall likewise be submitted to the

MIF-JCOC.

SEC. 39. Right to Freedom of Information of the
Public. — All documents of the MIF and the MIC shall be
open, available, and accessible to the public, as may be allowed
by law, in both English and Filipino, including but not
limited to:

(a) All investments thereof, by the MIC and on the
portfolio of the MIF;

(b) The Statement of Assets, Liabilities, and Net Worth
(SALNs) of the members and officials of the Board of Directors,
Risk Management Committee, and Advisory Body;

(©. The SALNs of those who appointed and designated
the said members and officials;

(@ Audit documents from the COA; and
(e) Similar documents and information.

SEC. 40. Provision for Access Rights and Retention
Period of Records. - The records of the MIC pertaining to
its investment activities shall be secured and maintained
pursuant to the rules of the National Archives of the
Philippines. The relevant disclosure rules under Republic Act
No. 8799 or “The Securities Regulation Code”, Republic Act
No. 11232 or the “Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines”,
and other laws, rules and regulations shall apply to the MIC.
The MIC shall be covered by Executive Order No. 2, s. 2016.
All reports of the MIC pursuant to the disclosure rules under
existing laws shall be published on its website that shall be
immediately updated and made easily accessible to the public.

SEC. 41. Reports of Government Financial Institutions
to Stakeholders. - GFIs with investments in the MIC shall
include the performance of their investments, a risk
assessment of their exposure and strategies to manage such
risks, and other relevant information in their annual reports.

SEC. 42. Compliance with Santiago Principles. — The
audits required under this article shall include an assessment

of the implementation of the Santiago Principles and
recommendations to improve compliance with such principles.

SEC. 43. Dispute Settlement. — The provision of existing
laws to the contrary notwithstanding, any dispute, controversy
or claim arising out of or relating to investments entered
pursuant to this Act or the breach, termination or invalidity
thereof shall be resolved by good faith negotiations between the
parties.

In the event that such negotiations do not succeed, any
dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or relating to
investments entered pursuant to this Act or the breach,
termination or invalidity thereof shall be settled in accordance
with internationally accepted institutional systems of
arbitration of which the Philippines is a signatory.

The MIF-JCOC created under Section 38 hereof shall
regularly be apprised of the status of any dispute settlement
proceeding.

ARTICLE IX
OFFENSES AND PENALTIES

SEC. 44. Violation of Disqualification Provision;
Penalties. — A director or officer who willfully holds office
while possessing any of the disqualifications or willfully
conceals a ground for disqualification as provided for in
Sections 20 and 22 of this Act shall be punished with a fine
ranging from Five million pesos (P5,000,000.00) to Seven
million pesos (P7,000,000.00) at the discretion of the court, and
perpetual disqualification from holding public office. When the
violation of this provision is injurious or detrimental to the
public, the penalty shall be a fine ranging from Ten million
pesos (P10,000,000.00) to Fifteen million pesos (P15,000,000.00).

SEC. 45. Violation by an Independent Auditor;
Penalties. — An independent auditor who, knowingly certifies
the corporation’s financial statements despite its gross
incompleteness or inaccuracy, its failure to give a fair and
accurate presentation of the corporation’s condition, or despite
containing false or misleading statements, shall be punished

soos en age pr pe yh a a deo

eatauer ntprer ssseentr 2s

ey

PIRES ANE Nc NA I tN to oa tT:

with a fine ranging from Five million pesos (P5,000,000.00)
to Seven million pesos (P7,000,000.00), imprisonment of six (6)
years, and perpetual disqualification from holding public office.
When the statement or report certified is fraudulent, or had
the effect of causing injury to the general public, the auditor
or responsible officer may be punished with a fine ranging from
Ten million pesos (P10,000,000.00) to Fifteen million pesos
(P15,000,000.00), imprisonment of six (6) years, and perpetual
disqualification from holding public office.

SEC. 46. Acting as Intermediaries for Graft and Corrupt
Practices; Penalties. - Any person, natural or juridical, who
allows itself to be used for fraud, or for committing or
concealing graft and corrupt practices — by the directors,
officers, or other employees of the MIC — as defined under
pertinent laws, rules and regulations, shall be liable for a fine
ranging from One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) to Five million
pesos (P5,000,000.00), imprisonment of six (6) years, and
perpetual disqualification from holding public office.

When there is a finding that any of its directors, officers,
employees, agents, or representatives are engaged in graft and
corrupt practices, the Board of Director’s failure to install:
(a) safeguards for the transparent and lawful delivery of
services; and (b) policies, code of ethics, and procedures against
graft and corruption shall be prima facie evidence of corporate
liability under this section.

SEC. 47. Tolerating Graft and Corrupt Practices;
Penalties. — A director or officer of the MIC who fails to
sanction, report, or file the appropriate action with proper
agencies, allows or tolerates graft and corrupt practices or
fraudulent acts committed by a director, officer, employee,
agent or representative shall be punished with a fine ranging
from Five million pesos (P5,000,000.00) to Ten million pesos
(P10,000,000.00), imprisonment of twenty (20) years, and
perpetual disqualification from holding public office.

SEC. 48. Retaliation Against Whistleblowers. —- A
whistleblower refers to any person who provides truthful
information relating to the commission or possible commission
of any offense or violation under this Act. Any person who,
knowingly and with intent to retaliate, commits acts
detrimental to a whistleblower, such as interfering with the

lawful employment or livelihood of the whistleblower, shall, at
the discretion of the court, be punished with a fine ranging
from One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) to Two million pesos
(P2,000,000.00), and imprisonment of six (6) years.

SEC. 49. Separate Liability. — Liability for any of the
foregoing offenses shall be separate from and in addition to
any other administrative, civil, or criminal liability under other
laws, such as, but not limited to:

(a) Act No. 3815 or “The Revised Penal Code”, as
amended;

(b) Republic Act No. 3019 or the “Anti-Graft and Corrupt
Practices Act”, as amended;

(©) Republic Act No. 6713 or the “Code of Conduct and
Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees”;

(@_ Republic Act No. 1379;

() Republic Act No. 7080 or “An Act Defining and
Penalizing the Crime of Plunder’;

() Republic Act No. 9160 or the “Anti-Money
Laundering Act of 2001”, as amended;

(g) Executive Order 292 or the “Administrative Code
of 1987’;

(h) Republic Act No. 9184 or the “Government
Procurement Reform Act”;

@ Republic Act No. 386 or “The Civil Code of the
Philippines”, as amended;

G) Republic Act No. 11232 or the “Revised Corporation
Code of the Philippines”; and

(k) Other relevant laws, rules, and regulations.
SEC. 50. Prescription of Crimes/Offenses. — The crimes/

offenses punishable under this Act shall prescribe in ten (10)
years. However, the right of the State to recover properties

unlawfully acquired by the person involved, nominees, or
transferees in embezzlement and misappropriation of the funds
shall not be barred by prescription, laches, or estoppel.

ARTICLE X
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 51. Appropriations. - A portion of the National
Government capital contribution, either through subscription
of common shares or of preferred shares, under Section 6
hereof shall be sourced from the following:

(a) Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) dividends. For the
first and second fiscal years upon the effectivity of this Act,
one hundred percent (100%) of the BSP’s total declared
dividends, as computed under Republic Act No. 7653, also
known as the “New Central Bank Act”, as amended by
Republic Act No. 11211, shall be remitted to the National
Government for the capitalization of the MIC, in the amount
not exceeding the Fifty billion pesos (P50,000,000,000.00) initial
subscription of the National Government to the capitalization
of the MIC under this section: Provided, That the Monetary
Board may recommend to the President of the Philippines the
reduction of BSP’s dividend contribution to the MIC whenever
economic conditions may warrant; thereafter, the dividends of
the BSP shail be remitted to the National Government to fund
the increase in the capitalization of the BSP in accordance
with Section 2 of Republic Act No. 7653, as amended by
Republic Act No. 11211;

(b) Government share in PAGCOR, and revenue from
other government-owned gaming operators and/or regulators.
Ten percent (10%) of the National Government's share from
the income of the PAGCOR, as provided for in Presidential
Decree No. 1869, as amended: Provided, That the share
earmarked for the Universal Health Care Act under Section
37(b) of Republic Act No. 11223 shall not in any manner be
diminished: Provided, further, That the above funding from
PAGCOR will be for a period of five (5) years. Accordingly,
other government-owned gaming operators and/or regulators
shall also contribute ten percent (10%) of their revenues from
gaming operations for a period of five (5) years;

(©) DOF-PMO Proceeds from the privatization of
government assets, the amount of which shall be determined
by the Privatization Council, subject to budgeting, accounting,
and auditing laws, rules, and regulations subject to the
conditions provided under Section 6 of this Act; and

(@) Other sources, such as royalties and/or special
assessments, subject to budgeting, accounting, and auditing
laws, rules, and regulations.

The amount of contribution provided in Section 6 shall
be remitted to the National Treasury as a special account in
the General Fund and are hereby appropriated solely for the
payment of the MIC’s capitalization subscribed by the National
Government which shall not exceed fifty-one percent (51%) of
the authorized capital stock. Thereafter, all funds collected
under Section 6 shall be deposited to the National Treasury
under the General Fund to support the national budget.

SEC. 52. Statutory Counsel. — The Office of the
Government Corporate Counsel (OGCC) is the statutory counsel
of the MIC and shall handle its legal affairs.

SEC. 53. Corporate Term of the MIC. - The MIC shall
exist for a term of thirty-five (35) years from the date of the
effectivity of this Act, unless sooner repealed or extended by
Congress.

SEC. 54. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Treasurer
of the Philippines, in consultation with the Founding GFIs,
shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the
implementation of this Act.

SEC. 55. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of
Republic Act No. 11232, also known as the “Revised
Corporation Code of the Philippines”, to the extent relevant and
consistent with this Act, shall be applicable to the MIC.

SEC. 56. Separability Clause. — If any provisions of
this Act are declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining
parts or provisions not affected shall remain valid.

SEC. 57. Repealing and Amendatory Clause. — All acts,
executive orders, administrative orders, proclamations, rules
and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this Act, are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

Particularly, the following laws or provisions of laws are
hereby expressly amended to the extent of ensuring the full
implementation of the provisions of this Act:

(a) Section 2 of Republic Act No. 7653 or the “New
Central Bank Act”, as amended by Republic Act No. 11211;
and

(b) Presidential Decree No. 1869, otherwise known as
the “PAGCOR Charter, as amended”, without prejudice to
Section 37 of Republic Act No. 11223 or the “Universal Health
Care Act”.

SEC. 58. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect
immediately upon its publication in the Official Gazette or in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Philippines.

After effectivity, this Act shall also be promulgated in
Filipino.

Approved,

RDIN, TIN .
Speaker of the House

of Representatives

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 2020 on May 31, 2023 and adopted by the
House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill
No. 6608 on May 31, 2023.

REGIN S. VELASCO

House of Representatives

FERDINAND ROMUAPDEZ MARCOS JR.
Presfdent of the Philippines

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

ii i iil