Meteo Mavila

Niueteenth Congress

Ghird Regular Session

day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

cel

[ Repusuic AcrNo. 12086]

AN ACT AMENDING SECTIONS 27, 28, 32, 34, 57, 106, 108,
« 109, 112, 135, 237, 237-A, 269, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297,
300, 301, 308, 309, 310, AND 311, AND ADDING NEW
SECTIONS 135-A, 295-A, 296-A, AND 297-A OF THE
NATIONAL INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1997, AS
AMENDED, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 27(A) of the National Internal
Revenue Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended
to read as follows:

“SEC. 27. Rates of Income Tax on Domestic
Corporations. —

(A) In General. — Except as otherwise provided
in this Code, an income tax rate of twenty-five
percent (25%) effective July 1, 2020 is hereby imposed
upon the taxable income derived during each taxable

é year from all sources within and without the

in this Code, a corporation organized, authorized, or
existing under the laws of any foreign country,
engaged in trade or business within the Philippines,
shall be subject to an income tax equivalent to
twenty-five percent (25%) of the taxable income
derived in the preceding taxable year from all
sources within the Philippines effective July 1, 2020:
Provided, That registered business enterprises under
the enhanced deductions regime as provided in
Section 294(C) of this Code, shall be subject to a tax
rate equivalent to twenty percent (20%) of their
taxable income derived from registered projects or
activities during each taxable year.

X X X.

! 3
Philippines by every corporation, as defined in Section eH &
22(B) of this Code and taxable under this Title as a
corporation, organized in, or existing under the laws \
of the Philippines: Provided, That corporations with He
net taxable income not exceeding Five million pesos
(P5,000,000) and with total assets not exceeding One (B) Tax on Nonresident Foreign Corporation. —
: hundred million pesos (P100,000,000), excluding land i
on which the particular business entity’s office, (1) In General. — x x x.”
plant, and equipment are situated during the taxable \
a pe hoon <20%): ee uA ot | SEC. 3. Section 32 of the National Internal Revenue Code
registered business enterprises under the enhanced \ of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read
deductions regime as provided in Section 294(C) of as follows: ‘
this Code shall be taxed at a rate equivalent to |
twenty percent (20%) on their taxable income derived ' “SEC. 32. Gross Income. —
from registered projects or activities during each
taxable year. i (A) General Definition. — x x x
RRM i (B) Exclusion from Gross Income. — The
| following items shall not be included in the gross
SEC. 2. Section 28(A)(1) of the National Internal Revenue income and shall be exempt from taxation under
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read this Title:
as follows: |
| GQ) =x
“SEC. 28. Rates of Income Tax on Foreign
Corporations. — @ 2x x
(A) Tax on Resident Foreign Corporations. — @ xxx
(1) In General. — Except as otherwise provided () xx x;

(5) Income Exempt under Treaty. — Income of
any kind, to the extent required by any treaty
obligation, including agreements entered into by the
President with economies and administrative regions,
subject to the concurrence of the Senate, binding
upon the Government of the Philippines.

() x x x; and

(7) x x x.”

SEC. 4. Section 34 of the National Internal Revenue Code
of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as
follows:

“SEC. 34. Deductions from Gross Income. —
xe x

(B) Interest. - x x x

(1) In General. - x x x

(2) Limitations on Deductions. - x x x

(3) Credit Against Tax for Taxes of Foreign
Countries. - X X xX

(4) Limitations on Credit. - x x x

(6) Adjustments on Payment of Incurred
Taxes. - X X X

(6) Year in Which Credit Taken. - x x x
(7) Proof of Credits. - x x x

(8) Input Tax Attributable to VAT-Exempt
Sales. — Input tax paid on local purchases
attributable to VAT-exempt sales shall be deductible
from the gross income of the taxpayer.

»

xX X X.

SEC. 5. Section 57 of the National Internal Revenue Code
of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read
as follows:

“SEC. 57. Withholding of Tax at Source. —

(A) Withholding of Final Tax on Certain
Incomes. — X X X

(B) Withholding of Creditable Tax at Source.
— The Secretary of Finance may, upon the
recommendation of the Commissioner, require the
withholding of a tax on the items of income payable
to natural or juridical persons, residing in the
Philippines, by payor-corporation/persons as provided
for by law, at the rate of not more than fifteen
percent (15%) thereof, which shall be credited against
the income tax liability of the taxpayer for the
taxable year.

(C) Tasx-free Covenant Bonds. — x x x

”

SEC. 6. Section 106 of the National Internal Revenue Code
of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as
follows:

“SEC. 106. Value-Added Tax on Sale of Goods
or Properties. —

(A) Rate and. Base of Tax. — x x x.

(1) ‘Goods or Properties.’ The term ‘goods’ or
‘properties’ x x x;

(2) The following sales by VAT-registered
persons shall be subject to zero percent (0%) rate:

(a) Export Sales. — The term ‘export sales’
means:

(1) xxx;

(2) Sale of raw materials or packaging
materials to a non-resident buyer for delivery to a
resident local export-oriented enterprise to be used in
manufacturing, processing, packing or repacking in
the Philippines of the said buyer’s goods and paid
for in acceptable foreign currency and accounted for
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP);

(3) Sale of goods to an export-oriented enterprise
whose export sales is at least seventy percent (70%)
of the total annual production of the preceding taxable
year: Provided, That such goods are directly
attributable to the export activity of the export-oriented
enterprise: Provided, further, That the Export
Marketing Bureau of the Department of Trade and
Industry (DTI) shall determine compliance with the
aforementioned threshold. Any export-oriented
enterprise that fails to meet the threshold shall be
disqualified from availing of VAT zero-rating on local
purchases in the immediately succeeding year:
Provided, finally, That input tax otherwise due
on VAT zero-rated local purchases attributable to
VAT-exempt sales shall be paid and deductible from
the gross income of the taxpayer. For this purpose,
‘directly attributable’ shall refer to goods and services
that are incidental to and reasonably necessary for
the export activity of the export-oriented enterprise,
including janitorial, security, financial, consultancy,
marketing and promotion services, and services
rendered for administrative operations such as
human resources, legal, and accounting;

(4) The sale of goods, supplies, equipment, and
fuel to persons engaged in international shipping or
international air transport operations: Provided, That
the goods, supplies, equipment, and fuel shall be used
for international shipping or air transport operations;
and

(5) Sales to bonded manufacturing warehouses
of export-oriented enterprises.

The Department of Finance (DOF) shall
establish a VAT refund center in the Bureau of
Internal Revenue (BIR) and in the Bureau of
Customs (BOC) that will handle the electronic
processing and granting of cash refunds of creditable
input tax.

An amount equivalent to five percent (5%) of
the total VAT collection of the BIR and the BOC
from the immediately preceding year shall be
automatically appropriated annually and shall be

treated as a special account in the General Fund or
as trust receipts for the purpose of funding claims
for VAT refund: Provided, That any unused fund,
at the end of the year shall revert to the General
Fund: Provided, further, That the BIR and the BOC
shall be required to submit to the Congressional
Oversight Committee on the Comprehensive Tax
Reform Program (COCCTRP) a quarterly report of
all pending claims for refund and any unused fund.

(bl) xxx

(c) xxx

(d) Those sales subject to zero percent (0%) VAT
under special laws.

»

xX KX.

SEC. 7. Section 108 of the National Internal Revenue Code

of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as
follows:

“SEC. 108. Value-added Tax on Sale of Services
and Use or Lease of Properties. —

(A) Rate and Base of Tax. — x x x

(B) Transactions Subject to Zero Percent (0%)
Rate. = The following services performed in the
Philippines by VAT-registered persons shall be
subject to zero percent (0%) rate: .

@ x= x»

(2) x om oxy

(3) x x x;

(4) x x x;

(5) Services performed for an export-oriented

enterprise whose export sales is at least seventy
percent (70%) of the total annual production of the

preceding taxable year: Provided, That such services
are directly attributable to the export activity of the
export-oriented enterprise: Provided, further, That
the Export Marketing Bureau of the DTI shall
determine compliance with the aforementioned
threshold. Any export-oriented enterprise that fails to
meet the threshold shall be disqualified from availing
of VAT zero-rating in the immediately succeeding
year: Provided, finally, That input tax otherwise due
on VAT zero-rated local purchases attributable to
VAT-exempt sales shall be paid and deductible from
the gross income of the taxpayer. For this purpose,
‘directly attributable’ shall follow the same definition
under Section 106 of this Code.

xX XX

(dd) Importation of goods by an export-oriented
enterprise whose export sales is at least seventy
percent (70%) of the total annual production of the
preceding taxable year: Provided, That such goods
are directly attributable to the export activity of the
export-oriented enterprise: Provided, further, That
the Export Marketing Bureau of the DTI shall
determine the compliance with the aforementioned
threshold. For this purpose, ‘directly attributable’
shall follow the same definition under Section 106
of this Code.”

SEC. 9. Section 112 of the National Internal Revenue Code

(6) x x x; of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as
' follows:
(7) x x x; and
“SEC. 112. Refunds or Tax Credits of Input
(8) Sales subject to zero percent (0%) VAT i Tax. —
under special laws. !
(A) Zero-Rated or Effectively Zero-Rated Sales.
The DOF shall establish a VAT refund center =e x

in the BIR and in the BOC that will handle the
electronic processing and granting of cash refunds of

(B) Cancellation of VAT Registration. — x x x
creditable input tax.

| (C) Period within which the Refund or Tax
xe oe” Credit of Input Taxes shall be Made. — In proper
cases, the Commissioner shall grant a refund for
creditable input taxes within ninety (90) days from
the date of submission of certified true copies of

SEC. 8. Section 109 of the National Internal Revenue Code
of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as

“SEC. 109. Exempt Transactions. —

(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsection (2)
hereof, the following transactions shall be exempt
from the VAT:

x XX

(u) Importation of fuel, goods, and supplies used
for international shipping or air transport operations;

follows: invoices and other documents specifically limited to

those prescribed in the revenue issuances and in
support of the application filed in accordance with
Subsections (A) and (B) hereof: Provided, That for
this purpose, the VAT refund claims shall be
classified into low-, medium-, and high-risk claims,
with the risk classification to be based on the amount
of VAT refund claim, tax compliance history,
frequency of filing VAT refund claims, among others:
Provided, further, That medium- and high-risk
claims shall be subject to audit or other verification
processes in accordance with the BIR’s national audit
program for the relevant year. Should the

Commissioner find that the grant of refund is not
proper, the Commissioner must, within the ninety
(90)-day period, communicate in writing to the
taxpayer, the legal and factual basis for the denial,
including the deficiencies of the VAT refund claim.

The taxpayer shall have fifteen (15) days from
receipt of the full or partial denial to file a request
for reconsideration. The Commissioner shall decide
on the request for reconsideration within fifteen (15)
days from reteipt thereof. Failure to file a request
for reconsideration within the fifteen (15)-day period
shall render the decision final.

In case of full or partial denial of the request
for reconsideration, or failure on the part of the
Commissionér to act on the application for refund or
request for reconsideration within the periods
prescribed above, the taxpayer affected may, within
thirty (30) days from the receipt of the decision
denying the request for reconsideration, or after the
expiration of the ninety (90)-day period to decide on
the application for refund, or after the lapse of the
fifteen (15)-day period to decide on the request for
reconsideration in cases where no action is made
by the Commissioner on the request for
reconsideration, appeal the decision with the Court
of Tax Appeals: Provided, however, That failure on
the part of any official, agent, or employee of the BIR
to act on the application for VAT refund within the
ninety (90)-day period and on the request for
reconsideration within the fifteen (15)-day period shall
be punishable under Section 269 of this Code.

(D) Manner of Giving Refund. — Refunds shall
be made upon warrants drawn by the Commissioner
or by a duly authorized representative without the
necessity of being countersigned by the Chairperson
of the Commission on Audit, the provisions of the
Administrative Code of 1987 to the contrary
notwithstanding: Provided, That refunds under this
paragraph shall be subject to post audit by the
Commission on Audit following the risk-based
classification above-described: Provided, further, That

Code of 1997, as amended,
as follows:

the BIR shall publish statistics on the aggregated
volume, processing time, approval rate of refund
claims, and other relevant statistics in their official
website: Provided, finally, That in case of
disallowance by the Commission on Audit, only the
taxpayer shall be liable for the disallowed amount
without prejudice to any administrative liability on
the part of any employee of the BIR who may be
found to be grossly negligent in the grant of refund.”

Il

SEC. 10. Section 135 of the National Internal Revenue

“SEC. 135. — Petroleum Products Sold to
International Carriers and Exempt Entities or
Agencies. — Petroleum products sold to the following
are exempt from excise tax:

(a) International carriers of Philippine or foreign
registry directly importing petroleum products, on
their use or consumption outside the Philippines:
Provided, That the petroleum products sold to these
international carriers shall be stored in a bonded
storage tank and may be disposed of only in
accordance with the rules and regulations to be
prescribed by the Secretary of Finance, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner:

Suppliers of petroleum products to international
carriers shall be allowed to file a claim for refund
of excise tax paid on such products, upon presenting
proof that the petroleum products were sold to
international carriers of Philippine or foreign
registry, for their use or consumption outside
the Philippines, following the procedure under
Section 135-A of this Code.

&b) x x x

(c) x x x.”

is hereby further amended to read

SEC. 11. A new Section 135-A shall be introduced in the
National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended. The new
Section 135-A shall read as follows:

Failure on the part of any official agent or
employee of the BIR to process and decide on the
application within the ninety (90)-day period and on
the request for reconsideration within the fifteen
(15)-day period shall be punishable under Section 269
of this Code.”

“SEC. 135-A. Refund of Excise Tax on
- Petroleum Products. - No refund or credit of excise
tax paid by suppliers on otherwise exempt sales

under Section 135 shall be allowed, unless the SEC. 12. Section 237 of the National Internal Revenue

taxpayer files a written claim for refund with the Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read
Commissioner, within two (2) years after the as follows:

payment of excise tax: Provided, however, That a
return filed showing an overpayment shall be
considered a written claim for refund.

The Commissioner shall process and decide the
refund under. this provision within ninety (90) days
from the submission of complete documents
supporting the application filed. Should the
Commissioner deny the claim for refund in full or
in part, the Commissioner shall communicate in
writing to the taxpayer, the legal and/or factual basis
for the denial.

The taxpayer shall have fifteen (15) days from
receipt of the denial to file a request for
reconsideration, which shall be resolved by the
Commissioner within fifteen (15) days from the
receipt thereof. Failure to file a request for
reconsideration within the fifteen (15)-day period shall
render the decision final.

In case of full or partial denial of the request
for reconsideration, or failure on the part of the
Commissioner to act on the application for refund or
request for reconsideration within the periods
prescribed above, the taxpayer affected may, within
thirty (30) days from the receipt of the decision
denying the request for reconsideration, or after the
lapse of the period to decide on the application for
refund or request for reconsideration, in cases where
no action is made by the Commissioner, appeal the
decision with the Court of Tax Appeals.

“SEC. 237. Issuance of Invoices. —

(A) Issuance. — x x x

Upon the establishment of a system capable of
storing and processing the required data, the Bureau
shall require taxpayers engaged in the export of goods
and services, taxpayers engaged in e-commerce, and
taxpayers under the jurisdiction of the Large
Taxpayers Service to issue electronic invoices, subject
to rules and regulations to be issued by the
Secretary of Finance upon recommendation of the
Commissioner following a public hearing held for this
purpose: Provided, That taxpayers not covered by the
mandate of this provision may voluntarily issue
electronic invoices: Provided, further, That the
Secretary of Finance, upon the recommendation of
the Commissioner, may require taxpayers to issue
electronic invoices.

“

X KX X.

SEC. 13. Section 237-A of the National Internal Revenue

“SEC. 237-A. Electronic Sales Reporting
System. — Upon the establishment of a system
capable of storing and processing the required data,
the Bureau shall require taxpayers engaged in the
export of goods and services, and taxpayers under the
jurisdiction of the Large Taxpayers Service to
electronically report their sales data to the Bureau

Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended, to read
as follows:

through the use of electronic point of sale systems,
subject to rules and regulations to be issued by the
Secretary of Finance as recommended by the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue: Provided, That
the machines, fiscal devices, and fiscal memory
devices shall be at the expense of the taxpayer:
Provided, further, That the Secretary of Finance,
upon the recommendation of the Commissioner, may
require taxpayers to electronically report their sales
data to the Bureau.

All taxpayers required to issue and those who
voluntarily choose to issue electronic invoices and
electronically report their sales data to the Bureau
shall be granted, in addition to the allowable
deduction provided under Section 34(A)(1), the
following allowable deductions:

(1) For micro and small taxpayers as defined
under Section 21(B) of this Code, an additional
deduction from taxable income of one hundred

of the Government charged with the enforcement of
the provisions of this Code, who is guilty of any of
the offenses herein below specified shall, upon
conviction for each act or omission, be punished by
a fine of not less than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000)
but not more than One hundred thousand pesos
(P100,000) and suffer imprisonment of not less than
ten (10) years but not more than fifteen (15) years
and shall likewise suffer an additional penalty of
perpetual disqualification to hold public office, to vote,
and to participate in any public election:

xX XX '

G) Deliberate failure to act on the application
for refunds within the prescribed period provided
under Sections 112, 135-A, and 204 of this Act.

”

xX X X.

SEC. 15. Section 292 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read
as follows:

percent (100%) of the total cost for setting up an
electronic sales reporting system.

(2). For medium and large taxpayers as defined
under Section 21(B) of this Code, an additional
deduction from taxable income of fifty percent (50%)
of the total cost for setting up an electronic sales
reporting system.

The foregoing allowable deduction shall be
availed of only once. The importation of such
electronic sales reporting system shall also be exempt
from taxes.

SEC. 14. Section 269(j) of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is further amended to read

as follows:

“SEC. 269. Violations Committed by
Government Enforcement Officers. — Every official,
agent, or employee of the BIR or any other agency

“SEC. 292. Extent of Authority to Grant Tax
Incentives. — The Fiscal Incentives Review Board or
the Investment Promotion Agency, shall grant the
appropriate tax incentives provided in this Title to
RBEs only to the extent of their approved registered
project or activity under the Strategic Investment
Priority Plan (SIPP), taking into consideration the
infusion of investment capital, generation of direct
local employment which takes into account
Republic Act No. 11962, otherwise known as the
‘Trabaho Para sa Bayan Act’, and other standard
and project-specific performance metrics of the
registered project or activity that may be imposed
by the Fiscal Incentives Review Board or the
concerned Investment Promotion Agency.”

SEC. 16. Section 293 of the National Internal Revenue

(E) Direct local employment x x x
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read

“SEC. 293. Definitions. — When used in this
Title:

(A) Capital equipment refers to machinery,
equipment, major components thereof, tools, devices,
applications, or apparatus, which are directly
attributable to the registered project or activity of the
registered business enterprise;

(B) Certificate of authority to import refers to
the document issued by the Investment Promotion
Agency as proof of entitlement to exemption from
value-added tax and/or duty-free importation which
shall contain a list of capital equipment, raw
materials, spare parts, or accessories to be imported
that are directly attributable to the production of
goods and services, including goods used for
administrative purposes;

(C) Certificate of registration refers to the
document evidencing registration with an Investment
Promotion Agency and entitlement to tax incentives:
Provided, That each registered project or activity of
a registered business enterprise should be supported
by a separate certificate of registration;

(D) Directly attributable refers to goods and
services that are incidental to and reasonably
necessary for the registered project or activity of the
registered business enterprise, including janitorial,
security, financial, consultancy, marketing and
promotion services, and services rendered for
administrative operations such as human resources,
legal, and accounting: Provided, That the
determination of what is ‘directly attributable’ to the
registered project or activity of the registered business
enterprise shall be made by the relevant Investment
Promotion Agency;

as follows: . (F) Domestic input x x x

(G) Domestic market enterprise x x x
(H) Export enterprise x x x

(1) Freeport zones refer to isolated and policed
areas adjacent to a port of entry, which shall be
operated and managed as a separate customs
territory for purposes of ensuring free flow or
movement of goods ,between registered business
enterprises, except those expressly prohibited by law,
within, into, and exported out of the freeport zone
where imported goods may be unloaded for
immediate transshipment or stored, repacked, sorted,
mixed, or otherwise manipulated subject to the
provisions of Sections 294(D) and (E) and 295(C) and
(D): Provided, That a freeport shall have a
permanent customs control or customs office at its
perimeter;

(J) High-value domestic market enterprises refer
to registered domestic market enterprises with an
investment capital exceeding Fifteen billion pesos
(Php15,000,000,000) and are engaged in sectors
considered import-substituting, or with export sales
in the immediately preceding year of at least One
hundred million US dollars (USD100,000,000) or its
equivalent in an acceptable foreign currency:
Provided, That the threshold specified herein may
be increased by the Fiscal Incentives Review Board;

(K) Investment capital refers to the value of
investment indicated in Philippine currency, that
shall be used to carry out a registered project or
activity such as pre-operating expenses, cost of land
and land improvements, buildings, leasehold
improvements, working capital, machinery and
equipment, inventory, and other current and
non-current assets;

(L) Investment Promotion Agencies refer to
government entities created by law, executive order,
decree, or other issuances, in charge of promoting
investments, granting and administering tax and
non-tax incentives, and overseeing the operations of
the different economic zones and freeports in
accordance with their respective special laws. These
include the Board of Investments (BOI), Bangsamoro
Board of Investments (BBOI), Bangsamoro Economic
Zone Authority (BEZA), Philippine Economic Zone
Authority (PEZA), Bases Conversion and Development
Authority (BCDA), Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority
(SBMA), Clark Development Corporation (CDC), John
Hay Management Corporation (JHMC), Poro Point
Management Corporation (PPMC), Cagayan Special
Economic Zone Authority (CEZA), Zamboanga City
Special Economic Zone and Freeport Authority
(ZCSEZA), PHIVIDEC Industrial Authority (PIA),
Aurora Pacific Economic Zone Authority (APECO),
Authority of the Freeport Area of Bataan (AFAB),
Tourism Infrastructure and Enterprise Zone
Authority (TIEZA), Bulacan Special Economic Zone
and Freeport Authority (BEZA), and all other similar
existing authorities or those that may be created by
law unless otherwise specifically exempted from the
coverage of this Code.

(M) Metropolitan areas x x x

(N) Net book value refers to historical cost less
accumulated depreciation, as reflected in the books
of account or financial statements of the registered
business enterprise, and determined in accordance
with accepted accounting standards;

(O) Other government agencies administering
tax incentives x X x

(P) Other registered entities x x x
(Q) Qualified capital expenditure x x x

(R) Registered business enterprise (RBE) x x x

(S) Research and development x x x
(T) Sophisticated x x x

(U) Sophistication x x x

(V) Source document x x x

Special economic zone or ecozone refers to
a selected area which shall be operated and managed
as a separate customs territory that is highly
developed or has the potential to be developed into
an agro-industrial, industrial, information ‘technology,
or tourist/recreational area, whose metes and bounds
are fixed or delimited by presidential proclamations
and is within a specific geographical area which
includes industrial estates (IEs), export processing
zones (EPZs), ICT parks and centers, and free trade
zones: Provided, That for the ecozone to qualify as
a separate customs territory, an ecozone shall have
a permanent customs control or customs office at its
perimeter: Provided, however, That areas where
mining extraction is undertaken shall not be
declared as an ecozone: Provided, further, That
vertical economic zones, such as, but not limited to,
buildings, selected floors within buildings, and
selected areas on a floor, need to comply with the
minimum contiguous land area as determined by the
Fiscal Incentives Review Board;

(X) Technical obsolescence refers to the state
of an asset when its design or specification no longer
fulfills the function for which it was originally
designed and/or the machinery, equipment, spare
parts and/or materials have diminished in value as
caused by changes in technology and new inventions,
rendering it less desirable in the industry, including
a decline in value due to the availability of improved,
more cost-effective alternatives, or due to the
availability of more advanced technology that allows
for more efficiency such as earlier replacement of
information technology assets, as may be verified and
approved by the Investment Promotion Agency; and

(Y) Training x x x.”

Ig.

SEC. 17. Section 294 of the National Internal Revenue tourism projects or activities, respectively, that are
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read listed in the SIPP, no more than fifty percent (50%)
as follows: of the amount reinvested shall be allowed as a

“SEC. 294. Incentives. — Subject to the
conditions and period of availment in Sections 295,
296, and 296-A, respectively, the following types of
tax incentives may be granted to registered projects
or activities:

(A) Incame Tax Holiday (ITH). — For all RBEs,
exemption from income tax on registered project or
activity imposed under this Code;

(B) Special Corporate Income Tax (SCIT) Rate.
— For export enterprise, a tax rate equivalent to five
percent (5%). based on the gross income earned, in
lieu of all national and local taxes and local fees
and charges.

xR x.
(©) Enhanced Deductions Regime (EDR). —

For export enterprise and domestic market enterprise,
the following may be allowed as deductions:

Q) xxx
Q) xxx
() xxx
(4) xxx
® xxx

(6) One hundred percent (100%) additional
deduction on power expense incurred in the taxable
year;

(7) Deduction for reinvestment allowance to
manufacturing and tourism industries. - When a
manufacturing or tourism RBE reinvests its
undistributed profit or surplus in manufacturing or

deduction from its taxable income within a period of
five (5) years from the time of such reinvestment;

(8) Fifty percent (50%) additional deduction on
expenses relating to exhibitions, trade missions, or
trade fairs; and

(9) Enhanced Net Operating Loss Carry-Over
(NOLCO). — The net operating loss of the registered
project or activity during the first three (3) years
from the start of commercial operation, which had
not been previously offset as deduction from gross
income, may be carried over as deduction from gross
income within the next five (5) consecutive taxable
years immediately following the last year of the ITH
entitlement period of the project.

(D) Duty exemption on importation of capital
equipment, raw materials, spare parts, or accessories,
including goods used for administrative purposes, of
the registered project or activity;

(E) Value-Added Tax (VAT) exemption on
importation and VAT zero-rating on local purchases;
and

(F) RBE Local Tax. — The concerned local
government unit may, through an ordinance issued
by the concerned Sanggunian, impose an RBE local
tax at the rate of not more than two percent (2%)
of an RBE’s gross income, as defined under
Section 27(E)(4), during the ITH and EDR, as
provided under Sections 294(A) and (C) of this Code,
respectively, which shall be in lieu of all local taxes
and local fees and charges imposed by the local
government unit under Republic Act No. 7160,
otherwise known as the “Local Government Code of
1991”, as amended: Provided, That RBE local tax
shall not be imposed on RBEs under SCIT.”

one of the following:

(1) ITH, which shall be followed by SCIT or
EDR; or

(2) SCIT, which shall be in lieu of all national
and local taxes and local fees and charges, and may
be granted immediately at the start of commercial
operations; or‘

(3) EDR, which may be granted immediately at
the start of commercial operations.

The elected incentive package shall be
irrevocable for the entire duration of entitlement to
such incentives under Sections 296 and 296-A of this
Code: Provided, That in no case shall the EDR be
granted simultaneously with the SCIT.

(B) Registered domestic market enterprises may
opt for either:

(1) ITH, which shall be followed by EDR; or

(2) EDR, which may be granted immediately at
the start of commercial operations.

The elected incentive package shall be
irrevocable for the entire duration of entitlement to
such incentives under Sections 296 and 296-A of
this Code.

The following conditions for the availment of
each enhanced deduction shall be complied with:

SEC. 18. Section 295 of the National Internal Revenue (Q) x = =
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read
as follows: (2) x x=
“SEC. 295. Conditions of Availment. — The (8) x x x
availment of tax incentives in the preceding section
shall be governed by the following rules: (4)xxx
(A) Registered export enterprises may opt for (5) x x x

(6) The additional deductions on power expense
shall only apply to power utilized for the registered
project or activity.

(7) The deduction for reinvestment allowance to
manufacturing and tourism industries shall only be
availed of until December 31, 2034.

(8) The additional deduction on expenses relating
to trade fairs, exhibitions, or trade missions shall
include expenses incurred in promoting the export of
goods or the provision of services to foreign markets
approved by the concerned Investment Promotion
Agency.

The Department of Finance, in coordination
with the BIR, Fiscal Incentives Review Board, and
Investment Promotion Agencies, shall prescribe the
terms and conditions on the grant of EDR under
Section 294(C) and this Title.

(C) The duty exemption shall only apply to the
importation of capital equipment, raw materials,
spare parts, or accessories directly attributable to the
registered project or activity of RBEs, including goods
used for administrative purposes: Provided, That the
following conditions are complied with:

(1) The capital equipment, raw materials, spare
parts, or accessories are directly attributable to the
registered project or activity of the RBE, including
goods used for administrative purposes, and are not
produced or manufactured domestically in sufficient
quantity or of comparable quality and at reasonable

prices. Prior approval of the Investment Promotion
Agency must be secured for the part-time utilization
of said capital equipment, raw materials, spare
parts, or accessories in a non-registered project or
activity to maximize usage thereof: Provided, That
the RBE shall adopt a method to best allocate the
same at the time of application for a certificate of
authority to import, or its equivalent: Provided,
further, That the proportionate taxes and duties are
paid on a specific capital equipment, raw materials,
spare parts, or accessories in proportion to the

utilization for non-registered projects or activities. In

the event that the capital equipment, raw materials,
spare parts, or accessories, shall be used for non-
registered project or activity of the RBE at any time
within the first five (5) years from the date of
importation, the RBE shall first seek prior approval
of the concerned Investment Promotion Agency and
pay the taxes and customs duties that were not paid
upon the importation; and

(2) The approval of the Investment Promotion
Agency was obtained by the RBE prior to the
importation of such capital equipment, raw
materials, spare parts, or accessories.

An Investment Promotion Agency may
authorize the importation of capital equipment, raw
materials, spare parts, or accessories pending
issuance of the certificate of registration, subject to
the posting of a performance bond or bank guarantee
equivalent to duties and taxes waived on such
importations and other conditions as may be
determined by the concerned Investment Promotion
Agency and the BOC.

No taxes and duties shall be imposed on
subsequent sale, transfer, or disposition of the capital
equipment, raw materials, spare parts, or accessories,
which were granted tax and customs duty exemption
hereunder within the first five (5) years from date
of importation. The approval of the Investment
Promotion Agency must be secured before the sale,
transfer, or disposition of the capital equipment, raw
materials, spare parts, or accessories, which were

granted tax and customs duty exemption hereunder,
and shall be allowed only under any of the following
circumstances:

(a) If made to another enterprise availing of
customs duty exemption on imported capital
equipment, raw materials, spare parts, or accessories;

(b) Exportation of capital equipment, raw
materials, spare parts, accessories, source documents,
or goods required for pollution abatement and
control; or

(c) If donated: to the Government of the
Philippines or to any of its agencies or political
subdivisions, including fully-owned government
corporations, TESDA, state universities and colleges
(SUCs), or DepEd and CHED-accredited schools:
Provided, That the donation shall be exempt from
import duties and taxes, including donor's tax.

In case of subsequent sale, transfer, or
disposition of tax and duty-free capital equipment,
raw materials, spare parts, or accessories, within the
first five (5) years from date of importation and upon
approval by the Investment Promotion Agency, there
shall be taxes and duties assessed based on the net
book value of the capital equipment, raw materials,
spare parts, or accessories if:

(a) Made to another enterprise not availing of
duty exemption on imported capital equipment, raw
materials, spare parts, or accessories; or

(b) There is proven technical obsolescence of the
capital equipment, raw materials, spare parts, or
accessories.

Provided, That if the RBE sells, transfers, or
disposes the aforementioned imported items without
prior approval, the RBE and the vendee, transferee,
or assignee shall be solidarily liable to pay twice the
amount of the duty exemption that should have been
paid during its importation: Provided, further, That

the sale, transfer, or disposition of the capital
equipment, raw materials, spare parts, or accessories
made after five (5) years from date of importation
shall require that prior notice be given by the RBE
to the Investment Promotion Agency: Provided,
furthermore, That even if the sale, transfer, or
disposition of the capital equipment, raw materials,
spare parts, or accessories was made after five (5)
years from date of importation with notice to the
Investment Promotion Agency, the RBE is still liable
to pay the duties based on the net book value of the
capital equipment, raw materials, spare parts, or
accessories if it has violated any of its registration
terms and conditions.

(D) The VAT exemption on importation and
VAT zero-rating on local purchases shall only apply
to goods and services directly attributable to the
registered project or activity of a registered export
enterprise, or a registered high-value domestic
market enterprise, including expenses incidental
thereto. The project or activity registered with the
Investment Promotion Agency shall be subject to the
following conditions:

(1) Sale of goods or services by a VAT-registered
seller to a registered export enterprise, regardless of
location, shall be subject to zero percent (0%) VAT;

(2) Sale, transfer, or disposal of previously
VAT-exempt imported capital equipment, raw
materials, spare parts, or accessories shall be subject
to the following rules:

I. If the purchaser is a registered export
enterprise, regardless of location, the transaction
shall be subject to zero percent (0%) VAT; and

Il. If the purchaser is a registered domestic
market enterprise, regardless of location, the
transaction shall be subject to twelve percent (12%)
VAT based on the net book value of the capital
equipment, raw materials, spare parts, or accessories:

Provided, That local sales of goods and/or
services by an RBE, regardless of the income tax
incentives regime and location, shall be subject to
twelve percent (12%) VAT, unless otherwise exempt
or zero-rated under Titles IV and XIII of this Code.
For this purpose, ‘local sales’ shall cover sales of
goods and services to domestic market enterprises or
non-RBEs, regardless of whether the sale occurs
within the freeport or economic zones: Provided,
further, That the liability to pay and remit the VAT
to the government rests with the buyer .of the said
goods or services.

Any registered export enterprise that fails to
meet the seventy percent (70%) export sales threshold
in the immediately preceding year or high-value
domestic market enterprise that fails to meet the
export sale or investment capital requirement shall
be disqualified from availing of duty exemption on
importation under Section 294(D), and VAT
exemption on importation and VAT zero-rating on
local purchases under Section 294(E) in the
immediately succeeding year.

Notwithstanding the provisions in the preceding
paragraphs, sales receipts and other income derived
from non-registered project or activity shall be
subject to appropriate taxes imposed under this Code.

(E) xxx
@) zxx

Any law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
importation of petroleum products by any person,
including RBEs, shall be subject to the payment of
applicable duties and taxes as provided under
Republic Act No. 10863, otherwise known as the
‘Customs Modernization and Tariff Act’, and this
Code, respectively, upon importation into the
Philippine customs territory and/or into free zones
as defined under Republic Act No. 10863: Provided,
That the importation of petroleum products used in
international shipping or air transport operations

shall be covered by the provisions of Sections 109(U)

for job generation is not met, the RBEs must submit
and 135(A) of this Code.

to their respective Investment Promotion Agencies

1 and the Fiscal Incentives Review Board their
x X ox : justifications for and plans to address the same in
(@) Crude ail ; . the succeeding year.”

rude ou x x x ‘

SEC. 19. A new Section 295-A shall be introduced in the
National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended. The new
Section 295-A shall read as follows:

Provided, That applicable duties x x x

(H) The RBE local tax shall be imposed on an
RBE which meets and maintains the conditions for
its registration, during the period of availment of the
ITH and the EDR.

The tax shall be directly remitted by the RBE
to the Treasurer’s office of the municipality or city
where the enterprise is located.

Where “two (2) or more local government units
cover the same enterprise, the sharing between such
local government units shall be as follows:

“SEC. 295-A. Registered Business Enterprises
Taxpayer Service. — A separate service within the
BIR is hereby created to support the end-to-end tax
compliance of RBEs. The Commissioner shall
prescribe the manner and place of filing returns and
payment of taxes by RBEs through the said service.
For ease of compliance with tax rules and
regulations, simplified filing and payment processes
shall be implemented for RBEs.”

SEC. 20. Section 296 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read

(1) Fifty percent (50%) of revenues shall be as ‘follows:

shared equally among the local government units;
and

(2) Fifty percent (50%) of revenues shall be
apportioned based on the population of the local
government units.

Fifty percent (50%) of the share of the
municipality based on the foregoing allocation shall
be remitted to the province where the said
municipality is located: Provided, That cities shall
retain one hundred percent (100%) of their share.

Local government units may reduce or waive
the rate of tax, or their share thereof, in the case
of two (2) or more local government units covering
the same enterprise.

RBEs, whose performance commitments include
job generation, shall maintain their employment
levels to the extent practicable. In case of reduced
employment or when the performance commitment

“SEC. 296. Period of Availment of Incentives
for Projects or Activities Approved by the Investment
Promotion Agencies. — The period of availment of
incentives granted by the Investment Promotion
Agencies to RBEs shall be as follows:

(A) For export enterprise under the SIPP, ITH
of four (4) to seven (7) years, depending on location
and industry priorities as specified in this section;

followed by SCIT or EDR for ten (10) years, or SCIT .
or EDR for a maximum period of fourteen (14) to .
seventeen (17) years, depending on location and ‘

industry priorities: Provided, That the application for

extension of availment of incentives shall only be.
allowed for the same registered project or activity if:

such project or activity employs at least ten,
thousand (10,000) direct local employees and:
maintains the said number during its registration,
even if the registered project or activity no longer
complies with the conditions and qualifications set

forth in the SIPP: Provided, further, That the
extension of availment of incentives shall not exceed
five (5) years, subject to the performance review by
the Investment Promotion Agency. Notwithstanding
any provision to the contrary, no ITH shall be
granted to registered export enterprises that applied
for extension of availment of incentives for the same
project or activity.

A qualified expansion project or activity
registered under this Act may qualify to avail of
SCIT or EDR for eight (8) years, subject to the
provisions of Sections 294(B) and (C), qualifications
set forth in the SIPP, and performance review by
the Investment Promotion Agency: Provided, That
existing registered projects or activities prior to the
effectivity of Republic Act No. 11534 otherwise
known as the ‘Corporate Recovery and Tax Incentives
for Enterprises Act’, may qualify to register on or
before December 31, 2024 and avail of the incentives
granted under Republic Act No. 11534 for the
prescribed period, subject to the criteria and
conditions set forth in the SIPP. The qualified
expansion project or activity may also be entitled to
duty exemption on importation, VAT exemption on
importation, and VAT zero-rating on local purchases
subject to the provisions of Sections 294(D) and (EB),
respectively.

(B) For domestic market enterprise under the
SIPP, ITH for four (4) to seven (7) years followed
by EDR for ten (10) years, or EDR for a maximum
period of fourteen (14) to seventeen (17) years,
depending on location and industry priorities:
Provided, That the application for extension of
availment of incentives shall be allowed for the same
registered project or activity only if such project or
activity employs at least ten thousand (10,000) direct
local employees and maintains the said number
during its registration, even if the registered project
or activity no longer complies with the conditions
and qualifications set forth in the SIPP: Provided,
further, That the extension of availment of incentives
shall not exceed five (5) years, subject to the
performance review by the Investment Promotion
Agency. Notwithstanding any provision to the

contrary, no ITH shall be granted to domestic
market enterprises that have applied for extension
of availment of incentives for the same project or
activity.

A qualified expansion project or activity
registered under this Act may qualify to avail of
EDR for eight (8) years, subject to the provisions of
Section 294(C), qualifications set forth in the SIPP
and performance review by the Investment Promotion
Agency or the Fiscal Incentives Review Board, as the
case may be: Provided, That existing registered
projects or activities prior to the effectivity of
Republic Act No. 11534 may qualify to register on
or before December 31, 2024 and avail of the
incentives granted under Republic Act No. 11534 for
the prescribed period, subject to the criteria and
conditions set forth in the SIPP.

The period of availment of the foregoing income
tax-based incentives shall commence from the actual
start of commercial operations with the RBE availing
of the tax incentives within three (3) years from the
date of registration, unless otherwise provided in the
SIPP and its corresponding guidelines.

xX KK

(3) Tier III activities shall include (i) research
and development resulting in demonstrably significant
value-added, higher productivity, improved efficiency,
breakthroughs in science and health, and high-paying
jobs; (ii) generation of new knowledge and intellectual
property registered and/or licensed in the Philippines;
Gii) commercialization of patents, industrial designs,
copyrights and utility models owned or co-owned by
an RBE; (iv) highly technical manufacturing; or (v)
are critical to the structural transformation of the
economy and require substantial catch-up efforts,
including but not limited to cyber-security, artificial
intelligence, and data-center facilities.

The period of availment of incentives based on
the combination of both location and industry

priorities, as determined in the SIPP, shall be as
follows:

For exporters:

Location/
Industry Tier I Tier IT Tier IIT
Tiers

National 4ITH+10 | 5ITH+10 | 6ITH+10
Capital EDR/SCIT, | EDR/SCIT, | EDR/SCIT,
Region or 14 or 15 or 16

EDR/SCIT EDR/SCIT EDR/SCIT

Metropolitan | 5ITH + 10 6ITH+10 7ITH+10
areas or EDR/SCIT | EDR/SCIT, | EDR/SCIT,
areas or 15 or 16 or 17
contiguous EDR/SCIT EDR/SCIT EDR/SCIT
and adjacent

to the
National ~
Capital |:
Region *
All other 6ITH+10 | 7ITH+10 | 7ITH+10
areas EDR/SCIT, | EDR/SCIT, | EDR/SCIT,
or 16 or 17 or 17

EDR/SCIT EDR/SCIT EDR/SCIT

For domestic market activities:

Location/
Industry Tier I Tier IT Tier III
Tiers

Capital EDR, or 14 EDR, or 15 EDR, or 16

t —_—_|—____
National 4ITH+10 51ITH+10 61TH + |
Region EDR EDR EDR

Metropolitan | 5ITH+10 6ITH+10 7ITH+10
areas or EDR, or 15 EDR, or 16 EDR, or 17
areas EDR EDR EDR
contiguous
and adjacent
to the
National
Capital
Region

All other 6ITH+10 7ITH+10 71ITH+10
areas EDR, or 16 | EDR, or 17 | EDR, or 17
EDR EDR EDR

In addition to the incentives provided in the
tiers above, projects or activities of registered
business enterprises located in areas recovering from
armed conflict or a major disaster, as determined by
the Office of the President, shall be entitled to two
(2) additional years of income tax-based incentives.

Projects or activities registered prior to the
effectivity of this Act, or under the incentive system
provided herein that shall, in the duration of their
incentives, completely relocate from the National
Capital Region, shall be entitled to three (3)
additional years of income tax-based, incentives:
Provided, That the additional incentive shall
commence at the completion of the relocation of
operations.

RBEs may continue to avail of the VAT
zero-rating on local purchases and VAT exemption
on importation under Section 294(E), and duty
exemption on importation under Section 294(D), for
the entire registration period as an RBE, reckoned
from the date of registration, if the RBEs continue
to meet the terms and conditions of registration by
their respective Investment Promotion Agencies and
if the RBEs maintain at least seventy percent (70%)
of total annual production or output as export sales
for the immediately preceding year.

Registered domestic market enterprises may
avail of duty exemption on importation from the date
of registration until the expiration of the income
tax-based incentives granted in this section.

After the expiration of the entitlement to VAT
zero-rating on local purchases and VAT exemption
on importation under this Title, registered export
enterprises may avail of the VAT zero-rating on local
purchases and VAT exemption on importation under
Sections 106, 108, and 109 of this Code: Provided,
That they comply with the requirements set forth
therein.”

SEC. 21. A new Section 296-A shall be introduced in the
National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended. The new
Section 296-A shall read as follows:

expansion project or activity may also be entitled to
VAT exemption on importation and VAT zero-rating
on local purchases under Section 294(E) and duty

“SEC. 296-A. Period of Availment of Incentives
for Projects or Activities Approved by the Fiscal
Incentives Review Board. - The period of availment
of incentives granted by the Fiscal Incentives Review
Board to RBEs shall be as follows:

(A) For an export enterprise under the SIPP,
ITH of four (4) to seven (7) years, depending on
location and industry priorities as specified in this
section, followed by SCIT or EDR for twenty (20)
years, or SCIT or EDR for a maximum period of
twenty-four (24) to twenty-seven (27) years,
depending on location and industry priorities:
Provided, That the application for extension of
availment of incentives shall only be allowed for the
same registered project or activity if such project or
activity employs at least ten thousand (10,000) direct
local employees and maintains the said number
during its registration, even if the registered project
or activity no longer complies with the conditions
and qualifications set forth in the SIPP: Provided,
further, That the extension of availment of incentives
shall not exceed ten (10) years, subject to the
performance review by the Fiscal Incentives Review
Board. Notwithstanding any provision to the
contrary, no ITH shall be granted to registered
export enterprises that have applied for extension of
availment of incentives for the same project
or activity.

A qualified expansion project or activity
registered under this Act may qualify to avail of
SCIT or EDR for thirteen (13) years, subject to the
provisions of Sections 294(B) and (C), qualifications
set forth in the SIPP and performance review by the
Fiscal Incentives Review Board: Provided, That
existing registered projects or activities prior to the
effectivity of this Act may qualify to register and
avail of the incentives granted under this Act for the
prescribed period, subject to the criteria and
conditions set forth in the SIPP. The qualified

exemption on importation under Section 294(D).

(B) For domestic market enterprise under the
SIPP, ITH of four (4) to seven (7) years, followed by
EDR for twenty (20) years, or EDR for a maximum
period of twenty-four (24) to twenty-seven (27) years,
depending on location and industry priorities:
Provided, That the application for extension of
availment of incentives shall be allowed for the same
registered project or activity only if employment level
for such project or: activity employs at least ten
thousand (10,000) direct local employees and
maintains the said number during its registration,
even if the registered project or activity no longer
complies with the conditions and qualifications set
forth in the SIPP: Provided, further, That the
extension of availment of incentives shall not exceed
ten (10) years, subject to the performance review by
the Fiscal Incentives Review Board. Notwithstanding
any provision to the contrary, no ITH shall be
granted to domestic market enterprises that have
applied for extension of availment of incentives for
the same project or activity.

A qualified expansion project or activity
registered under this Act may qualify to avail of
EDR for thirteen (13) years, subject to the provisions
of Section 294(C), qualifications set forth in the SIPP,
and performance review by the Investment Promotion
Agency or Fiscal Incentives Review Board, as the
case may be: Provided, That existing registered
projects or activities prior to the effectivity of this
Act may qualify to register and avail of the
incentives granted under this Act for the prescribed
period, subject to the criteria and conditions set forth
in the SIPP. The qualified expansion project or
activity may also be entitled to VAT exemption on
importation and VAT zero-rating on local purchases
under Section 294(E) and duty exemption on
importation under Section 294(D).

The period of availment of the foregoing income
tax-based incentives shall commence from the actual
start of commercial operations with the RBE availing
of the tax incentives within three (3) years from the
date of registration, unless otherwise provided in the
SIPP and its corresponding guidelines.

The period of availment of incentives based on
the combination of both location and industry
priorities, as determined in the SIPP, shall be as
follows:

For exporters:

[ Location
INDUSTRY

TIERS .. TIER I TIER II TIER III

National 4ITH+ 20 | 5ITH+20 | 6ITH+20
Capital SCIT/EDR, | SCIT/EDR, | SCIT/EDR,
Region or 24 or 25 or 26

SCIT/EDR SCIT/EDR | SCIT/EDR

Metropolitan | 5ITH+ 20 6 ITH + 20 7ITH +20
areas or SCIT/EDR, | SCIT/EDR, | SCIT/EDR
areas or 25 or 26 or 27
contiguous SCIT/EDR SCIT/EDR | SCIT/EDR
and adjacent
to the
National
Capital
Region

All other 6ITH+20 | 7ITH+20 | 7ITH+20

areas SCIT/EDR, | SCIT/EDR, | SCIT/EDR,
or 26 or 27 or 27

SCIT/EDR | SCIT/EDR | SCIT/EDR

{|
i

For domestic market activities:

LOCATION/
INDUSTRY

TIERS TIERI TIER II TIER III

National 41TH + 20 51TH + 20 6 ITH + 20
Capital EDR, or 24 EDR, or 25 EDR, or 26
Region EDR EDR EDR

Metropolitan | 5ITH+20 | 6ITH +20 7ITH+20
areas or EDR, or 25 EDR, or 26 EDR, or 27
areas EDR EDR * EDR
contiguous
and adjacent ’
to the
National
Capital
Region

All other 61ITH+20 | 7ITH+20 | 7ITH+20
areas EDR, or 26 EDR, or 27 EDR, or 27
EDR EDR EDR

RBEs may-continue to avail of the VAT
zero-rating on local purchases and VAT exemption
on importation under Section 294(E), and duty
exemption on importation under Section 294(D), for
the entire registration period as an RBE, reckoned
from the date of registration, if the RBEs continue
to meet the terms and conditions of their
registration with their respective Investment
Promotion Agencies and if the following requirements
are met for the immediately preceding year:

(1) Registered export enterprises maintain at
least seventy percent (70%) of total annual production
or output as export sales;

(2) High-value domestic market enterprises
satisfy the investment capital or export requirement
under Section 293(J) of this Code. Qualified high-value
domestic market enterprises may avail of the said
incentives from the date of registration until the
expiration of the income tax-based incentives granted
in this section.

|
38 |
i

Registered domestic market enterprises may
avail of duty exemption from the date of registration
until the expiration of the income tax-based
incentives granted in this section.

After the expiration of the entitlement to VAT
zero-rating on local purchases and VAT exemption
on importation under this Title, registered export
enterprises may avail of the VAT zero-rating on local
purchases and VAT exemption on importation under i
Sections 106, 108, and 109 of this Code: Provided,
That they comply with the requirements set forth
therein.

In addition to the incentives provided in the
tiers above, projects or activities of registered
business enterprises located in areas recovering from
armed conflict or a major disaster, as determined by
the Office of the President, shall be entitled to two
(2) additional years of income tax-based incentives.



Projects or activities registered prior to the
effectivity of this Act or under the incentive system
provided herein that completely relocate from the
National Capital Region, within the duration of their
incentives, shall be entitled to three (3) additional
years of income tax-based incentives: Provided, That
the additional incentive shall commence upon the
completion of the relocation of operations.”

SEC. 22. Section 297 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read
as follows:

“SEC. 297. Expanded Functions of the Fiscal
Incentives Review Board. — The functions and
powers of the Fiscal Incentives Review Board created
under Presidential Decree No. 776, as amended, shall
be further expanded as follows:

(A) To exercise policy-making, oversight,
regulatory, and quasi-judicial functions on the
administration and grant of tax incentives by the
Investment Promotion Agencies and other

|

government agencies administering tax incentives. In
particular, the Fiscal Incentives Review Board shall:

(1) Determine the target performance metrics
as conditions to avail of tax incentives;

(2) Review and audit the compliance of
Investment Promotion Agencies and other
government agencies administering tax incentives,
with respect to the administration and grant of tax
incentives and impose sanctions such as, but not
limited to, withdrawal, suspension, or cancellation of
their authority to grant tax incentives under this
Title without prejudice to the conduct of inquiry,
investigation, and filing of appropriate criminal and
administrative cases against erring officials and
employees in accordance with the procedures
prescribed under existing laws;

(3) Conduct regular monitoring and evaluation
of investment and non-investment tax incentives,
such as using cost-benefit analysis to determine their
impact on the economy and whether agreed
performance targets are met; and prescribe data
requirements, reporting standards, processes, and
procedures for the application of incentives for the
calculation of costs and benefits upon application;

(4) Check and verify, as necessary, the
compliance of RBEs, through the Investment
Promotion Agencies, with the terms and conditions
of their availment, in particular the agreed target
performance metrics, rules and regulations of this
Act, and other relevant laws or issuances;

(5) Provide Investment Promotion Agencies with
capacity-building activities to ensure that they are
equipped to comply with reportorial requirements; and

(6) Assess its organizational structure, focusing
on the adequacy of its human resources for
regulatory and quasi-judicial functions. If necessary,
the Fiscal Incentives Review Board shall submit to
the Department of Budget and Management the

seicga

proposed organizational changes to strengthen its
human resources in accordance with existing laws
and regulations.

For this purpose, all Investment Promotion
Agencies and other government agencies
administering tax incentives shall annually furnish
the Fiscal Incentives Review Board with all the
issuances related to the grant and administration of
incentives.

(B) To‘approve or disapprove, the grant of tax
incentives to the extent of the registered project or
activity listed in the SIPP upon the recommendation
of the Investment Promotion Agency: Provided, That
the application for tax incentives shall be duly
accompanied by a cost-benefit analysis: Provided,
further, That the Investment Promotion Agencies
shall use the Fiscal Incentives Review Board-
prescribed data requirements and methodologies for
the application of incentives in calculating the costs
and benefits upon application: Provided, further,
That the Investment Promotion Agencies shall grant
the tax incentives to registered projects or activities
listed in the SIPP with investment capital of Fifteen
billion pesos (P15,000,000,000) and below: Provided,
furthermore, That the Fiscal Incentives Review
Board, in consultation with the Investment
Promotion Agencies, may increase the threshold
amount of Fifteen billion pesos (P15,000,000,000);

(C) To approve applications for tax subsidies to
government-owned or -controlled corporations,
government instrumentalities, government
commissaries, and state universities and colleges.

For this purpose, the other government agencies
shall ensure complete submission of applications,
documents, records, books, or other relevant data or
material;

(D) To formulate additional time-bound or
place-specific projects or activities for inclusion in the
SIPP during periods of recovery from calamities and
post-conflict situations and where the Fiscal
Incentives Review Board determines that there is a

rh enema ancosmnaeineitisne





need to attract many classes, firms, and other
investors that would accelerate the growth of a
region’s flagship industries, in accordance with the
Medium-Term Development Plan and Republic Act
No. 11962, otherwise known as the ‘Trabaho Para
sa Bayan Act’, and recommend incentives to
the President;

(E) To cancel, suspend, or withdraw, after due
process, the enjoyment of fiscal incentives of
concerned RBEs on its own initiative or upon the
recommendation of the Investment Promotion
Agency for flagrant and material violations of any
of the conditions imposed in the grant of fiscal
incentives, including, but not limited to, the
non-compliance with the agreed performance
commitments, and endorse RBEs whose incentives
are cancelled, suspended, or withdrawn to the
concerned revenue agencies for the assessment and
collection of taxes and duties due commencing from
the first year of availment;

xxx

(G) To require Investment Promotion Agencies
and other government agencies administering tax
incentives to submit, regularly or when requested,
summaries of approved investment and incentives
granted, and firm- or entity-level tax incentives and
benefits data as input to the Fiscal Incentives Review
Board’s review and audit function, and evaluation of
performance of recipients of tax incentives. For this
purpose, the Fiscal Incentives Review Board shall
maintain a masterlist of registered products and
services for export or domestic consumption that are
entitled to incentives: Provided, That to facilitate
compliance with the foregoing, the DTI, in
coordination with relevant regulatory bodies, shall
cause the registration and reporting by RBEs of the
types of services rendered whether domestically or to
foreign clients; types of products manufactured
domestically, products imported and sold locally, and
products exported;

(H) To publish regularly, per firm, the data
pertaining to the amount of tax incentives, tax
payments, and other related information, including

SEC. 23. A new Section 297-A shall be introduced in the
National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended. The new
Section 297-A shall read as follows:

benefits data, subject to the provisions of Chapter V
of this Title;

xxx

(K) To decide on issues, on its own initiative
or upon the recommendation of the Investment
Promotion Agency, after due hearing, concerning the
approval, disapproval, cancellation, suspension,
withdrawal, or forfeiture of tax incentives or tax
subsidy in accordance with this Act. The Fiscal

within ninety (90) days from the date when the

“SEC. 297-A. Processing of Tax Incentive
Applications. — The Fiscal Incentives Review Board
and Investment Promotion Agencies shall issue a
decision on applications for tax incentives within
twenty (20) working days from the receipt of all
required documents, in accordance with Section 9 of
Republic Act No. 11032, otherwise known as the
‘Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government
Service Delivery Act of 2018’. An extension of the
processing period may be permitted only once, and
shall in no case exceed an additional twenty (20)
working days.”

SEC. 24. Section 300 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read
as follows:

Fiscal Incentives Review Board declares the issues
submitted for resolution. A business enterprise

i
i
Incentives Review Board shall decide on the matter |
i
adversely affected by the decision of the Fiscal i

Incentives Review Board may, within thirty (30) days
from receipt of the adverse decision, appeal the same
to the Court of Tax Appeals;

(L) To promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the intent and provisions of this Title. The Fiscal Incentives Review Board may use any electronic means of publication in the Official Gazette or its official website;

(M) x x x
(N) x x x

(O) To recommend policies to prevent abuse of
fiscal incentives availment and tax evasion under
this Code and smuggling activities; and

(P) To exercise all other powers necessary or
incidental to attain the purposes of this Act and other
laws vesting additional functions on the Fiscal
Incentives Review Board.



sackman Ne

“SEC. 300. Strategic Investment Priority Plan.
— The BOI, in consultation with the Fiscal Incentives
Review Board, and the Investment Promotion
Agencies, other government agencies administering
tax incentives, and the private sector, shall formulate
the SIPP to be submitted to the President for
approval, which may contain recommendations for
types of non-fiscal support needed to create high-
skilled jobs to grow a local pool of enterprises,
particularly micro, small and medium enterprises
(MSMEs), that can supply to domestic and global
value chains, to increase the sophistication of
products and services that are produced and/or
sourced domestically, to expand domestic supply and
reduce dependence on imports, and to attract
significant foreign capital or investment. The SIPP
may include areas of investment that are specific to
an area or region, taking into consideration the
project or activity that the Investment Promotion
Agencies in those areas or regions deem fit to
promote, in order to foster regional growth and
attract investments: Provided, That the project or
activity identified by the Investment Promotion

ihe

Agencies shall be consistent with the Philippine Development Plan and Republic Act No. 11962, otherwise known as the ‘Jobs for the Nation’.

SEC. 25. Section 301 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read
as follows:

Act’. The SIPP shall be valid for a period of three
(3) years, subject to review and amendment every
three (3) years thereafter unless there would be a
supervening event that would necessitate its review:
Provided, That the BOI shall cause the publication
of the rules and regulations implementing the SIPP,
including any amendments thereof, in the Official
Gazette or newspaper of general circulation, and on
its official website, to be effective.

The SIPP shall contain the following:

(A) Priority projects or activities that are
included in the Philippine Development Plan or its
equivalent,-or other government programs, taking
into account ‘any of the following:

xX xX xX

(B) Scope and coverage of location and industry
tiers in Section 296.

All sectors or industries that may be included
in the SIPP shall undergo an evaluation to
determine the suitability and potential of the
industry or the sector in promoting long-term growth
and sustainable development, and the national
interest. In no case shall a sector or industry be
included in the SIPP unless it is supported by a
formal evaluation process or report.

xX XxX

In no case shall the Investment Promotion
Agencies accept applications unless the project or
activity is listed in the SIPP. Projects or activities
not listed in the SIPP shall be automatically
disapproved.”

| i

Vianna

“SEC. 301. Power of the President to Grant
Incentives. — Notwithstanding the provisions of
Sections 295, 296, and 296-A, the President may, in
the interest of national economic development, or
upon the recommendation of the Fiscal Incentives
Review Board, modify the mix, period or manner of
availment of incentives provided under this Code or
craft the appropriate fiscal and non-fiscal support
package for a highly desirable project or a specific
industrial activity based on defined development
strategies for creating high-value jobs, building new
industries to diversify economic activities, and
attracting significant foreign and domestic capital or
investment, and the fiscal requirements of the
activity or project, subject to maximum incentive
levels recommended by the Fiscal Incentives Review
Board: Provided, That the grant of ITH shall not
exceed ten (10) years followed by SCIT of five percent
(5%) or EDR; or SCIT or EDR, which may be
immediately granted at the start of commercial
operations: Provided, further, That the total period
of income tax-based incentive availment shall not
exceed forty (40) years.

The Fiscal Incentives Review Board shall
determine whether the benefits that the government
may derive from such investment are clear and
convincing and far outweigh the cost of incentives
that will be granted in determining whether a project
or activity is highly desirable.

The determination by the Fiscal Incentives
Review Board shall guide the President in calibrating
either or both the magnitude of the incentives to be
granted and the agreed performance target
corresponding to the grant.

The President may exercise the powers under
this section: Provided, That the following conditions
are satisfied:

(1) The project has a comprehensive sustainable
development plan with clear inclusive business
approaches, and high level of sophistication and
innovation; and

(2) Minimum investment capital of Fifty billion
pesos (P50,000,000,000) or its equivalent in US
dollars, or a minimum direct local employment
generation of at least ten thousand (10,000) within

Economic and Development Authority's core public
investments program, cannot be fully financed.

Notwithstanding the provisions in the preceding
paragraphs, tax and duty incentives granted through
legislative franchises shall be exempted from the
foregoing powers of the President to review,
withdraw, suspend, or cancel tax incentives and
subsidies.”

SEC. 26. Section 308 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read
as follows: ‘

three (3) years from the issuance of the certificate
of entitlement.

Provided, That the threshold shall be subject
to a periodic review by the Fiscal Incentives Review
Board every three (3) years, taking into consideration
international standards or other economic indicators:
Provided, further, That if the project fails to
substantially meet the projected impact on the
economy and agreed performance targets, the Fiscal
Incentives Review Board shall recommend to the
President the cancellation of the tax incentive or
fiscal and non-fiscal support package or the modified
period or manner of availment of incentives, after
due hearing and an adequate opportunity to
substantially comply with the agreed performance
targets and outputs.

For this purpose, the President may grant
non-fiscal support package limited to the utilization
of government resources such as use of land and
budgetary support provision under the annual
General Appropriations Act.

This power of the President, in as far as it
commands additional public sector expenditures in
support of investors, is suspended during fiscal years
when, an unmanageable fiscal deficit is declared by
the President on the advice of the Development
Budget Coordination Committee with a consequence
that even core budgetary obligations, such as, but
not limited to, mandatory revenue allotments for local
government units and budget for the National

“SEC. 308. Penalties for Noncompliance with
Filing and Reportorial Requirements. — Any RBE or
other registered enterprise, which fails to comply with
filing and reportorial requirements with the
appropriate Investment Promotion Agencies or other
government agencies administering tax incentives
and/or, which fails to show proof of filing of tax
returns using the electronic system for filing and
payment of taxes of the BIR under Section 305
hereof, shall be imposed the following penalties by
the appropriate Investment Promotion Agency or
other governmént agency administering tax
incentives:

(A) First (1st) Violation — Payment of a fine
amounting to One hundred thousand pesos
(P100,000);

(B) Second (2nd) Violation — Payment of a fine
amounting to Five hundred thousand pesos
(P500,000); and

(C) Third (8rd) Violation — Cancellation by the
Investment Promotion Agency of the registration of
the RBE.

Provided, That if the failure to show such proof
is not due to the fault of the RBEs or other
registered enterprises, the same shall not be a
ground for the suspension of the ITH and/or other

nce

tax incentives availment: Provided, further, That
collections from the penalties shall accrue to the
general fund.

for not more than one (1) year, or both, in addition
to any criminal and administrative penalties
imposable under existing laws.”

After due process, the concerned Investment Promotion Agency may cancel the registration, suspend the enjoyment of incentive benefits of any

SEC. 27. Section 309 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read
as follows:

aint

registered enterprise, and/or require refund of
incentives enjoyed by such enterprise, including
interests and monetary penalties, for any willful and
material misrepresentation of information or
submission’ of falsified or misleading information or
documents for the purpose of availing of more
incentives than what it is entitled to under this Code:
Provided, further, That in case of cancellation of the
certificate of registration, the project or activity of
the RBE shall cease to be registered and the RBE
shall be réquired to pay all appropriate taxes and
duties froni the date the cancellation order becomes
final and executory.

Provided, That the Investment Promotion
Agency, with the recommendation of the
Commissioner, may revoke or suspend incentives
granted by the Investment Promotion Agency,
and/or order a business closure of the RBE that
violates Title VI (Excise Taxes on Certain Goods) and
Title X (Statutory Offenses and Penalties) of this
Code and other related revenue regulations, orders,
or issuances of the government: Provided, further,
That such authority shall cover the acts of the RBE
committed even in the first year of availment of
incentives. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
section, the DOF, the BIR, and the BOC shall retain
their respective mandates, powers and functions as
provided for under this Act and related laws.

Any government official or employee who fails
without justifiable reason to provide or furnish the
required tax incentives report or other data or

ills map

edie ERE ie

ieee saa

“SEC. 309. Prohibition on Registered Activities.
— Except as allowed under this provision, a qualified
registered project or activity under an Investment
Promotion Agency administering an economic zone
or freeport shall be exclusively conducted or operated
within the geographical boundaries of the zone or
freeport being administered by the Investment
Promotion Agency in which the project or activity
is registered: Provided, That an RBE may conduct
or operate more than one qualified registered project
or activity within the same zone or freeport under
the same Investment Promotion Agency: Provided,
further, That any project or activity conducted or
performed outside the geographical boundaries of the
zone or freeport shall not be entitled to the incentives
provided in this-Act: Provided, furthermore, That
RBEs may institute a ‘telecommuting’ program as
defined under Republic Act No. 11165, otherwise
known as the ‘Telecommuting Act’, including work-
from-home arrangements, which shall not cover more
than fifty percent (50%) of the total workforce, and
shall be subject to the rules and regulations
formulated by the Investment Promotion Agency. The
RBEs shall continue to avail of all the incentives
provided under this Act and under their registration
with any applicable Investment Promotion Agency:
Provided, finally, That double registration for
purposes of availing of other incentives under special
laws shall not be allowed.”

SEC. 28. Section 310 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read
as follows:

information as required under Sections 306 and 307
of this Act shall be penalized, after due process, by
a fine equivalent to the official’s or employee’s basic
salary for a period of one (1) month to six (6)
months or by suspension from government service

ERSESEEEEEE: wrpencreneniaonommmn grannies cio yin

“SEC. 310. Establishment of One-Stop Action
Center and Initial Point of Contact for Foreign
Investment Leads. — All Investment Promotion
Agencies shall establish a one-stop shop or one-stop
action center that will facilitate and expedite, to the
extent possible, the setting up and conduct of
registered projects or activities, including assistance
in coordinating with the local government units and
other government agencies to comply with Republic
Act No. 11032, otherwise known as the ‘Ease of
Doing Business and Efficient Government Service
Delivery Act of 2018’: Provided, however, That the
enterprises shall continue to avail of the one-stop
shop facility notwithstanding the expiration of their
incentives under this Code.

Unless otherwise provided under special laws,
local government units may delegate to the
concerned Investment Promotion Agency, through
appropriate memoranda of agreement, the functions
of accepting, processing, and granting business
permits and licenses.

The Investment Promotion Agency may also
assist RBEs in obtaining licenses and permits from
national government agencies by accepting and
submitting documentary requirements for such
licenses and permits, on behalf of the RBEs to the
appropriate national government agencies.

The Investment Promotion Agency may
undertake activities necessary to perform the function
as the initial point of contact for foreign investment
leads. Such activities shall include assisting potential
foreign investors in establishing their business
enterprises in the concerned Investment Promotion
Agency or in the economic zone best suited to their
specific needs.”

serps caren ica

&
i
a
|
¢
-
=
i
a
H
8 2
g

“SEC. 311. Investments Prior to the Effectivity
of Republic Act No. 11534. - RBEs with incentives
granted prior to the effectivity of Republic Act
No. 11534 shall be subject to incentives granted in
their certificate of registration or certificate of
registration and tax exemption, and to the
following rules:

(A) x x xX

(B) RBEs, whose projects or activities were
granted an ITH prior to the effectivity of Republic
Act No. 11534 and are entitled to the five percent
(5%) tax on gross income earned incentive after the
ITH, shall be allowed to avail of the five percent
(5%) tax on gross income earned incentive based on
Subsection (C), including all corresponding
exemptions from national taxes, local taxes, and local
fees and charges until December 31, 2034;

(C) RBEs currently availing of the five percent
(5%) tax on gross income earned granted prior to the
effectivity of Republic Act No. 11534 shall be allowed
to continue availing of the said tax incentives at the
rate of five percent (5%), including all corresponding
exemptions from national taxes, local taxes, and local
fees and charges until December 31, 2034; and

(D) RBEs availing of duty exemption on
importation under Section 294(D), VAT exemption on
importation, and VAT zero-rating on local purchases
under Section 294(E) prior to the effectivity of
Republic Act No. 11534 shall be allowed to continue
availing of the said tax incentives until December
31, 2034: Provided, That registered export enterprises
shall continue to avail of the said incentives
thereafter, in accordance with Title IV of this Code,
the provisions of Republic Act No. 10863, otherwise
known as the ‘Customs Modernization and Tariff
Act’, as amended, and other applicable laws.”

SEC. 29. Section 311 of the National Internal Revenue SEC. 30. Appropriations. — The Secretary of Finance shall
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read 7 immediately elude in the Department's program the
as follows: ' operationalization of the electronic processing of the VAT refund
‘ system, the funding of which shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 31. Transitory Provisions. — The following
provisions shall apply prospectively to projects or activities
granted with tax incentives under Republic Act No. 11534
upon the effectivity of this Act:

(1) The exemption from national and local taxes,
including local fees and charges for projects or activities
availing of SCIT pursuant to Section 294(B) of Title XIII;

(2) The availment of additional enhanced deductions
provided under Section 294(C)(6), (7), (8), and (9) of Title XIII;

(3) The imposition of twenty percent (20%) income tax
rate specified in Sections 27 and 28 of this Code upon the
taxable income of RBEs availing the enhanced deduction
regime;

(4) The imposition of RBE local tax under Section 294(F)
of Title XIII, to RBEs availing of ITH or EDR; and

(5) The conditions for the availment of the duty and
VAT exemption on importation and VAT zero-rating on local
purchases under Sections 295(C) and (D) of Title XIII.

No tax refund or credit shall be granted to RBEs covered
by Section 19 of this Act.

SEC. 32. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Secretary
of Finance, upon the recommendation of the Commissioner of
Internal Revenue, shall promulgate the necessary rules and
regulations for its effective implementation: Provided, That for
the provisions under Title XIII of the National Internal
Revenue Code of 1997, as amended, the Secretary of Finance
and the Secretary of Trade and Industry shall jointly
promulgate the necessary rules and regulations thereof within
the same period, after due consultation with the BIR, the BOC,
the BOI, and other Investment Promotion Agencies, for its
effective implementation. Failure to promulgate the rules and
regulations shall not prevent the implementation of this Act
upon its effectivity.

SEC. 33. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is declared unconstitutional, the remaining parts or
provisions hereof not affected thereby shall remain in full force
and effect.

SEC. 34. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive
orders, implementing rules and regulations, issuances, or any
part thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are
deemed repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

SEC. 35. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect after
fifteen (15) days following its publication in the Official Gazette
or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved, :

TIN G. JALDEZ FRANCIS “CHIZ’ G. ESCUDERO
Speaker of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 2762
and House Bill No. 9794, was passed by the Senate of the
Philippines and the House of Representatives on
mber 10, 2024.

House of Representatives

CERTIBI

REPUBLIC OF THE

UY ABN 0

COPY

Sy-y( aq -XCTING DIRECTOR IV