S.No. 2898
H. No. 10755

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Nineteenth Cangress

Third Regular Session

|
|

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

—_

[ RepuBLic Act No. 12252]

AN ACT LIBERALIZING THE LEASE OF PRIVATE
LANDS BY FOREIGN INVESTORS, ESTABLISHING
THE STABILITY OF LONG-TERM LEASE CONTRACTS,
AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT
NO. 7652, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE “INVESTORS’
LEASE ACT”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 2 of Republic Act No. 7652, otherwise
known as the “Investors’ Lease Act”, is hereby amended to
read as follows:

“SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is hereby
declared the policy of the State to encourage foreign
investments consistent with the constitutional
mandate to conserve and develop our own patrimony.

Towards this end, the State hereby adopts a flexible
and dynamic policy on the granting of long-term
lease on private lands to foreign investors for the
establishment of industrial estates, factories,
assembly or processing plants, agro-industrial
enterprises, land development for industrial or
commercial use, tourism, agriculture, agro-forestry,
ecological conservation and other similar priority
productive: endeavors.

It is the policy of the State to ensure the
reliability of investors’ lease contracts to provide a
stable environment for foreign investments.”

‘SEC. 2. Section 4 of Republic Act No. 7652 is, hereby
amended to read as follows: :

“SEC. 4. Coverage. — Any foreign investor
investing in the Philippines shall be allowed to lease
private lands in accordance with the laws of the
Republic of the Philippines subject to the following
conditions:

(1) The aggregate period of the lease contract

shall not exceed ninety-nine (99) years: Provided, -

That upon the recommendation of the Fiscal
Incentives Review Board (FIRB) or other relevant
government agencies, the President of the Philippines
may impose a shorter lease period for investors
engaged in vital services or industries considered as
critical infrastructure, in the interest of national
security or pursuant to government-identified
priorities for national development;

(2) The leased area shall be used solely for the
purpose of the approved and registered investment
upon the mutual agreement of the parties;

(3) The leased premises shall comprise such
area as may reasonably be required for the purpose
of the approved and registered investment subject
however to the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Law
and the Local Government Code; and

(4) The foreign investor must have an approved
and registered investment under Republic Act No. 7042,
otherwise known as the ‘Foreign Investments Act of
1991’, as amended; Republic Act No. 11534, otherwise

known as the ‘Corporate Recovery and Tax Incentives
for Enterprises Act’ or ‘CREATE’, as amended by
Republic Act No. 12066, otherwise known as the
‘CREATE MORE’ Act; or under other applicable laws,
or has complied with the investment requirements
prescribed by the appropriate Investment Promotion
Agency (IPA) pursuant to existing laws;

(5) The lease contract shall be registered with
the Registry of Deeds of the province or city where
the leased area is located and annotated on the
certificate of title covering the leased area; and

(6) The Register of Deeds shall register the
lease contract if all of the following conditions exist:

_ (a) The investor presents proofeof an approved and
registered investment under subparagraph 4 hereof:

(b) The date of commencement and maximum
duration of the lease are certain;
. _. &) The technical description of the property
subject of the lease is clearly specified;

(a) The lessee has performed preparatory acts
for the commencement of its investment project; and

_() There is a provision in the lease contract
providing for its termination in case of a change in
the purpose or project for which the lease was
intended, or in case of failure to commence the
investment project within a reasonable period from
the signing of the lease contract.

The leasehold right acquired under long-term
lease contracts entered into pursuant to this Act may
be sold, transferred, assigned, or may serve as
security for a loan: Provided, That when the buyer,
transferee, assignee, or creditor is a foreigner or
foreign-owned enterprise, the conditions and
limitations in respect to the use of the leased
property as provided under this Act shall continue
to apply.”

oo
wy

(5) In the case of tourism projects, lease of
private lands by qualified foreign investors shall be
limited to projects with an investment of not less
than Five million US dollars (USD 5,000,000.00),
seventy percent (70%) of which shall be infused in
said project within three (3) years from the signing
of the lease contract.”

SEC. 3. A new Section 4-A is hereby inserted after
Section 4 of Republic Act No. 7652, to read as follows:

“SEC. 4-A. Operative Act of Registration. — The
registration of the long-term lease contract shall be
the operative act that renders the lease binding
against third persons. Registration shall be made in
accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree
No. 1529, as amended. SEC. 5. A new Section 5-A is hereby inserted after
Section 5 of Republic Act No. 7652, to read as follows:

A registered lease contract shall not be subject
to collateral attack. It cannot be altered, modified,
or cancelled, except in a direct proceeding in
accordance with law.” .

“SEC. 5-A. Sublease. — Unless there is an
express prohibition in the lease contract, the lessee
may sublet the property with the consent of the
lessor. The conditions under Sections 4 and 5 of this
Act shall apply to the sublease contract.”

e

—}

SEC. 4. Section 5 of Republic Act No. 7652 is hereby

amended to read as follows: {
SEC. 6. A new Section 5-B is hereby inserted after the

“SEC. 5. Limitations. — new Section 5-A of Republic Act No. 7652, to read as follows:

(1) Foreign individuals, corporations,
associations, or partnerships not otherwise investing
in the Philippines as defined herein shall continue
to be covered by Presidential Decree No. 471 and
other existing laws on lease of lands to foreigners;

(2) Withdrawal of the approved and registered
investment in the Philippines within the period of
the lease contract entered into under this Act, or use
of the leased area for the purpose other than that
authorized, shall warrant the ipso facto termination
of the lease contract without prejudice to the right
of the lessor to be compensated for the damages the
lessor may have suffered thereby:

(3) Any lease contract under this Act which is
renewable at the option of the lessee subject to the
same terms and conditions of the original contract
shall be interpreted to mean as renewable upon the
mutual agreement of the parties:

(4) In addition to the conditions for the renewal
of a lease contract, the foreign lessee shall show that
it has made social and economic contributions to the
country; and

. “SEC. 5-B. Registration of Sublease Contracts.
— Sublease contracts shall be registered with the
Registry of Deeds and annotated on the Certificate
of Title to the land.”

SEC. 7. Section 6 of Republic Act No. 7652 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 6. Termination of Lease Contract. — In
case of failure to commence the investment project
within three (3) years from the signing of the lease
contract, the FIRB, Board of Investments (BOI), or
the relevant IPA, as applicable, shall order the lessee
to explain the delay and if merited, require such
lessee to commence the project within a reasonable
period. Failure to comply with the order and to
initiate the project within the period provided may,
after due notice and hearing, cause the revocation
of all entitlements granted under this Act.”

SEC. 8. Section 7 of Republic Act No. 7652 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 7. Penal Provision. — Any contract made
or executed in violation of any of the following
prohibited acts shall be null and void ab initio and
both contracting parties shall be punished by a fine
of not less than One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) but
not more than Ten million pesos (P10,000,000.00) or
imprisonment of six (6) months to six (6) years, at
the discretion of the court:

(1) Any provision in the lease contract
stipulating a lease period in excess of that provided
in paragraph (1) of Section 4;

(2) Use of the leased premises for a purpose
contrary to existing laws of the land, public order,
public policy, morals, or good customs;

(3) Any agreement resulting in the lease of
land in excess of the approved area: Provided, That,
where the excess of the totality of the area leased
is due to the acts of the lessee, the lessee shall be
held solely liable therefor: Provided, further, That,
in the case of corporations, associations, or
partnerships, the president, manager, director,
trustee, or officers responsible for the violation hereof
shall bear the criminal liability.

The penalties provided under this section shall
likewise apply to all sublease contracts.”

SEC. 9. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Department
of Trade and Industry (DTI), through the BOI, and the Land
Registration Authority (LRA), shall promulgate the necessary
implementing rules and regulations for the effective
implementation of this Act, in consultation with the FIRB and
other concerned government agencies and stakeholders.

SEC. 10. Separability Clause. — If any part or provision
of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other
parts or provisions hereof not otherwise affected shall remain
valid and effective.

SEC. 11. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
issuances, rules, and regulations or parts thereof that are
inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

SEC. 12. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect after

fifteen (15) days following its complete publication in the
Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

“CHIZ” G. ESCUDERO
President of the Senate

 

of Representatives

?

This Act, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill
No. 2898 and House Bill No. 10755, was passed by the
Senate of the Philippines and the House of Representatives
on June 9, 2025.

    

REGINALISS. VELASCO
Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

‘

Approved: ‘SEP. @ 3 2025

    
   

;
FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.

President of th

       
 
   
  

Officg.of the President
RECORDS OFFICE

ED COPY

LENTINO-NAVA
DIRECTOR IV

ma Qo
REP! oF

PBBMO09i

(ILIPPINES