H. No. 7909
S. No. 2219

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Mineteenth Gougress

first Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth
day of July, two thousand twenty-two.

[REPUBLIC AcT No. L1 958]

AN ACT FURTHER AMENDING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11213,
OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE “TAX AMNESTY ACT”,
AS AMENDED BY REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11569, BY
EXTENDING THE PERIOD OF AVAILMENT OF THE
ESTATE TAX AMNESTY UNTIL JUNE 14, 2025, AND
FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Répresentatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 4 of Republic Act No. 11213, as
amended by Republic Act No. 11569, is hereby further amended
to read as follows:

“SEC. 4. Coverage. — There is hereby
authorized and granted a tax amnesty,
hereinafter called Estate Tax Amnesty, which
shall cover the estate of decedents who died on or

SEC. 2. Section 6 of Republic Act No. 11213, as amended
by Republic Act No. 11569, is hereby further amended to read as

follows:

before May 31, 2022, with or without assessments
duly issued therefor, whose estate taxes have
remained unpaid or have accrued as of
May 81, 2022: Provided; however, That the Estate
Tax Amnesty hereby authorized and granted shall
not cover instances enumerated under
Section 9 hereof.”

“Src. 6. Availment of the Estate Tax

Amnesty; When and Where to File and Pay. —
The executor or administrator of the estate, or if
there is no executor or administrator appointed,
the legal heirs, transferees or beneficiaries, who
wish to avail of the Estate Tax Amnesty shall,
within June 15, 2023 until June 14, 2025, file,
either electronically or manually, with any
authorized agent bank, Revenue District Office
through the Revenue Collection Officer, or
authorized tax software provider, a sworn Estate
Tax Amnesty Return, in such forms as may be
prescribed in the Implementing Rules and
Regulations. The payment of the amnesty tax
shall be made, either electronically or manually,
at the time the Returnis filed with any authorized
agent bank, Revenue District Office through the
Revenue Collection Officer, or authorized tax
software provider: Provided, That the appropriate
Revenue District Officer shall issue and endorse
an acceptance payment form, in such form as
may be prescribed in the Implementing Rules and
Regulations of this Act for the authorized agent
bank, or in the absence thereof, the revenue
collection agent or authorized tax software
provider concerned, to accept the tax amnesty
payment: Provided, further, That for the
availment of the estate tax amnesty, the
requirements to be submitted to the Bureau of
Internal Revenue (BIR) by the filers of the estate
tax amnesty shall be limited to the following:

“(A) Mandatory requirements:

“(1) Certified true copy of the Death
Certificate (DO), or if not available, the certificate
of no record of death from Philippine Statistics
Authority and any valid secondary evidence
including, but not limited to, those issued by any
government agency/office sufficient to establish:
the fact of death of the decedent;

“(2) Taxpayer Identificiation Numb T
of decedent and heir/s; aie

“(8) For “claims against the estate” arising
from contract of loan, notarized promissory note,
if applicable;

“(4) Proof of the claimed “property
previously taxed”, if any;

“(6) Proof of the claimed “transfer for public
use”, if any; and

/ “(6) At least one (1) government-issued
identification card (ID) of the executor/
administrator of the estate, or if there is no
executor or administrator appointed, the heirs,
transferees, beneficiaries or authorized
representative.

“(B) For real property/ies, if any:

“(1) Certified true copy/ies of the transfer/
original condominium certificate/s of title of
real property/ies;

“(2) Certified true“copy of the tax.
declaration of real property/ies, if untitled,
including the improvements at the time of death
or the succeeding available tax declafation issued
nearest to the time of death of the decedent, if
none is available at the time of death; and

“(3) Where declared property/ies has/have
no improvement, Certificate of No Improvement
issued by the assessor's office at the time of death
of the decedent.

 

“(C) For personal property/ies, if applicable:

“(1) Certificate of Deposit/Investment/
Indebtedness owned by the decedent alone, or
decedent and the surviving spouse, or decedent
jointly with others;

“(2) Certificate of Registration of vehicle/s
and other proofs showing the correct value of

the same;

“(8) Certificate of Stocks;

“In the absence of any of the documents
required above, the Commissioner of Internal
Revenue may request for alternative documents,
as may be deemed appropriate.

“The application for payment of estate taxes
shall be a distinct and separate process from the
application for transfer of properties: Provided,
however, That the proof of settlement of the estate,
whether judicial or extrajudicial, shall only be
required by the BIR for the issuance of the
Electronic Certificate Authorizing Registration
(ECAR) for the transfer of properties, and not for
purposes of filing and payment of the estate taxes.

SEC. 3. Section 8 of Republic Act No. 11213, as amended
by Republic Act No. 11569, is hereby further amended to read as

“(4) Proof of valuation of shares of stock at follows:

the time of death; or

“(5) Proof of valuation of other types of
personal property.

“(D) Other requirements, if applicable:

“(1) If the person transacting/processing
the transfer is the authorized representative, duly
notarized original Special Power of Attorney (SPA)
and/or, if one of the heirs is designated as
executor/administrator, sworn statement;

“(2) If the document is executed abroad,
certification from the Philippine Consulate or

“Src. 8. Immunities and Privileges. —
Estates covered by the Estate Tax Amnesty,
which have fully complied with all the conditions
set forth in this Act, including the payment of
the estate amnesty tax shall be immune from
the payment of all estate taxes, as well as any
increments and additions thereto, arising from
the failure to pay any and all estate taxes for the
period ending May 31, 2022 and prior years, and
from all appurtenant civil, criminal, and
administrative cases and penalties under the
National Internal Revenue Code of 1997,
as amended.

Apostille; or PRK

“(3) If zonal value cannot be readily : . SEC. 4. Payment by Installment. — Payment by
determined from the documents submitted, : installment shall be allowed within two (2) years from the statutory
location plan/vicinity map. date for its payment without civil penalty and interest.

¥

 

 

SEC. 5. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
thirty (30) days from its effectivity, the Secretary of Finance shall,
in coordination with the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, issue %
the necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation.
of this Act. Failure to promulgate the rules and regulations shall
not prevent the implementation of this Act upon its effectivity.

SEC. 6. Repealing Clause. — All laws, orders, rules and
regulations which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act ~
are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in two (2)
newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,

   

   

     
 

      

MIGUELF. ZUBIRI
President of the Senate

RDINAI RTRYG. RO!
Speaker of the Hous
of Representatives

 

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 2219 on May 29, 2023 and adopted by the House of
Representatives as an amendment to House Bill No. 7909 on
May 30, 2023.

is
REGEVALDS. VELASCO
Secretary General
House of Representatives

y
Lapseu inte taw on 05 AUG 2023
Approved: Without "he signature of the Preident
In accordancs with Article VI, Section
27 (1) of the Constitution.

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines

 

oO

  
 
 

    

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

, Gailunimn,
ity. (ON ZENY E. FERROLINO-ENAD

223 DIRECTOR Iv U, (Le)

  
  

&&-