H. No, 5598

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Nineteenth Congress
Third Regular Svasian

iS

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No.J 2238 J

AN ACT DECLARING MAASIN CITY AND THE MUNICIPALITIES
OF MALITBOG AND PADRE BURGOS, ALL IN THE
PROVINCE OF SOUTHERN LEYTE, AS TOURISM ZONES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act hereby declares the City of Maasin and
the Municipalities of Malitbog and Padre Burgos in the Province of
Southern Leyte as tourism zones.

Pursuant thereto, its development as a viable host for the visitor
economy shall be prioritized and supported by the Department of
Tourism (DOT), subject to the rules and regulations governing the
development of tourism zones,

Spc. 2, Within one (1) year after the approval of this Act, the
Provincial Government of Southern Leyte shall, in coordination with
the DOT, Department of Public Works and Highways, Department of
Environment and Natural Resources, and concerned agencies of the
government, prepare a tourism development plan providing for the
development, maintenance, improvement, and restoration of tourism

sites, where appropriate, in conformity with set standards, including
the construction of hotels, resorts, restaurants, recreational facilities,
and other appropriate facilities and infrastructure to enhance tourism
in the area: Provided, That said development plan shall ensure the
preservation of the ecological balance and natural beauty of the area:
Provided, further, That the implementation of the tourism development
plan shall be included in the budget of the Provincial Government of
Southern Leyte.

Skc, 3. The DOT shall assist the Provincial Government of
Southern Leyte in the implementation of the tourism development
plan by providing technical assistance in tourism capacity building.
It shall also include the Province of Southern Leyte in its national
and regional promotion programs.

SEC. 4, The funding for the implementation of this Act shall
be included in the annual budget of the Provincial Government of
Southern Leyte. The DOT may augment such allocation with
internally generated funds.

SEc. 5. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act,
the Provincial Government of Southern Leyte shall, in consultation
with the DOT and concerned agencies of the government, promulgate
rules and regulations to implement this Act.

Sec. 6. All laws, rules, regulations, executive orders,
proclamations, presidential decrees, and other issuances inconsistent
with any of the provisions of this Act are hereby deemed repealed or
amended accordingly.

SEC. 7, This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

Approved,
FRANCIS “CHIZ” ESCUDEROC tg ROMUALDEZ
President of the Senate Speaker of the Hous

of Representatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on November 15, 2022,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on June 10, 2025, and which
amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives
on June 10, 2025.

REGH D §. VELASCO
Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

 

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

UE ANU EIT A Office of tg President

=e MALACANANG FCORDS OFFICE

CERTIFAED COPY