H. No. 7961

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Nineteenth Congress

Second Regular Sessian

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand twenty-three.

[ REPUBLIC Acr No. 11980}

AN ACT STRENGTHENING THE BULACAN STATE
UNIVERSITY, EXPANDING ITS CURRICULAR
OFFERINGS AND THE COMPOSITION OF THE
GOVERNING BOARD, AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Revised Bulacan State University Charter”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — The State shall promote,
foster, nurture, and protect the right of all citizens to accessible
quality education. It shall establish, maintain, and support a
complete, adequate, and integrated system of education that is
relevant to the needs of the people and society.

 

5 LRA TTR ARNT UNL NRO PRA AL HTSUS GET

To this end, the Bulacan State University (BulSU) and its
constituent units shall be strengthened as a state university to
enhance its capability to provide accessible quality education.
It shall also be further strengthened by expanding its curricular
offerings and the composition and powers of its governing board,
developing the competencies and encouraging the specialization
of its constituent units, engaging in conventional or alternative
instructional techniques, methodologies and strategies, and
fostering a unique and distinctive academic leadership towards
the improvement of BulSU as an academic institution and the
delivery of higher education services in the Province of Bulacan
and Central Luzon Region.

SEC. 3. University Campuses and Other Units. — The
BulSU shall be comprised of its existing campuses in the cities of
Malolos and San Jose del Monte and in the municipalities of San
Rafael, Bustos, Bulakan, and Hagonoy, as well as its constituent
units, regular and extension campuses, colleges, academic or
nonacademic units, and all other BulSU campuses that may be
established in the future. The main campus of the BulSU shall
remain in the City of Malolos, Province of Bulacan.

SEC. 4. General Mandate. — The BulSU shall primarily
provide advanced education, higher technological, professional ‘
courses and training programs in engineering and technology,
arts and sciences, education, agriculture and industrial fields,
accountancy, business and public administration, medicine and
allied health courses, hotel and restaurant management, tourism,
aeronautics, artificial intelligence and robotics, law, nontraditional
courses and other relevant fields of study. It shall also undertake
research and extension services and production activities, in
support of the socioeconomic development of the Province of
Bulacan and Central Luzon Region.

SEC. 5. Curricular Offerings. — The BulSU shall primarily
offer undergraduate and graduate courses, advanced professional
and technical instruction and training within its areas of
specialization in the fields of environment and natural sciences,
accountancy, commerce, business and public administration,
agriculture, education, fisheries, forestry, engineering and
technology, arts and sciences, law, medicine and allied medicine,
architecture, archeology, hotel and tourism, aeronautics, artificial

intelligence and robotics, public administration, and other
relevant fields of study, as the Board of Regents may deem
necessary for the accomplishment of its objectives, and those which
respond to the human resource development needs of the Province
of Bulacan and Central Luzon Region: Provided, That BulSU
shall comply with the policies, standards and guidelines of
the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) for the offering of
courses and the introduction of new or revised programs.

The BulSU may open new branches or extension campuses
in consortium with other academic institutions as it may deem
necessary, to improve access to quality education, promote
innovation and progress in the academe, and advance its research
capabilities, subject to applicable arrangements with other
institutions: Provided, That BulSU shall comply with the policies,
standards and guidelines of the CHED for the operation of regular
or extension campuses,

The existing reasonably-sized laboratory junior and senior
high school shall continue to operate under the supervision of
the College of Education of the BulSU to serve the in-campus
requirements of its students.

SEC. 6. Administration. — The BulSU shall have the
general powers of a corporation set forth in Republic Act No. 11282,
otherwise known as the “Revised Corporation Code of the
Philippines”. The exercise of its corporate powers shall be vested
exclusively in the Board of Regents, hereinafter referred to as the
Board, and the President of the BulSU.

SEC. 7. The Governing Board. — The governing board of
the BulSU shall be the Board of Regents, hereinafter referred to
as the Board, which shall be chaired and co-chaired by the
Chairperson of the CHED and the President of the BulSU,
respectively, and with the following as members:

(@@) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher, Technical
and Vocational Education of the Senate;

(b) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher and Technical
Education of the House of Representatives;

(© Regional Director of the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA);

@ Regional Director of the Department of Agriculture;

© Regional Director of the Department of Science
and Technology;

@ President of the federation of faculty associations of
the BulSU;

(g) President of the federation of student councils of
the BulSU;

(h) President of the federation of alumni associations of
the BulSU;

@ President of the nonteaching personnel association of
the BulSU; and

@) Two (2) prominent citizens from the private sector who
have distinguished themselves in their profegsions or fields

of specialization, \

The Board shall appoint two (2) prominent citizens who
shall be selected from a list of at least five (5) qualified persons
from the Province of Bulacan as recommended by a search
committee constituted by the President of the BulSU, in
consultation with the Chairperson of the CHED and other
members of the Board, based on the guidelines, qualifications
and standards for the position set by the Board. They shall serve
for a term of two (2) years from the date of appointment.

The president of the federation of faculty associations, the
president of the federation of student councils, the president of
the federation of alumni associations, and the president of
the nonteaching personnel association of the BulSU shall be
coterminous with their terms of office, as provided under their
respective constitutions and bylaws.

SEC. 8. Powers and Duties of the Board. — The
administration of the BulSU and the exercise of its corporate
powers are vested in the Board, which shall have the following
specific powers and duties in addition to its general powers of
administration and the exercise of all the powers granted to
the Board of Directors of a Corporation under Section 35 of
Republic Act. No. 11232, the Board shall have the following
specific powers and duties:

(@) Promulgate and implement policies in accordance with
the declared State policies on education, other pertinent provisions
of the Constitution on education, agriculture, science and
technology, and the policies, standards and thrusts of the CHED
under Republic Act No. 7722, otherwise known as the “Higher
Education Act of 1994”;

(b) Approve the curricula, instructional programs, and
rules on student discipline drawn by the Administrative and
Academic Councils as herein provided;

(©) Appoint, upon the recommendation of the President of
the BulSU, the vice presidents, deans, directors, heads of the
campuses, faculty members, and other officials of the BulSU;

@ Prescribe the salaries of faculty members and
administrative officials and employees, subject to the provisions
of Republic Act No. 11466, otherwise known as the “Salary
Standardization Law of 2019”, civil service rules and regulations
governing hours of service and such other requirements and
conditions, and other pertinent laws, rules and regulations;

© Fix the tuition fees and other necessary school charges,
such as matriculation fees, graduation fees and laboratory fees,
as the Board may deem proper to impose, after due consultation
with the concerned sectors. The fees and charges, including
government subsidies and other income generated by the BulSU,
shall constitute its funds to be used exclusively in the pursuit of
its mandate as a state university, and shall be deposited in any
authorized government depository bank. All interests that shall
accrue therefrom shall form part of the same funds for the use
of the BulSU;

The fees and charges collected by the BulSU, including
government subsidies and proceeds from other income sources,
as well as interests that would accrue therefrom, shall be retained
by the University: Provided, That in no case shall the said income
be used for the payment of allowances and other benefits not
authorized by law: Provided, further, That all fiduciary fees
shall be disbursed for the specific purpose for which they
were collected.

Ifthe BulSU, for reasons beyond its control, would not be
able to pursue any project for which funds have been appropriated
and allocated under its approved program of expenditures, the
Board may authorize the use of said fund for any reasonable
purpose for which it deems necessary and urgent for the
attainment of the objectives of the University: Provided, That
funds collected from students for specific purposes shall not be
realigned or reprogrammed to other expenditures;

() Adopt and implement a socialized scheme of tuition and
other school fees for greater access of poor but deserving students
in accordance with Republic Act No. 10931, or the “Universal
Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act’;

(g) Establish professorial chairs in the BulSU and provide ;
fellowships for qualified faculty members, and scholarships to
deserving students;

(h) Receive and appropriate sums as may be provided by
law for the support of the BulSU, and all other sums in the
manner it may, in its discretion, determine to carry out the
purposes and functions of the BulSU;

@ Setthe policies on admission and graduation of students;

@) Award honorary degrees upon persons in recognition of
their outstanding contributions in the fields of education, public
service, arts, science and technology, sports and human kinetics
or any field of specialization within the academic competency of
the BulSU, and authorize the awarding of certificates of completion
of nondegree and nontraditional courses;

(&) Establish research and extension centers to promote
the development of the BulSU;

@ Develop academic arrangements for institutional
capability building with appropriate institutions and agencies,
whether public, private, local or foreign, and appoint experts
or specialists as consultants, part-time, visiting or exchange
professors, scholars or researchers, as the case may be;

(m) Adopt modern and innovative modes of knowledge
transfer for the promotion of greater access to education such as
the use of information technology, the dual training system, open
distance learning, and community laboratory;

(a) Collaborate with the governing bodies of other state
universities and colleges within the Province of Bulacan and
Central Luzon Region, under the supervision of the CHED and in
consultation with the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM), in restructuring the BulSU to make it more efficient,
relevant, productive and competitive;

©) Absorb non-chartered tertiary institutions within the
Province of Bulacan and Central Luzon Region as branches,
extension or external centers, in coordination with the CHED
and in consultation with the DBM, and offer therein programs or
courses to carry out the constitutional mandate of providing equal
access of students to educational opportunities;

(p) Authorize an external management audit of the BulSU,
to be financed by the CHED, subject to the rules and regulations
of the Commission on Audit, and institute reforms, including
academic and structural changes, on the basis of the audit results
and recommendations; t

@ Develop consortia and other economic forms of linkages
with local government units as well as public, private, local or
foreign institutions and agencies for the furtherance of the
purposes and objectives of the BulSU;

@) Import books or publications, instruments, equipment
and apparatuses for economic, technical-vocational, scientific,
medical, philosophical, historical, legal or cultural purposes;

(s) Enter into joint ventures with business and industry,
after consultation with the NEDA, for the profitable development
and management of economic assets, the proceeds of which shall
be used for the development and strengthening of the BulSU;

(t) Receive, in trust, all legacies, gifts and donations of
real and personal properties of all kinds and administer and dispose
of the same, when necessary, for the benefit of the BulSU and
subject to the limitations, directions and instructions of the donor,
ifany;

(u) Extend the term of the President of the BulSU beyond.
the age of retirement, but not beyond the age of seventy (70),
based on the guidelines, qualifications and standards set by the
Board: Provided, That such extension shall be subject to the
term limits provided in Section 10 of this Act: Provided, further,
That the President’s performance has been rated by the Board
as outstanding and a unanimous recommendation for such
extension has been decided upon by the search committee;

(v) Delegate any of its powers and duties provided to
the President and other officials of the BulSU, as it may deem
appropriate, so as to efficiently and effectively administer the
affairs of the BulSU;

(w) Establish policy guidelines and procedures for
participative and transparent decision-making within the BulSU;

(x) Where most advantageous to the BulSU, outsource the
management of nonacademic services such as health, food,
building or grounds or property maintenance, and such other
similar activities;

(y) Authorize the construction or repair of its buildings,
machinery, equipment and other facilities, and the purchase and
acquisition of real property, including the necessary supplies,
materials, and equipment; and

@ Promulgate rules and regulations, as may be necessary,
to carry out the purposes and functions of the BulSU.

\

SEC. 9. Meetings of the Board. — The Board shall regularly
convene once every three (3) months. The Chairperson of the
Board may, however, call a special meeting whenever necessary:
Provided, That members are notified in writing at least three (3)
days prior to the conduct of said meeting.

A quorum of the Board shall consist of a majority of all
its members holding office at the time of the meeting: Provided,
however, That the Chairperson of the Board or the President of
the BulSU is among those present in the meeting.

In case the Chairperson of the CHED cannot attend a
meeting of the Board, a CHED Commissioner, duly designated
by the Chairperson of the CHED as representative to the meeting,
shall have all the rights and responsibilities of a regular member:
Provided, That during the meeting, the President of the BulSU,
as Vice Chairperson, shall be the presiding officer: Provided,
further, That this provision notwithstanding, the Chairperson
of the CHED may designate a CHED Commissioner as the
regular Chairperson of the Board, in which case, the said CHED
Commissioner shall act as the presiding officer.

In case the Chairpersons of the Senate Committee on
Higher, Technical and Vocational Education and the House
Committee on Higher and Technical Education cannot attend
the Board meeting, they may designate their respective
representatives, who shall have the same rights and
responsibilities as regular members of the Board.

The members of the Board shall not receive any salary,
but shall be entitled to reimbursements for actual and necessary
expenses incurred, either for their attendance to the meetings
of the Board or in connection with other official business
authorized by a resolution of the Board, subject to existing laws
and regulations.

SEC. 10. The University President. - The BulSU shall be
headed by a President who shall be appointed by the Board,
subject to its guidelines, qualifications and standards, and
based on the recommendation of a search committee duly
constituted for the purpose of selecting the President.


The President shall render full-time service and shall have
aterm of four (4) years and may be reappointed to another term.

Within six (6) months before the expiration of the term of
office of the President of the BulSU, the Board shall constitute
the Search Committee for the Presidency, and shall ensure the
appointment or reappointment of a President on or before the
expiration of the term.

The powers and duties of the President of the BulSU, in
addition to those specifically provided for in this Act, shall include
those usually pertaining to the Office of the President of similar
state universities and colleges and those delegated by the Board.

The salary of the President of the BulSU shall be in
accordance with Republic Act No. 11466, or the “Salary
Standardization Law of 2019”, and such other laws amendatory
thereto, which may hereinafter be enacted, and on the joint circular
for state universities and colleges’ leveling instruments, and
guidelines of the CHED and the DBM.

In case of a vacancy in the Office of the President by reason
of death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal for cause,
or incapacity to perform the functions of the office, the Board
shall designate an Officer-in-Charge (OIC) of the BulSU, pending
the appointment of a new President: Provided, That the OIC
shall serve only during the unexpired portion of the term.

The President of the BulSU shall be assisted by the following
officials: Executive Vice President; Vice President for Academic
Affairs; Vice President for Administration, Planning, and Finance;
Vice President for Research, Development, and Extension; Vice
President for Linkages, Production, and Research Generation;
and the Vice President for Quality Assurance. They shall all be
appointed by the Board upon the recommendation of the President
of the BulSU.

SEC. 11. The Secretary of the BulSU. ~ The Board shall
appoint a Secretary who shall serve as such for both the Board
and the BulSU and shall keep all records and proceedings of
meetings of the Board. The Secretary of the BulSU shall serve

upon each member of the Board the appropriate notice of
board meetings.

SEC. 12. The Treasurer of the BulSU. — The Treasurer of
the Philippines shall be the ex officio Treasurer of the BulSU.

SEC. 13. The Administrative Council. —There shall be an
Administrative Council consisting of the President of the BulSU
as chairperson, and the vice presidents, deans, directors, and
other officials of equal rank, as members. The Administrative
Council shall review and recommend to the Board the policies
that shall govern the administration, management, and
development planning of the BulSU.

SEC. 14. The Academic Council. ~ There shall be an
Academic Council, which shall formulate academic policies.
It shall be composed of the President of the BulSU, who shall
act as chairperson, and all academic staff with the rank of at
least an assistant professor, as members.

The Academic Council shall have the power to review and
recommend the curricular offerings and rules on student
discipline, subject to the approval of the Board. It shall fix the
requirements for the admission of students, as well as for their
graduation and conferment of degrees, subject to the review and
approval of the Board through the President of the BulSU.

It shall exercise disciplinary power over the students
of the BulSU and shall formulate rules and regulations on
student discipline, subject to the approval of the Board.

SEC. 15. Heads of University Campuses. — The constituent
units of the BulSU shall be clustered into two (2) and each cluster
shall be headed by a Chancellor who shall have a term of three (3)
years and may be reappointed for another term. The Chancellor
shall be appointed by the Board upon the recommendation of the
search committee and the BulSU President, subject to the
guidelines, qualifications and standards set by the Board.

The campuses under the constituent units of the BulSU
shall each be headed by a Campus Director who shall serve


as head or administrator of each of the campuses and shall
render full-time service for a term of two (2) years and may be
reappointed to another term.

The Campus Director shall be appointed or designated by
the Board, upon the recommendation of the search committee
and the BulSU President, subject to the guidelines, qualifications
and standards set by the Board: Provided, That upon the
effectivity of this Act, the incumbent Campus Directors of the
existing campuses of the BulSU shall continue to serve as such.

SEC. 16. The Faculty. — No political belief, sex, gender
preference, cultural or community affiliation, ethnic origin, or
religious opinion or affiliation shall be a matter of inquiry in the
appointment of faculty members of the BulSU: Provided, That
said appointment shall be subject to the guidelines, qualifications
and standards set by the Board: Provided, further, That no
member of the faculty shall teach for or against any particular
religious denomination.

SEC..17. Faculty Sabbatical Leave. — The BulSU may
grant sabbatical leave to deserving and qualified faculty
for purposes of research or community engagement
ranging from three (3) months to one (1) yéar, subject to the
recommendation of the Chancellor and the BulSU President and
upon approval of the Board.

Faculty engaged in long-term sabbatical leave shall be
temporarily relieved from their teaching duties to conduct
research, write, and engage in scholarly or professional activity
and required to submit a research output published in a
reputable journal.

SEC. 18. Academic Freedom and Institutional Autonomy.
— The BulSU shall enjoy academic freedom and institutional
autonomy pursuant to paragraph 2, Section 5 of Article XIV of
the Constitution.

SEC. 19. Scholarship Programs and Admission. — The
BulSU shall provide scholarship programs and other affirmative
action programs to assist poor but deserving students who qualify
for admission to the BulSU.

No student shall be denied admission to the BulSU by
reason of sex, gender, religion, cultural community affiliation,
or ethnic origin, or any other forms of discrimination.

SEC. 20. Loan or Transfer of Supplies, Apparatuses, or
Equipment, or Detail of Personnel to the BulSU. — Heads of
national government agencies and instrumentalities may, upon
the request of the Board through the President of the BulSU,
loan or transfer supplies, apparatuses, or equipment, or detail
personnel to the University: Provided, That such loan, transfer
or detail shall not be detrimental to public service.

The personnel to be detailed to the University shall perform
such duties as may be deemed required by the President of the
BulSU and the time spent for such duties shall be counted as
part of the detailed personnel’s regular service.

SEC. 21. Assets, Liabilities, and Personnel. — All assets,
both real and personal, personnel and records of the BulSU, as
well as its liabilities or obligations, shall remain under the name
ofthe BulSU: Provided, That the positions, rights, and security
of tenure of faculty members and personnel therein employed
under existing laws shall be respected: Provided, further, That
the incumbents occupying the positions shall remain in the same
status until otherwise provided for by the Board: Provided, finally,
That the BulSU shall also accordingly upgrade or increase its
human resource component as may be deemed appropriate by
the Board.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the BulSU and all its campuses are hereby declared as property
of the BulSU and shall be titled under its name: Provided, That
should the BulSU cease to exist or be abolished or shonld such
aforementioned parcels of land be no longer needed by the BulSU,
the same shall revert to the concerned local government units or
to the Province of Bulacan or to the Republic of the Philippines,
as the case may be.

SEC. 22. Duty and Tax Exemptions. — The importation
of books or publications, instruments, equipment and apparatuses
which are for economic, technical-vocational, scientific, medical,
philosophical, historical, legal or cultural purposes made by the


BulSU, upon certification by the CHED, shall be exempt from
customs duties in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act
No. 10863, otherwise known as the “Customs Modernization
and Tariff Act”.

All grants, bequests, endowments, donations, and
contributions made to and used actually, directly, and exclusively
for educational purposes by the BulSU shall be exempt from
donor’s tax and the same shall be considered as allowable
deductions from gross income for purposes of computing the taxable
income of the donor in accordance with the provisions of the
National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended.

SEC. 23. Development Plan, Management Audit, and
Organizational, Administrative, and Academic Structure. —
Within a period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the approval
of this Act, the BulSU shall accomplish the following:

(@@) Submit a five (5)-year development plan, including its
program budget to the CHED for recommendation to the DBM;

(b+) Set up its organizational, administrative, and
academic structure, including the appointment of key officials
of the BulSU; and ‘

© Undergo a management audit in coordination with
the CHED.

SEC. 24. Filing of Report. —On or before the fifteenth (15%)
day of the second (2) month after the opening of regular classes
each year, the Board shall file a detailed report on the progress,
condition, and needs of the BulSU with the Office of the President
of the Philippines and both Houses of Congress, through the
Chairperson of the CHED.

SEC. 25. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of
Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher Education
Modernization Act of 1997”, shall form part of this Act.

SEC. 26. Parity Clause. — All other powers, functions,
privileges, responsibilities, and limitations under existing laws

 

shall be deemed granted to or imposed upon the BulSU and its
officials, whenever appropriate.

SEC. 27. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to
carry out the initial implementation of this Act shall be charged
against the current year’s appropriation of the BulSU.
Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continued
implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 28. Implementing Rules and Regulations. ~ Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Board shall,
in consultation with the CHED, formulate rules and regulations
to fully implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 29. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any
part or provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional,
the remaining parts or provisions not affected are in full force
and effect.

SEC. 30. Repealing Clause. — Republic Act No. 7665, entitled
“An Act Converting the Bulacan College of Arts and Trades in
the Province of Bulacan into a State University to be Known as
the Bulacan State University, and Appropriating Funds Therefor”,
and other laws, presidential decrees, executive orders, and rules
and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act are amended, repealed, or modified accordingly.

SEC. 31. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect after
fifteen (15) days following its publication in the Official Gazette
or in a newspaper of general circulation.

i

Approved,
JUAN MIGUELF. ZUBIRI INAND G.ROM@ALDEZ
President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

   
  

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on May 23, 2023, -
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on September 25, 2028,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on September 27, 2028,

swamp

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

  

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINE:

¥. Ss
BM003866

 

 

 

 

Office of the President

 

MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTI JED COPY