S. No. 2492
H. No. 7819

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila

Nineteenth Congress

Ghird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[ Rerusuic ActNo. 12064]

AN ACT DECLARING THE MARITIME ZONES UNDER
THE JURISDICTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF
THE PHILIPPINES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Philippine Maritime Zones Act”.

SEC. 2. Maritime Zones. — In accordance with the 1987
Constitution and international law, particularly, the 1982
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS):

(a) The maritime zones of the Philippine archipelago is
composed of the internal waters, archipelagic waters, territorial


sea, contiguous zone, Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), and
continental shelf; and

(b) All other territories over which the Philippines has
sovereignty or jurisdiction likewise have their respective
maritime zones, as appropriate.

The maritime zones of the Philippines on the western
side of the Philippine archipelago, including the Luzon Sea and
the territorial seas of Bajo de Masinloc and the maritime
features of the Kalayaan Island Group, shall be collectively
called the West Philippine Sea.

SEC. 3. Baselines. - The baselines of the Philippines
pursuant to Republic Act No. 9522, titled “An Act to Amend
Certain Provisions of Republic Act No. 3046, as Amended by
Republic Act No. 5446, to Define the Archipelagic Baselines
of the Philippines, and for Other Purposes”, are the following:

(a) Archipelagic baselines for the Philippine archipelago,
drawn in accordance with Article 47 of the UNCLOS; and

(b) Normal or straight baselines, as appropriate, for all
other territories over which the Philippines has sovereignty or
jurisdiction, drawn in accordance with Articles 5, 6, 7, 13, and
121 of the UNCLOS.

SEC. 4. Waters Inside the Baselines of the Philippines. —
Consistent with the Constitution, the Philippines has
sovereignty over all the waters inside its archipelagic baselines
as established by Républic Act No. 9522, as well as all the
waters on the landward side of the baselines of all Philippine
territories located outside of the archipelagic baselines,
including the airspace above these waters and the seabed and
subsoil underneath.

The exercise of sovereignty by the Philippines over these
waters is subject to its international obligations as provided
in the UNCLOS and other relevant treaties to which the
Philippines is a Party.

In harmony with these international obligations, the
sovereign waters of the Philippines inside its baselines shall
be treated as follows:

(a) The waters inside the archipelagic baselines of the
Philippines are considered archipelagic waters, except for bays,
estuaries and other waters considered as internal waters, as
delimited from archipelagic waters in accordance with
Article 50 of the UNCLOS.

The archipelagic sea lanes passage in these archipelagic
waters shall be exercised in the sea lanes to be determined
by law or a Presidential issuance, as appropriate.

The delimitation between archipelagic waters and internal
waters shall be made by the National Mapping and Resource
Information Authority (NAMRIA) and marked on the official
charts of the Philippines. The archipelagic sea lanes shall also
be marked on these charts. The charts shall be deposited with
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in accordance
with Articles 16 and 53 of the UNCLOS.

(b) The internal waters of the Philippines comprise the
waters delimited by NAMRIA from archipelagic waters and the
waters on the landward side of the baselines of Philippine
territories located outside of the archipelagic baselines.

Foreign vessels have no navigational rights in the
internal waters of the Philippines, unless expressly authorized
by the Philippine Government.

SEC. 5. Territorial Sea. — The territorial sea of the
Philippines refers to the adjacent belt of sea measured
twelve (12) nautical miles from the baselines as provided in
Section 3 of this Act, and as determined in accordance with
the provisions of Part II “Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone”,
Part IV “Archipelagic States”, and Part VIII “Regime of
Islands” of the UNCLOS, as appropriate.

The Philippines exercises sovereignty over its territorial
sea and the airspace above it as well as its seabed and subsoil
in accordance with the UNCLOS and other existing laws and
treaties, having due regard for the rights of other States,


including the right of innocent passage as provided in
Part II, Section 3 of the UNCLOS.

The high-tide features covered by the Kalayaan Island
Group in the West Philippine Sea shall have a territorial
sea of twelve (12) nautical miles from its baselines as
determined above.

SEC. 6. Contiguous Zone. — The contiguous zone of the
Philippines refers to the waters beyond and adjacent to its
territorial sea and up to the extent of twenty-four (24) nautical
miles from the baselines.

In accordance with the UNCLOS, the Philippines
exercises control over this zone necessary to:

(a) Prevent infringement of its customs, fiscal,
immigration, or sanitary laws and regulations within its
territory or territorial sea;

(b) Punish infringement of the above laws and regulations
committed within its territory or territorial sea; and

(c) Regulate the removal of archaeological and historic
objects from the seabed.

SEC. 7. Exclusive Economic Zone. — The EEZ of the
Philippines refers to the waters beyond and adjacent to its
territorial sea and up to two hundred (200) nautical miles from
the baselines, as established by Presidential Decree No. 1599,
“Establishing an Exclusive Economic Zone and for Other
Purposes”, and to the extent consistent with the other
provisions of this Act and with the provisions of the UNCLOS.
All other low-tide elevations within two hundred (200) nautical
miles from the archipelagic baselines shall likewise form part
of the Philippine EEZ.

In accordance with the UNCLOS, within the EEZ. the
Philippines has:

(a) Sovereign rights for the purpose of exploring and
exploiting. conserving and managing the natural resources,
whether living or nonliving, of the waters superjacent to the
seabed, and the seabed and its subsoil, and with regard to

other activities for the economic exploitation and exploration
of the zone, such as the production of energy from the sun,
water, currents, and winds: Provided, That in the exercise of
these rights, the Philippines shall enforce its laws and
regulations consistent with Article 73 of the UNCLOS;

(b) Jurisdiction with regard to: (1) the establishment and
use of artificial islands, installations, and structures;
(2) marine scientific research; and (3) the protection and
preservation of the marine environment; and

(c) Other rights and duties provided for in the UNCLOS.

Pursuant to Articles 56 and 60 of the UNCLOS, the
Philippines has the exclusive right to construct and to
authorize and regulate the construction, operation, and use of
artificial islands, installations, and structures, and has
exclusive right and jurisdiction over such artificial islands,
installations, and structures. Violations of this exclusive right
and jurisdiction of the Philippines shall be subject to
Section 15 of this Act and the relevant provisions of the
UNCLOS and other relevant international conventions.

SEC. 8. Continental Shelf and Extended Continental
Shelf. — The continental shelf of the Philippines comprises the
seabed and subsoil of the submarine areas that extend beyond
its territorial sea throughout the natural prolongation of its
land territory to the outer edge of the continental margin, or
to a distance of two hundred (200) nautical miles from the
baselines, where the outer edge of the continental margin does
not extend up to that distance.

Where the continental shelf extends beyond two hundred
(200) nautical miles from the baselines, the outer limits shall
be delineated in accordance with Article 76 of the UNCLOS:
Provided, That the limits of the continental shelf beyond
two hundred (200) nautical miles in the Benham Rise Region,
including the Philippine Rise, hereby renamed collectively as
the Talampas ng Pilipinas, as submitted to the Commission
on the Limits of the Continental Shelf (CLCS) and deposited
to the United Nations Secretary General on July 02, 2012,
are hereby incorporated into this Act: Provided, further, That
this is without prejudice to the submission for an extended


continental shelf in the West Palawan Region, and to the
making of other submissions for other areas at a future time.

The Philippines exercises sovereign rights to explore and
exploit the mineral, petroleum and nonliving resources of the
seabed and subsoil and living organisms belonging to the
sedentary species, as well as jurisdiction with regard to the
establishment and use of artificial islands, installations and
structures on the seabed, marine scientific research, drilling
and tunneling, and other rights as provided for in accordance
with the UNCLOS, Philippine mining and petroleum laws, and
other existing laws and treaties.

SEC. 9. Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction. — The
Philippines has rights and privileges in the high seas and the
international seabed area as provided in the UNCLOS and
other existing laws and treaties.

SEC. 10. Marine Scientific Research. — The Government
shall adopt measures in accordance with Part XIII “Marine
Scientific Research” of the UNCLOS, and other existing
laws and treaties, to ensure that marine scientific research,
whether undertaken by local or foreign entities, in the
maritime zones declared herein, shall redound to the benefit
of the Filipino people.

SEC. 11. Marine Environmental Protection. — All States
have the obligation to protect and preserve the marine
environment. The Philippines shall enforce its laws and
regulations on the protection and preservation of the marine
environment of the maritime zones declared herein, taking into
consideration the provisions of Part XII “Protection and
Preservation of the Marine Environment” of the UNCLOS.

SEC. 12. Delimitations. - Where the maritime zones
defined in this Act overlap with the maritime zones of a
neighboring State based on the UNCLOS, the common
boundaries shall be determined by agreement with that State
in accordance with the relevant principles of delimitation under
international law: Provided, That where no agreement has been
reached within a reasonable time, the Philippines may resort
to the procedures provided under Part XV “Settlement of
Disputes” of the UNCLOS.

SEC. 138. Due Regard and Mutual Respect. - The
Philippines shall give due regard to the rights and duties of
foreign states, and foreign states shall act with due regard to
the rights and duties of the Philippines, relative to the
maritime zones as provided under this Act, the UNCLOS, and
international law.

The Philippines shall recognize the rights and privileges
of foreign vessels and aircraft in its maritime zones under
conditions of reciprocity and mutual respect, and reserves the
right to take necessary legal and diplomatic actions against
States whose vessels and aircraft do not abide by, or act
inconsistently with, the UNCLOS and international law.

SEC. 14. Other Maritime Rights and Jurisdictions. —
The Philippines shall exercise all other maritime rights and
jurisdictions in accordance with the UNCLOS, the South
China Sea Arbitration (PCA Case No. 2013-19), international
law, and other pertinent laws and regulations of the
Philippines.

SEC. 15. Penal Sanctions. —- Any violation of the rights
of the Philippines as provided under this Act shall be addressed
and penalized through pertinent existing laws and regulations.
In the absence thereof, any violation shall be subject to
an administrative fine of not less than Six hundred thousand
US dollars (US$600,000.00) but not more than One million
US dollars (US$1,000,000.00), or the equivalent in Philippine
currency.

SEC. 16. Joint Congressional Oversight Committee. —
There shall be a Joint Congressional Oversight Committee on
the Law of the Sea (JCOC-LOS). The President of the Senate
and the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall each
designate six (6) Senators and six (6) Members of the House
of Representatives, respectively, as members of the JCOC-LOS:
Provided, That the minority in the Senate and the House of
Representatives shall each have at least one (1) seat in
the JCOC-LOS.

The JCOC-LOS shall conduct a hearing at least once
every quarter to review the implementation of this Act and
identify other necessary legislation.

SEC. 17. Separability Clause. — If any portion or provision
of this Act is declared unconstitutional or invalid, the other
portions or provisions hereof not affected thereby shall continue
to be in full force and effect.

SEC. 18. Repealing Clause. - The second, third, and
fourth whereas clauses and Section 2 of Republic Act No. 3046,
titled “An Act to Define the Baselines of the Territorial Sea
of the Philippines”, are hereby repealed.

The following laws or their specified provisions are hereby
amended:

(a) Section 1 of Presidential Decree No. 1596 “Declaring
Certain Area Part of the Philippine Territory and Providing
for Their Government and Administration’;

(b) Presidential Decree No. 1599; and

(c) Section 3(e) and 3(ai) of Republic Act No. 7942, titled
the “Philippine Mining Act of 1995”.

All other laws, presidential decrees, executive orders, rules
and regulations, proclamations, and other issuances
inconsistent with or contrary to the provisions of this Act are
deemed amended or repealed accordingly: Provided, That
nothing in this Act shall be construed as repealing Section 2
of Republic Act No. 5446, as amended, and Section 2 of
Republic Act No. 9522

SEC. 19. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of genera! circulation.

Approved,

LM Qos mit FRANCIS “CHIZ’ G. ESCUDERO
s

Speaker of the Hou. President of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill
No. 2492 and House Bill No. 7819, was passed by the
Senate of the Philippines and the House of Representatives
on August 19, 2024 and August 20, 2024, respectively.

CZ VELASCO

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved: NOV 07 202%

 
  
 

FERDINAND ROMUA Liz MARCOS JR.

Presidenf of the Philippines

 
 

REPUBLIC OF

UY TTT UY TA Wa

PBBM006334

Office ef the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

ED COPY