ae aan Nari gen a mbes Aneta sete eg neo ran arm en

H. No, 10270
8. No. 3000

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metres Manila
Nineteenth Congress
Chirs Regular Session
—a—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 12288]

AN ACT INSTITUTIONALIZING THE CAREER PROGRESSION
SYSTEM FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL TEACHERS AND SCHOOL
LEADERS AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as the
“Career Progression System for Public School Teachers and
School Leaders Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is the declared policy
of the State to enhance the right of teachers to professional
advancement, and ensure that the teaching profession shall
attract and retain its rightful share of the best available
talents through adequate remuneration and other means of job
satisfaction and fulfillment.

To this end, the State shall implement just and equitable
measures to provide competency-based promotion and salary

increases to expand the welfare and professional growth of public
school teachers and school leaders while advancing the right of
each Filipino to quality education by ensuring that the system of
professional advancement provides incentives for effective
teaching and learning for improved learning outcomes.

SEc. 8. Definition of Terms, — As used in this Act:

(a) Career Progression refers to the professional development
and career advancement of teachers and school leaders in terms
of, but not limited to, standards-based competencies and skills,
position and stature, remuneration and incentives, and qualifications
and development goals;

(b) Career Progression Line refers to individual tracks of
professional advancement available to teachers and school
leaders under the Career Progression System;

(c) Career Progression System refers to a framework of
professional development and career advancement along the
established career pathways available to teachers and school
leaders within the public basic education system;

(d) Current Career Progression refers to the Career Progression
Lines available to teachers and school leaders, which are existing
and implemented prior to the effectivity of this Act;

@) Expanded career progression refers to the Career
Progression Lines for teachers and school leaders as provided
in this Act;

@ Promotion, for purposes of career progression, refers
to the advancement of teachers and school leaders from one position
to another with an increase in duties and responsibilities or
in the qualifications and competencies, and in the salaries of the
incumbent as authorized by law, through application for vacant
plantilla positions or reclassification of positions, subject to
existing laws, rules, and regulations;

(g) School Administration Career Line refers to the career
pathway of school leaders involved in overall school administration,
educational management, or instructional supervision;

() School leaders, for purposes of career progression, refer
to incumbent head teachers, assistant principals, and principals
in the public school system who perform managerial or instructional
supervisory roles, or both, in their respective levels of governance;

@) Standards-Based Assessment refers to a competency-based.
assessment involving appropriate evaluation processes to assess
the competencies of teachers and school leaders, which shall be
required as a prerequisite to their promotion and increase in salary,
as the case may be, as provided in Section 9 hereof;

@ Teacher refers to any person qualified under the law to
practice teaching at the elementary and secondary levels, whether on
full- or part-time basis, including industrial arts, vocational, or
alternative learning system (ALS) teachers and all other
persons performing supervisory and/or administrative functions
in all schools in the aforesaid levels; and

(&) Teaching Career Line refers to the career pathway of
teachers involved in teaching, including those under the ALS
as institutionalized under Republic Act No. 11510 or the “Alternative
Learning System Act”.

Sec. 4. Institutionalization of the Career Progression System
for Public School Teachers and School Leaders. — The Career
Progression System for public school teachers and school leaders
is hereby institutionalized to promote professional development
and career advancement among public school teachers and
school leaders, and define the Career Progression Line of teachers
and school leaders within the public school system, specifically
in the elementary and secondary levels.

Src. 5. Expanded Career Progression for Public School
Teachers and School Leaders. — The prospects for a career path
for public school teachers and school leaders in teaching or
school administration are hereby expanded.

The positions from Teacher I to Master Teacher I shall
form the bases of the expanded career progression system.
Promotions within the base positions shall be non-hierarchical,
and shall be based on the principles of merit, fitness, and competence
based on the qualifications and the professional standards,

pursuant to Section 9 of this Act. Thereafter, a Master Teacher I may
opt to pursue a career line in teaching or school administration.

In recognition of prior learning and experience in the
teaching profession, entry to any position within the base of the
expanded career progression system shall be allowed: Provided,
That the qualification standards approved by the Civil Service
Commission (CSC) are met and the indicators of the career
stages of the professional standards are achieved as affirmed
by the Teacher Education Council (TEC).

For this purpose, the CSC, the Department of
Education (DepEd), including the TEC, and the Professional
Regulation Commission (PRC) shall harmonize the qualification
standards for teaching positions in all levels of the public school
system, taking into consideration the Standards-Based
Assessment as mandated in this Act. The Department of
Budget and Management (DBM) shall create the new teaching
position titles of Teacher IV, Teacher V, Teacher VI, Teacher VII,
Master Teacher V, Master Teacher VI, and School Principal V,
and include the same in the Index of Occupational Services,
Occupational Groups, Classes, and Salary Grades.

SEC. 6. Options of Incumbent Head Teachers. — Allincumbent
head teachers may apply to retain their positions and Career
Progression Line under the Current Career Progression, or
otherwise apply for reclassification or retitling of their current
position to the appropriate position under the Expanded
Career Progression: Provided, That within three (3) years from
the effectivity of this Act, all incumbent head teachers shall file
the appropriate application to retain their current Career Progression
Line under the Current Career Progression, or be retitled under the
Expanded Career Progression, as the case may be.

For purposes of this Act, the DepEd shall prepare a list of
incumbent head teachers who shall retain their current positions
and Career Progression Line under the Current Career Progression.
No new item or position under the Current Career Progression
for incumbent head teachers shall be created hereafter.

Incumbent head teachers who apply for the reclassification or
retitling of their current positions to the appropriate positions under

the Expanded Career Progression can no longer revert to the previous
Career Progression Line.

All teachers, other than those incumbent head teachers who
file the appropriate application to retain their current positions and
Career Progression, shall follow the Expanded Career Progression as
provided in this Act. They shall undertake a mandatory transition
program to be developed by the National Educators Academy of the
Philippines (NEAP).

SEC. 7. Equivalence of Positions. — The positions in the
Teaching Career Line and the School Administration Career Line shall
be equivalent in all salaries, benefits, and other privileges, as follows:

  

 

 

School Administration
Career Line

  
   

Teaching
Career Line

Master Teacher IT
Master Teacher III School Principal II
Master Teacher IV School Principal IIT
Master Teacher V

SEC. 8. Non-Diminution in the Basic Salaries and Benefits
of Incumbent Teachers and School Leaders. — In no case shall
there be a demotion in rank or diminution of salaries, benefits,
and other privileges, or both, of incumbent teachers and school
leaders granted under existing laws, decrees, and orders, or any
contract, agreement, or policy between them and the DepEd
upon the implementation of this Act.

  

         
  
  

     
  
  
  

   
   

School Principal I

 

 

  

SEc. 9. Promotion of Teachers and School Leaders. -
Teachers and school leaders shall be promoted through natural
vacancy or reclassification of position based on merit, fitness, and
competence anchored on the professional standards.

The evaluation of applicants in the Teaching Career Line
shall consider subject area and pedagogical knowledge, and other
requirements of the professional standards. In no case shall
promotion in the Teaching Career Line be based on arbitrary criteria
such as the proportion of learners who achieve curricular expectations.

The evaluation of applicants in the School Administration
Line shall consider organizational and managerial effectiveness,
in terms of productivity, performance, utility, efficiency, and
other requirements of the professional standards.

The DepEd shall formulate clear guidelines on assessing
teachers and school leaders seeking promotion. The assessment
process, criteria, and point system, as well as the Standards-Based
Assessment of each teacher and school leader, shall be made
available to the public to foster equal opportunity, transparency,
and accountability.

The DepEd may likewise provide clear guidelines for the
conduct of Standards-Based Assessment by an independent third party.

SEC. 10. Support Program for Teachers and School Leaders;
Continuous Improvement of the Career Progression System;
Quality Professional Development. — Teachers and school leaders
who do not pass the Standards-Based Assessment for two (2)
successive assessments shall be required to undergo a support
program. For purposes of this Act, the NEAP shall develop a
special free support program for such teachers and. school leaders to
aid in their development.

Further, to ensure the continuous improvement of the
Career Progression System and enhance the right of teachers
and school leaders to professional advancement, the TEC shall
review, align, and continuously monitor the roles of the NEAP
and the Bureau of Human Resource and Organizational
Development (BHROD) of the DepEd.

The DepEd shall likewise ensure that the programs of the
NEAP and the BHROD are properly aligned with the directions
set by the TEC in terms of career stage affirmations and quality
assurance of the use of professional standards adopted by
the DepEd. Such programs shall be coordinated to provide quality
professional development programs on teacher education
that are responsive to the needs of teachers and school leaders
to be effective in teaching or school administration.

SEc. 11. Appropriations. - The amount necessary for the
initial implementation of this Act shall be charged against the
current year’s appropriation of either the DepHd or the
Miscellaneous Personnel Benefits Fund, or both. Thereafter, the
amount necessary for its continuous implementation shall be
included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

The funding for the promotion of teachers and school leaders
shall be prioritized and made available.

Src. 12. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the DepEd,
the CSC, the PRC, and the DBM, in consultation with the TEC,
teachers and school leaders organizations within the DepEd,
and other education stakeholders, shall jointly issue the necessary
rules and regulations for its effective implementation. The rules and
regulations issued pursuant to this section shall take effect thirty (80)
days after its publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

SEc. 18. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part of
this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining
provisions or parts not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

Src. 14. Repealing Clause. — All other laws, executive orders,
presidential decrees, administrative orders, rules and regulations,
issuances, or parts thereof inconsistent with or contrary to the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 15. Effectivity. — Notwithstanding the non-issuance of
the implementing rules and regulations, this Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

x

FRANCIS “CHIZ” G. ESCUDERO ‘FE!
President of the Senate

    

G.WOMUALDEZ
Speaker of the House
of Representatives

     

ot eaten sess IRS aN TAI EE EA A ITNT ETI NEAT TLR IO

This Act, which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 10270
and Senate Bill No. 3000, was passed by the House of Representatives
and the Senate of the Philippines on June 11, 2025.

F

Secretary General
House of Representatives

   

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
Presideptt of the Philippines

    

oO

 

)
mie
PE

AAT ale cone rice
{D COPY

REPUBLIC 0)

HMM]

 

» TOLENTINO-NAVA
IRECTOR IV