S. No. 2441
H. No. 5001

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Nineteenth Congress

Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand twenty-three.

[Repustic ActNo. 120064

AN ACT MANDATING PRIVATE HIGHER EDUCATION
INSTITUTIONS TO WAIVE COLLEGE ENTRANCE
EXAMINATION FEES AND CHARGES OF
CERTAIN STUDENTS QUALIFIED TO APPLY FOR
COLLEGE ADMISSION

Be it enacted by the Senate and. House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Free College Entrance Examinations Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. - It is hereby declared the
policy of the State to protect and promote the right of all
citizens to quality education at all levels and to democratize
access to quality tertiary education. In line with this declared
policy, and in cognizance of the need to assist disadvantaged
students that show potential for academic excellence, the State
shall exempt qualified graduates and graduating students from


payment of entrance examination fees administered by private
higher education institutions (HEIs).

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — For the purposes of this Act:

(a) College entrance examinations shall refer to
examinations administered by private HEIs that serve as one
of the criteria in the selection of prospective students
for admission;

(b) Graduates and graduating students shall refer to
learners who have completed or are about to complete the
Enhanced Basic Education Program as provided under Republic
Act No. 10533, otherwise known as the “Enhanced Basic
Education Act of 2013”; the Accreditation and Equivalency
Assessments and Certifications for Senior High School Level
under the Alternative Learning System as provided under
Republic Act No. 11510, otherwise known as the “Alternative
Learning System Act”; and other similar educational programs
or accreditation and equivalency assessments and certifications
as may be identified by the Department of Education (DepEd);

(c) Higher education shall refer to the stage of formal
education, or its equivalent, requiring completion of secondary
education and covering programs of study leading to bachelor
and advanced degrees, including associate degrees; and

(d) Private higher education institutions shall refer to
HEIs duly recognized by the Commission on Higher Education
(CHED) which are owned or operated by private persons,
natural or juridical, whether sectarian or non-sectarian.

SEC. 4. Waiver of Entrance Examination Fees. — All private
HEIs are hereby mandated to waive the college entrance
examination fees and charges imposed on qualified graduates and
graduating students who are applying for college admission.

SEC. 5. Eligibility Requirements. — A graduate or
graduating student shall be eligible for the waiver of college
entrance examination fees and charges upon the satisfaction
of the following qualifications and requirements:

(a) The graduate or graduating student must be a
natural-born Filipino citizen;

(b) The graduate or graduating student must belong to
the top ten percent (10%) of his or her graduating class;

(c) The graduate or graduating student must belong to
a family whose combined household income falls below the
poverty threshold as defined by the National Economic and
Development Authority or cannot afford in a sustained manner
to provide for their minimum basic needs of food, health,
education, housing and other essential amenities of life
duly certified as such by the Department of Social Welfare
and Development;

(d) The graduate or graduating student must apply for
college entrance examination to any private HEI within the
country; and

(e) The graduate or graduating student must satisfy all
other requirements as specified by the private HEI concerned.

SEC. 6. Penalties. - The CHED is hereby authorized, in
accordance with Section 8(e) of Republic Act No. 7722,
otherwise known as the “Higher Education Act of 1994”, to
determine and impose appropriate sanctions against responsible
officials or employees of private HEIs for failure or refusal to
comply with the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 7. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the CHED
shall, in coordination with the DepEd and in consultation
with the Coordinating Council of Private Educational
Associations of the Philippines, or its equivalent institution,
promulgate the rules and regulations to effectively implement
the provisions of this Act.

 

 

 

SEC. 8. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part
hereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of this
Act or any provision not affected thereby shall remain in full
force and effect.

 

SEC. 9. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential
decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are
hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

 

 

SEC. 10. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect
immediately following its publication in the Official Gazette or
in two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Approved, |

INAND /ROMYALDEZ ZUBIRI |

Speaker of the House resident of the Senate
of Representatives )

     

y

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 2441 on December 11, 2023 and adopted by
the House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill \
No. 5001 on March 19, 2024.

REGINALDS. VELASCO
Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

‘x pagel Lapsed invo iaw on JUN 1 4 20% i
pprove’ without the signature of the Pre’
ent, in accordance with Article Vi \

ection 27 (1) of the Constitution

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines

   
   
     

  

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY
V,. ESPINO

E

ACTIN DIRECTOR IV