HH. No. 11299

Tepoillic of the Piiliggines
Gangress of the Philippines
fiteten Mails,

Nineteenth Gougress

Girt Regular Session
—s

Begun and held in Metro Manila, or. Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four,

[REPUBLIC Act No, 12262 |

AN ACT RECOGNIZING SINGAPORE SCHOGL CEBU AS AN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION OF INTERNATIONAL
CHARACTER, AND GRANTING CERTAIN PREROGATIVES
CONDUCIVE TO ITS DEVELOPMENT AND GROWTH

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Singapore School Cebu, herein veferved to as
the School, is hereby recognized as an educational institution of
international character authorized to operate educational programs
that primarily and principally adhere to universally accepted and
recognized educational policies.

SEC. 2. The School shall use the registered name “Singapore
School Cebu Corp.”, and be governed by a Board of Directors,
herein referred to as the Board, elected in accordance with its
corporate character.

SEC. 3. To enable the School to continue carrying out its
educational program, improve its standard of instruction, and meet
the special needs of the foreign temporary resident community for
quality education, it shall:

a) Accept applicants for admission, regardless of nationality,
in accordance with its own eligibility standards and rules for
adiwission, and grade placement: Provided, That no single alier
nationality shall consist move than one-third of the entire student
population in a given school year, as stated in the records of the
School, except in case of dependenis of foreign diplomatic personnel
ov other foreign temporary residents, as may be provided by law:

   

 

have the
ysonal properties,
interesta in such propert

 

tb) Whenever necessary to carry out its objectiv
toob ain leases on veal properties, acquire pe.
gible or agible, or any

seal, hy paarehiaae, lease, ba

  
   

 
   

 

        
 
 
  

(@) Upon consiltat i j
of Education (DepMd), determine its own distal teach
whatever language or languages it may deem prog etermine
the amount of fees and assessments seltieh a ¥ y be reasonably
imposed upon its learners and students, to n :
the School's standards of education:

 

  

    

 

(@) Maintain the international standards of educata
with those obtained in similar schools of generally recog

    

 

() Himploy iis own teaching and management personne!
selected by the Board ei locally ov abroad, frora the Philippines
og other countries or nationalities, sach foreign personnel being
exempt from otherwise applicable laws and regulations attending
their employment. except laws that have been ov will be enacted
for the protection of employees: Provided, That such exemption shall
not extend to their liability for income taxes, unless otherwise

 

 

 

 

provided by a bilateral agreement: Provided, further, That the
School shall give priovity to hiving locally qualified teaching and
management personnel:

   

  

(g} Promote international friendship, goodwill, and understanding
among members of the foreign community and the citizens of the
Philippines: and

 

(Gh) Not to teach aeything, derogatory to the prestige and
l-being of the Philippines and its people, nor those which will
subvert its institutions and government.

 

 

Sic. 4. Notwithstanding 0 ou and prerogatives
under this Act. the School shall be under the supervision and
regulation of the DepEd and shail adhere to the basic laws and
ions of the DepHd governing international

 

 

   

the rules and regula
or foreign schools.

30) days from the effec

pild shall, ir

    
    

of the rules

 

SEC. 7. Notwithstanding the non-i i
and regulations under Section 5 herein, this Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days attter its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

   

Approved,

  

Wa per
SCUDERO cohol
e \_ Speaker of ihe House
of Representatives

 

   

 

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on February 3, 2025,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on June 9, 2025, and which
amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives

on June 10, 2025.
REGINALD . ‘VELASCO

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved: SEP 95 2025

 
   

REPUBLIC OF

i;

PBBM009992

  
 

Office of the President
MALAGANANG RECORDS OFFICE