H. No. 7316

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meters Manila
\ Nineteenth Congress
Third Regular Session

—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second

day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT No. 12118]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE BAGUIO CITY HIGH SCHOOLFOR
THE ARTS AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in

Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy. — It is the declared policy
of the State to foster the preservation, enrichment, and dynamic
evolution of Filipino national culture based on the principle of unity
in diversity in a climate of free artistic and intellectual expression.

To this end, the State shall promote the sustained development
of young Filipinos whose aptitude and skill in culture and the arts
shall be properly encouraged and honed through education and
specialized training programs. The State shall establish, maintain,
and support a complete, adequate, and integrated system of education
and training to encourage the artistic talent and cultural aptitude
of the Filipino youth as well as support and promote the development

of young artists nationwide. °

.

SEC. 2. Establishment of the Baguio City High School for
the Aris. — There is hereby established in the City of Baguio a
specialized public high school that shall offer arts-focused education,
to be known as the Baguio City High School for the Arts, herein referred
to as the School.

The School shall be administered and supervised by the
Department of Education (DepEd), in close coordination with the
National Commission for Culture and the Arts (NCCA) and the
Cultural Center of the Philippines (CCP). The NCCA and the CCP
shall provide policy direction and technical assistance to the School
through the DepEd Cordillera Administrative Region Regional
Office and the Schools Division Office of Baguio City.

SEc. 38. Mandate. — The School shall implement a general
secondary education curriculum, as prescribed by Republic Act
No. 10588, or the “Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2018”, to learners
with considerable potential in the arts. The curriculum shall have
significant emphasis on developing the talent, skill, and exceptional
giftedness of learners, thereby nurturing potential artists while
preserving and promoting Filipino heritage.

SEc. 4, Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern;
Development Plan. — The organizational structure and staffing
pattern of the School shall be prescribed by the DepEd, subject to
the approval of the Department of Budget and Management.

Within one hundred twenty (120) days upon the approval
of the implementing rules and regulations of this Act, the School shall
submit a five (5)-year development plan, including its corresponding
budgetary program to the DepEd, and set up its organizational,
administrative, and academic structure.

SEC. 5. Authority to Receive Donations, Grants, and Other
Gratuitous Transfers; Allowable Deductions and/or Exemptions. —
The School head may receive donations, grants, bequests, legacies,
devises, endowments, contributions, and other gratuitous transfers
made to the School, which shall form part of the School fund to be
used actually, directly and exclusively by the School, subject to
compliance with existing laws, rules and regulations.

Any donation, grant, bequest, legacy, devise, endowment,
contribution, and other gratuitous transfers, in cash or in kind, made
by individuals or organizations, public or private, local or foreign, shall
be subject to applicable deductions and/or exemptions, in accordance

with the pertinent provisions on donor’s and estate taxes under the
National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended.

SEC. 6. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of Republic
Act No. 9155, or the “Governance of Basic Education Act of 2001”,
shall be made an integral part of this Act, and shall govern the
administration and supervision of the School.

SEC. 7. Appropriations. — The Secretary of Education
shall immediately include in the Department's program the
operationalization of the Baguio City High School for the Arts,
the initial funding of which shall be charged against the
current year’s appropriation of the Schools Division Office of
Baguio City. Thereafter, the amount necessary for the continued
operation of the School shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

SEC. 8. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days after the effectivity of this Act, the DepEd,
in coordination with the NCCA, the CCP, and the local government
of the City of Baguio, shall promulgate the rules and regulations
implementing the provisions of this Act.

; SEC. 9. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part of
this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder
thereof not otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 10. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential decrees,
executive orders, letters of instruction, proclamations, or
administrative regulations that are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 11. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect after
fifteen (15) days following the completion of its publication in the
Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

   
   

FRANCIS “CHIZ’ G. ESCUDERO_ FEI RY
President of the Senate Speaker of the House

of Representatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on March 15, 2023, amended
by the Senate of the Philippines on September 16, 2024, and which
amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives
on November 6, 2024.

    

REGINALD & VELASCO
Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved: JAN 0 3 2025

 

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
Presidenf of the Philippines

 
 

REPUBLIC OF

PBBM007139 Office of the President

MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE