S.No. 2863
H. No. 10466

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila y

Nineteenth Congress ‘ ‘

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

—
[ RepusticAcrNo. 12181]

AN ACT ADJUSTING THE MONTHLY BENEFITS OF THE
RETIREES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Adjusted DFA Retirement Benefits Act”.

SEC. 2. Coverage. — This Act shall apply to retired
officers and employees of the Department of Foreign Affairs
(DFA) who are receiving a monthly pension-from the
Government Service Insurance System (GSIS) and those who
opted to retire under Republic Act No. 1616: Provided, That
said retired officers and employees are Filipino citizens, who
have reached sixty-five (65) years of age, and served the DFA
for at least fifteen (15) years at the time of their retirement.

All other DFA officers and employees who have retired
but have not met all the abovementioned qualifications shall
be covered by applicable benefits under existing laws and
regulations.

SEC. 8. Monthly Pension Differential and
Gratuity Benefit. —

(a) The DFA retirees receiving monthly pension from the
GSIS shall receive a monthly pension differential (MPD). The
MPD shall be the difference between the adjusted monthly
pension computed by the DFA and the actual monthly pension
provided by the GSIS to the DFA retiree, to be multiplied by
the adjustment factor: Provided, That, upon the effectivity
of this Act, the adjustment factor shall be equivalent to
fifty percent (50%) which may be subject to review after
five (5) years of implementation. The MPD shall be computed
as follows:

MPD = [Adjusted Monthly Pension — Actual GSIS Monthly
Pension] x Adjustment Factor

The adjusted monthly pension is equal to the product
of the monthly salary of the active DFA personnel holding
the same rank last held by the retiree, based on the updated
salary schedule, multiplied by two and one-half percent (2.5%)
and the retiree’s recorded creditable service in the DFA:
Provided, That for the first five (5) years of the implementation
of this Act, the monthly salary corresponding to Salary Grade
Step 1 of the fourth tranche of Republic Act No. 11466, also
known as the “Salary Standardization Law of 2019”, shall
serve as the basis for computing the adjusted monthly pension.

(b) The DFA retirees who opted to retire under
Republic Act No. 1616 shall receive a monthly gratuity benefit
equivalent to not more than fifty percent (50%) of the MPD
received by other DFA retirees who retired in the same year
and held the same rank.

The guidelines on the computation of the MPD shall be
periodically reviewed by the DFA to ensure feasibility and
sustainability and to prevent any adverse or negative impact
on the government deficit, consistent with the provisions of
of Section 7 of this Act.

SEC. 4. Adjustment of Pension Differential. — Five (5)
years after the effectivity of this Act, and every five (5) years
thereafter, the MPD, as provided under Section 3(a), may be
adjusted: Provided, That the funds collected by the DFA
under Executive Order No. 906, series of 2010, are sufficient
to finance the said adjustment: Provided, further, That the
pension differential of the DFA retirees shall not be
automatically increased whenever there is an annual increase
in the salary of the active DFA personnel holding the same
rank last held by the retirees.

SEC. 5. Exemption from Income Tax, Attachment, Levy,
and Garnishment. — Any benefit granted under this Act shall
not, in whole or in part, be subject to income tax, attachment,
execution, forfeiture, or retention under any legal or equitable
proceeding, nor shall any lien of any kind or under any
consideration be imposed thereon.

SEC. 6. Survivorship Benefits. — In the event of the
death of a DFA retiree receiving monthly pension from the
GSIS and who met the qualifications provided under Section
2 of this Act, the surviving legal spouse, until he or she
remarries, and the qualified dependent children or those
eighteen (18) years old and above, but suffering from mental
or physical incapacity or any disability that renders them
totally dependent on the deceased, shall be entitled to receive
survivorship benefits equivalent to a maximum of fifty percent
(50%) of the MPD that the deceased retiree was receiving or
entitled to receive subject to the survivorship pension
guidelines under Republic Act No. 8291, also known as “The
Government Service Insurance System Act of 1997”, and other
applicable laws and regulations.

The DFA shall formulate guidelines on the distribution
and release of survivorship pension benefits provided under
this Act to qualified dependents of DFA retirees.

SEC. 7. Funding. — The funding requirements for the
effective implementation of this Act shall be charged against
the applicable fees collected under Executive Order No. 906,
series of 2010. The national government shall not be
responsible for any deficil thal may arise due to insufficiency
of this funding source. *

_ SEC. 8. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within This Act, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 2863
ninety (90) days after the effectivity of this Act, the DFA shall issue and House Bill No. 10466, was passed by the Senate of the

the necessary rules and regulations for its effective implementation. Philippines and the House of Representatives on

SEC. 9. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this Act is February 4, 2025 and February 5, 2025, respectively.
‘declared unconstitutional, the remainder hereof not otherwise affected

shall remain in full force and effect. 4

=A

SEC. 10. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential decrees,

 

executive orders, letters of instruction, proclamations, or REGINA€D S. VELASCO
administrative regulations that are inconsistent with this Act are . Secretary General
hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly. House of Representatives

SEC. 11. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation.

Approved: MAY 0 2 2025

    
  

Approved,
WA LA FRANCIS “CHIZ’ G. ESCUDERO
Speaker of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

UY NNT

 

 

PBBM008570
.
j Office of the President
j 3 RECORDS OFFICE

   

TOLENTINO-NAVA
TOR IV