S. No. 2457
H. No. 6717

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Nineteenth Cougress

Ghird Regular Sessian

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[ Repustic Act No. 1 2027)

AN ACT DISCONTINUING THE USE OF THE MOTHER
TONGUE AS MEDIUM OF INSTRUCTION FROM
KINDERGARTEN TO GRADE 3, PROVIDING FOR ITS
OPTIONAL IMPLEMENTATION IN MONOLINGUAL
CLASSES, AND AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE
SECTIONS 4 AND 5 OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10533,
OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE “ENHANCED BASIC
EDUCATION ACT OF 2013”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Discontinuing the Use of the Mother Tongue
as Medium of Instruction. — The use of the Mother Tongue
as medium of instruction from kindergarten to the first three
(3) years of elementary education under Section 4 of


Republic Act No. 10533, otherwise known as “An Act
Enhancing the Philippine Basic Education System by
Strengthening its Curriculum and Increasing the Number of
Years for Basic Education, Appropriating Funds Therefor and
for Other Purposes”, is hereby discontinued.

The medium of instruction shall revert to Filipino and,
until otherwise provided by law, English, pursuant to
Article XIV, Section 7 of the 1987 Constitution. The regional
languages shall serve as auxiliary media of instruction.

SEC. 2. The Mother Tongue-Based Multilingual Education
(MTB-MLE) in Monolingual Classes; Requirements;
Monolingual Classes and Language Mapping. — The principles
and framework of MTB-MLE as embodied under Section 5(f)
of Republic Act No. 10533 may be applied in monolingual
classes: Provided, That the Mother Tongue to be used as
medium of instruction shall comply with the following
requirements: an official orthography developed and published
by the Komisyon sa Wikang Filipino (KWF); officially
documented vocabulary published by the KWF such as
glossary, dictionary, encyclopedia, or thesaurus; literature on
languages and culture, such as big books, small books, picture
stories, or wordless picture books; grammar book; and
availability of teachers in the school who speak and are
trained to teach in the Mother Tongue.

For purposes of this Act, a monolingual class shall refer
to a group of learners who speak the same Mother Tongue
and are enrolled in the same grade level in a given school
year. The Department of Education (DepEd) shall, in
consultation with the KWF, develop a language mapping policy
within one (1) year from the effectivity of this Act and
implement a language mapping framework to properly identify
and classify learners based on their Mother Tongue in order
to systematically determine the existence of monolingual
classes per school year.

SEC. 3. Reportorial Requirement. — Three (8) years after
the effectivity of this Act and every three (3) years thereafter,
the DepEd shall conduct a review of the optional
implementation of the MTB-MLE Program in monolingual
classes, including learner assessment, teacher recruitment and

matching, development of learning resources published in
the Mother Tongue, capacity-building efforts for teachers,
and funding requirements for the program. The report shall
be submitted to the President, the Senate of the Philippines,
and the House of Representatives not later than June 30
following the year of review. The report shall also include
recommendations to address gaps in the law and/or the
implementation of this Act.

The report shall further include recommendations on
whether to continue or discontinue the optional use of the
Mother Tongue as medium of instruction in monolingual classes
based on the review conducted by the DepEd.

SEC. 4. Administrative Sanctions. — Violations of the
provisions of this Act shall be subject to administrative
sanctions based on relevant laws.

SEC. 5. Appropriations. - The amount needed for the
implementation of this Act shall be charged against the
current year’s appropriations of the DepEd. Thereafter, such
sums as may be necessary for the continued implementation
of this Act shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act (GAA).

SEC. 6. Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR). —
Within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the
DepEd, the KWF, and other education stakeholders shall issue
the rules and regulations implementing its provisions. The IRR
issued pursuant to this section shall take effect thirty (30) days
after its publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

SEC. 7. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is held invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions
not so declared shall remain in force and effect.

SEC. 8. Repealing Clause. — All laws, executive orders,
presidential decrees, administrative orders, rules and
regulations, issuances, or parts thereof contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed
or amended accordingly.

 

SEC. 9. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or ina
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,
FERDINAND MON oer FRANCIS ‘ ESCUDERO
Speaker of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as

Senate Bill No. 2457 on July 23, 2024 and adopted by the

. House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill
No. 6717 on August 6, 2024.

    

REGINATD S. VELASCO
Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

ane aren pon att 10 208
Lapsed, AGT LAW OTD ‘sonseeessansoree nr"
-yithout the signature of the Pre :
dont, in accordance with Asticle ‘
Sectins 27 (1) of the Constitution

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines

O

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE