H. No. 11300

Republic of the Philippines
Gangress of the Philippines
Silvten Manila

Ainefeeutl Coagress

Ghict Regular Session

Begun and held in Meiro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, iwo thousand twenty-four.

[REPUBLIC Act No.12268 ]

AN ACT RECOGNIZING SINGAPORE SCHOOL CLARK AS AN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION OF INTERNATIONAL
CHARACTER, AND GRANTING CERTAIN PREROGATIVES
CONDUCIVE TO ITS DEVELOPMENT AND GROWTH

Be it enacted by ihe Senave and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Singapore School Clark, herein referred to as
the School. is hereby recognized as an educational institution of
international character authorized to operate educational programs that.
primarily and principally adhere to universally accepted and recognized
educational policies.

SEC. 2. The School shall use the registered name “Singapore
School Clark, Inc.” and be governed by a Board of Directors,
herein referred to as the Board, elected in accordance with its
corporate character.

Suc. 8. To enable the School to continue carrying out its
educational program, improve its standard of instruction, and meet the
special needs of the foreign temporary resident community for quality
education, it shall:

(a) Accept applicants for admission, regardless of nationality, in
accordance with its own eligibility standards and rules for admission,
and grade placement: Provided, Thai no single alien nationality shall
consist more than one-third of the entire student population in a given
school year, as stated in the records of the School, except in case of
dependents of foreign diplomatic personnel or other foreign temporary
residents, as may be provided by law:

(b) Whenever necessary to carry out its objectives, have the right
to obtain leases on real properties, acquire personal properties, tangible
ov intangible, or any interest in such properties other than real, by
purchase, lease, barter, donation, or gift, and dispose of, mortgage, or
encumber them for the benefit of the School concerned, subject to the
limitations provided by law;

(c) Be managed and administered by a Head of School who is a
Filipino citizen, and who possesses the qualifications prescribed by
the Board:

 
   

 
  

id) Upon consultation wit
Education (DepEd), determine its own lum, teach whatevei
language or languages it may deem proper, and determine the amount
of fees and assessments which may be reasonably imposed upon its
learners and students, to maintain or conform to the School's standards
of education;

 

teu

(e) Maintain the international standards of education compatible
with those obtained in similar schools of generally recognized standing:

) Employ its own teaching and management personnel selected
by the Board either locally or abroad, from the Philippines ov other
countries or nationalities, such foreign personnel being exempt from
otherwise applicable laws and regulations attending their employment,
except laws that have been or will be enacted for the protection of
employees: Provided, That such exemption shall not extend to their

  

oo

liability for income taxes, unless otherwise provided hy a bilateral
agreement: Provided, further. That the School shall give priority to
hiving locally qualified teaching and management personnel;

(g) Promote international friendship, goodwill, and understanding
among members of the foreign community and the citizens of the
Philippines; and

(h) Wot te teach anything derogatory to the prestige and
well-being of the Philippines and its people, nor those which will
subvert its institutions and government.

Suc. 4. Notwithstanding the recognition and prerogatives under
this Act, the School shall be under the supervision and regulation of the
DepEd and shall adhere to the basic laws and the rules and regulations
of the DepIid governing international or foreign schools.

Sec. 5. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act,
the Secre ofthe Depiid shall, in consultation with the members oi
the Board, issue the rules and regulations implementing the provisions
of this Act.

   

 
   

ision of this Act is subsequently
nal, the remaining provisions not
in in full force and effect.

   

 

otherwise affected shall

 

Sic. 7. Notwithstanding the non-issuance of the rules and
regulations under Section 5 herein, this Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

   

 

Approved,

   
    

pe F
FRANCIS “CHIZ’G. ESCUDERO FE
President of the Senate

G. Ai

’ Speaker of the House
of Represeniatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on February 3, 2025,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on June 9, 2025, and which
amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives
on June 10, 2025.

 

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

 

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR. |
President/of the Philippines |

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

HY U1 1 ON

PBBMO09999