SEC. 20. Enlit.lernenl to Magna, Carla Benefits. -
Qualified employees of the VIP shall be covered by Republic 
Act No. 8439 or the "Magna Carta for Scientists, Engineers, 
Researchers and Other S & T Personnel in the Government", 
as amended, and other rules and regulations issued by 
appropriate government agencies. 
SEC. 21. Authority to Negotiate, Receive Donations, 
Grants, Gifts, Legacies, Endowments, and Contribittions. -
The VTP may negotiate with and receive from any public or 
private domestic or foreign somces, donations, grants, gifts, 
legacies, endowments, contributions, or other transfers of 
ownership and/or possession of real or personal properties of 
all kinds in favor and for the benefit of the VIP. 
SEC. 22. Virology Research Fund. - A Virology Research 
Fund is hereby established as a special account in the General 
Fund and shall be som-ced from all donations, grants, gifts, 
legacies, endowments, contributions, and bequests, in cash or 
in kind, received by the VlP from various sources in 
accordance with accounting and auditing standards. rules, and 
t·egulations: Provided, That the acceptance of grants, in cash 
or in kind, from government of foreign countries shall be 
subject. to the approval by the President of the Philippines or 
his/her authorized representative based on Lhe recommendation 
of the Secretary of Finance: Provided, further, That other 
donations, in cash or in kind, from foreign governments shall 
require prior clearance and approval by the P1·esident or 
his/her 
authorized 
representative 
based 
on 
the 
recommendations of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs: Provided, 
finally, That the fund shall be deposited with the National 
Treasury through the treaSlU'Y single account for proper 
monitoring and accounting. 
SEC. 23. Ta.x Exemptions. - Donations, grants, gifts, 
endowments, and contributions actually, directly, and 
exclusively used for the purpose of the VIP shall be exempt 
from donor's tax and shall be considered as allowable deduction 
from gross income for purposes of computing the taxable 
income of the donor, in accordance with Section 34 (H)(2)(a) 
of Republic Act No. 8424 or the National Internal Revenue 
Code of 1997, as amended. 
/3 
SEC. 24. Annual Report. - The VIP shall submit its 
annual report to the President and to the Committees on 
Science and Technology of both Houses of Congress not later 
than the 30th of March of every year following the effectivity 
of this Act. The annual report shall provide a full and detailed 
account of the status of the implementation of this Act and 
policy recommendations. 
SEC. 25. Joint Congressional Oversight Committee. -
There shall be a Joint Congi;essional Oversight Committee on 
the VIP Act, which shall be jointly chaired by the 
Chairpersons of the Committees on Science and Technology of 
the Senate and the House of Representatives. It shall be 
composed of the Chairpersons of the Senate Committees on 
Health and Demography, and Agriculture, Food and Agrarian 
Reform, the Chairpersons of the Committees on Health, and 
Ag1:iculture and Food of the House of Representatives, and two 
(2) members from each House representing the minority who
shall be appointed by the Senate President and the Speaker of 
the House of Representatives.
SEC. 26. Appropriations. - The amount necessary to 
carry out the initial implementation of this Act shall be 
charged against the current year's appropriations of the 
DOST. 1'hereafter, such amount needed for its continued 
implementation shall be included in the annual General 
Appropriations Act. 
SEC. 27. Transitory Provisions. -
(a)
All offices and units under the DOST syslem whose
functions are related to virology research programs shall be 
absorbed by the VIP and shall be transferred accordingly 
within three (3) years. It shall include all functions, assets, 
capital, records, funds, receivables, equipment, and facilities 
of the concerned DOST offices and umts. The DOST shall 
conduct an audit and inventot·y of assets, liabilities, and 
human resources of Lhe transferred offices and units under the 
DOST system to the VIP. 
To the greatest extent possible and in accordance with 
Republic Act No. 6G56 or "An Act to ProtecL the Security of 
Tenure of Civil Service Officers and Employees in the 
Implementation of Government Reorganization", and other