H. No. 11042

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meters Manila
Nineteenth Congress

Third Regular Session
—_——

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 122'78 ]

AN ACT GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO FIRST LAGUNA
ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE, INC. (FLECO) TO CONSTRUCT,
INSTALL, ESTABLISH, OPERATE, OWN, MANAGE AND
MAINTAIN DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS FOR THE
CONVEYANCE OF ELECTRIC POWER TO THE END-USERS
IN THE MUNICIPALITIES OF CAVINTI, PAGSANJAN,
LUMBAN, KALAYAAN, PAETE, PAKIL, PANGIL,
SINILOAN, FAMY, MABITAC, AND STA. MARIA, PROVINCE
OF LAGUNA

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject to the
provisions of the Constitution and applicable laws, rules and
regulations, there is hereby granted to First Laguna Electric
Cooperative, Inc, (FLECO), hereunder referred to as the Grantee,
its successors or assignees, a franchise to construct, install, establish,
operate, own, manage and maintain in the public interest and for
commercial purposes, a distribution system for the conveyance of
electric power to the end-users in the Municipalities of Cavinti,
Pagsanjan, Lumban, Kalayaan, Paete, Pakil, Pangil, Siniloan, Famy,
Mabitac, and Sta. Maria, in the Province of Laguna.

As used in this Act, “distribution system” refers to the system of
wires and associated facilities including sub-transmission lines
belonging to a franchised distribution utility extending between the
delivery point on the national transmission system or generating facility
and the metering point/facility of the end-users.

Sic. 2. Manner of Operations of Facilities. — All electric
distribution facilities, lines and systems for electric services installed,
owned, operated, managed or maintained by the Grantee, its successors
or assignees, shall be operated or maintained at all times in a superior
manner, and it shall be the duty of the Grantee, its successors or
assignees, whenever required to do so by the Energy Regulatory
Commission (ERC) or its legal successor, the Department of Energy
(DOE) or its legal successor, the National Electrification Administration
(NEA) or its legal successor, or any other government agency concerned
to modify, improve, and change such facilities or systems in such
manner and to such éxtent as the progress in science or technology
and improvements or innovations in the electric power services may
render reasonable and proper.

Whenever practicable, and for purposes of maintaining order,
safety, and aesthetics along the highways, roads, streets, alleys, or
rights-of-way, the Grantee may allow the use of free spaces in its poles,
facilities, or rights-of-way by interested parties upon reasonable
compensation to the Grantee, considering the costs incurred to
accommodate and administer the use of the Grantee’s facilities by
such parties. The ERC shall decide in case of dispute or disagreement
between the parties.

SEC. 3. Authority of the ERC, NEA, and Other Government
Agencies. — The Grantee shall secure from the ERC, the NEA, or any
government agency having jurisdiction over its operations, the
Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity (CPCN) and any other
license, permit, or authority indispensable for the construction and
operation of the electric power distribution system.

SEC. 4. Excavation and Restoration Works. ~ For the purpose
of erecting and maintaining the poles or other supports for said
facilities, wires, or other conductors or for the purpose of laying and
maintaining said facilities, wires, cables, or other conductors, it shall
be lawful for the Grantee, its successors or assignees, with the prior
approval of the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)
or the local government unit concerned, as may be appropriate, to
make excavations or lay conduits in any of the public places, highways,

roads, streets, lanes, alleys, avenues, sidewalks, or bridges of the
province, cities, or municipalities: Provided, however, That a public
place, highway, road, street, lane, alley, avenue, sidewalk, or bridge
disturbed, altered, or changed by reason of erection of poles or other
supports or the underground laying of wires, other conductors, or
conduits shall be repaired and replaced in workmanlike manner by
the Grantee, its successors or assignees, in accordance with the
standards set by the DPWH or the local government unit concerned.
Should the Grantee, its successors or assignees, after the ten (10)-day
notice from the grant of authority, fail, refuse, or neglect to repair or
replace any part of public place, highway, road, street, lane, alley,
avenue, sidewalk, or bridge altered, changed, or disturbed by the said
Grantee, its successors or assignees, then the DPWH or the local
government unit concerned shall have the right to have the same
repaired and replaced in good order and condition and charge the
Grantee, its successors or assignees, double the amount of the cost
and expenses for such repair or replacement.

SEC. 5. Responsibility to the Public. -The Grantee shall supply
electricity to its captive market in the least costly manner. In the
interest of the public good and as far as feasible and whenever required
by the ERC, the Grantee shall modify, improve, or change its facilities,
poles, lines, systems, and equipment for the purpose of providing
efficient and reliable service and reduced electricity costs. The Grantee
shall charge reasonable and just power rates for its services to all
types of consumers within its franchised areas in order that businesses
and industries shall be able to compete.

The Grantee shall have the obligation to provide open and
non-discriminatory access to its distribution system and services for
any end-user within its franchise area consistent with Republic Act
(RA) No. 9136, otherwise known as the “Electric Power Industry Reform
Act of 2001”. The Grantee shall not engage in any activity that will
constitute an abuse of market power such as unfair trade practices,
monopolistic schemes, and other activities that will hinder
competitiveness of businesses and industries.

SEC. 6. Rates for Services. - The retail rates and charges
for the distribution of electric power by the Grantee to its end-users
shall be regulated by and subject to the approval of the ERC or its
legal successor.

The Grantee shall identify and segregate in its electricity bill
to the end-users the components of the retail rate pursuant to
RA No. 9136, unless otherwise amended. Such rates charged by the

Grantee to the end-users shall be made public and transparent. The
Grantee shall implement lifeline rate to marginalized end-users as
mandated under RA No. 9136.

SEC. 7. Promotion of Consumer Interests. — The herein
Grantee shall establish a consumer desk that will handle consumer
complaints and ensure adequate promotion of consumer interests. The
Grantee shall act with dispatch on all complaints brought before it.

SEC. 8. Commitment to Provide and Promoie the Creation of
Employment Opportunities, - The Grantee shall create employment
opportunities and allow on-the-job training in their franchise operation:
Provided, That priority shall be accorded to the residents where their
principal office is located: Provided, further, That the Grantee shall
comply with the applicable labor standards and allowance entitlement
under existing labor laws, rules and regulations, and similar issuances.

SEC. 9. Right of the Government. — A special right is hereby
reserved to the President of the Philippines, in times of war, rebellion,
public peril, calamity, emergency, disaster, or disturbance of peace
and order: to temporarily take over and operate the stations or facilities
of the Grantee; to temporarily suspend the operation of any station or
facility in the interest of public safety, security, and public welfare; or
to authorize the temporary use and operation thereof by any agency
of the government, upon due compensation to the Grantee, for the use
of the stations or facilities during the period when these shall be
so operated.

SEc. 10. Right of Eminent Domain. — Subject to the limitations
and procedures prescribed by law, the Grantee is authorized to exercise
the right of eminent domain insofar as it may be reasonably necessary
for the efficient maintenance and operation of its services. The Grantee
is authorized to install and maintain its poles, wires, and other facilities
over and across public property, including streets, highways, forest
reserves, and other similar property of the Government of the
Philippines, its branches, or any of its instrumentalities. The Grantee
may acquire such private property as is actually necessary for the
realization of the purposes for which this franchise is granted:
Provided, That proper expropriation proceedings shall have been
instituted and just compensation paid.

SEc. 11. Term of the Franchise. — This franchise shall be for a
term of twenty-five (25) years that shall commence from the date of
expiration of FLECO’s existing franchise, unless sooner cancelled.

ee

This franchise shall be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event that
the Grantee fails to operate continuously for two (2) years.

SEC. 12. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. — The Grantee shall hold the national, provincial, city,
and municipal governments of the Philippines free from all claims,
accounts, demands, or actions arising from accidents causing injury
to persons or damage to property, during the construction, installation,
operation, and maintenance of the distribution system of the Grantee.

SEC. 18. Liability for Damages. — The Grantee shall be liable
for any injury to persons and damage to property arising from accidents
by reason of any defective construction under this franchise or of any
neglect or omission to keep its poles and wires in safe condition.

SEC. 14. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Usufruct, or Assignment of
Franchise, — The Grantee shall not sell, lease, transfer, grant the
usufruct of, or assign this franchise or the rights and privileges
acquired thereunder to any person, firm, company, corporation,
or other commercial or legal entity, or merge with any other corporation
or entity, or transfer the controlling interest of the Grantee, whether
as a whole or in part, and whether simultaneously or
contemporaneously, to any such person, firm, company, corporation,
or entity without the prior approval of the Congress: Provided, That
Congress shall be informed of any lease, transfer, grant of usufruct of,
sale, or assignment of franchise or the rights and privileges acquired
thereunder, or of the merger, or sale of the controlling interest within
sixty (60) days after the completion of said transaction: Provided,
further, That any such transfer, sale, or assignment is in accordance
with constitutional limitations: Provided, furthermore, That failure
to report to Congress such change of ownership shall render the
franchise ipso facto revoked: Provided, finally, That any person or
entity to which this franchise is sold, transferred, or assigned shall be
subject to the same conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations of
this Act.

SEC. 15. Reportorial Requirement, ~ The Grantee shall submit
an annual report to Congress, through the Committee on Legislative
Franchises of the House of Representatives and the Committee on
Public Services of the Senate, on its compliance with the terms and
conditions of this franchise and on its operations on or before April 30
of every year during the term of the franchise. The reportorial
compliance certificate issued by Congress shall be required before any
application for permit or certificate is accepted by the ERC.

SEC. 16. Fine. — The failure of the Grantee to submit the
requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized with a fine in
the amount of Five hundred pesos (P500.00) per working day of
noncompliance which shall be collected by the ERC. The fine shall be
collected separately from the reportorial penalties imposed by the ERC
and shall be remitted to the Bureau of the Treasury.

SEC. 17. Equality Clause. ~ Any advantage, favor, privilege,
exemption, or immunity granted under existing franchises, or which
may hereafter be granted, upon prior review and approval of Congress,
shall become part of this franchise and be accorded immediately and
unconditionally to the herein Grantee: Provided, however, That the
foregoing shall neither apply to nor affect provisions concerning
territory covered by the franchise, the life span of the franchise, or the
type of service authorized by the franchise: Provided, further, That
the foregoing shall not apply to the sale, lease, transfer, grant
of usufruct, or assignment of legislative franchises with prior
congressional approval.

SEC. 18. Applicability of Existing Laws. — The Grantee shall
comply with and be subject to the provisions of Commonwealth Act
No. 146 or the “Public Service Act”, as amended, RA No. 9136, and RA
No. 10531 or the “National Electrification Administration Reform Act
of 2013”.

SEC. 19. Repealability and Non-Exclusivity Clause. — This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal by
Congress when the public interest so requires and shall not be
interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges herein provided for.

SEC. 20. Existing Powers. — Existing mandates, powers,
functions, and privileges granted to electric cooperatives under existing
laws, including Section 10 of RA No. 10531, shall remain valid and
effective, unless expressly repealed by succeeding laws.

SEC. 21. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections or
provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not affected
thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 22. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential decrees,
executive orders, letters of instruction, administrative rules
and regulations, or parts thereof which are contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

x

SEC. 23. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days
after its publication in the Official Gazetie or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

Approved,

 
   

FRANCIS “CHIZ” G, ESCUDERO FE]
President of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on January 14, 2025,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on June 9, 2025, and which
amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives
on June 10, 2025.

 

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved:
uapsed Hite Ww On SEP 0.7 2025
without the signature of the Presi
dent, in accordance with Article VT,
Section 27 (1) of the Constitution

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines