S. No. 1604
H. No. 8210

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Nineteenth Congress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

—_— —_

[ Repusuic Act No. 12028 |

AN ACT ESTABLISHING AN ACADEMIC RECOVERY
AND ACCESSIBLE LEARNING (ARAL) PROGRAM
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Academic Recovery and Accessible Learning (ARAL)
Program Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy and Objectives. — It is the
declared policy of the State to protect and promote the right
of all citizens to quality education at all levels and shall take
appropriate steps to make such education accessible to all.

Towards this end, the State shall endeavor to support
learners by establishing a free and effective national learning


intervention program to ensure that all learners who are
struggling in their lessons, especially in reading, mathematics,
and science, will be able to attain the competencies set by the
Department of Education (DepEd) in their respective levels.

SEC. 3. Coverage. — This Act shall apply to the following
learners from Kindergarten to Grade 10 under the public basic
education institutions of the DepEd:

(a) Those who have returned or are returning to school
after a furlough; ‘

(b) Those who are below the minimum proficiency levels
required in reading, mathematics, and science; or

(c) Those who are failing in examinations and tests as
assessed and evaluated by the teachers during the course of
the school year.

Learners who meet the minimum proficiency levels
may be allowed to enroll in supplemental classes under the
ARAL Program during the summer break: Provided, That
priority shall be given to the learners as enumerated in the
previous paragraph.

Similarly situated learners who are enrolled in qualified
private basic education institutions shall be provided the same
interventions under this Act upon request: Provided, That in
case of limited slots for enrollment, preference shall be given
to beneficiaries of the Educational Service Contracting Scheme.
The DepEd shall determine which private basic education
institutions qualify for these interventions, taking into
account factors such as size, type of incorporation, and other
relevant criteria.

SEC. 4. Establishment of the ARAL Program. — The
ARAL Program is hereby established to provide a national
learning intervention program which shall be grounded on the
following premises:

(a) Well-systematized tutorial sessions which demonstrate
higher achievement gains;

#

(b) Well-designed intervention plans and learning
resources developed in consultation with curriculum and
reading specialists, following a learner-centered approach
that is supportive and empathetic of the learner’s needs,
motivation and behavior, including but not limited to one-on-
one or group tutorials;

(c) Effective and accessible delivery modes for tutors and
learners;

(a) Careful determination and assessment of learners;
(e) Well-chosen and trained tutors and learning
facilitators; and ‘

(f) Alignment with existing DepEd policies for the
development and provision of nutritional, social and emotional,
and mental health programs to support and ensure the
holistic well-being of learners, and for them to prosper
academically, build resilience against adversity, and be
equipped with skills and confidence to seek help for early
intervention during their educational journey.

The ARAL Program shall further ensure mastery of
essential competencies and make up for learning loss
of learners.

SEC. 5. Essential Learning Competencies in Reading,
Mathematics, and Science. — The ARAL Program shall cover
the essential learning competencies under the K to 12 Basic
Education Curriculum covering reading and mathematics
for Grades 1 to 10, and science for Grades 3 to 10. Essential
learnihg competencies are competencies needed by the learners
and are considered indispensable in the teaching-learning
process in building skills and equipping learners for subsequent
grade levels.

Reading and mathematics shall be prioritized in the
ARAL Program to develop the critical and analytical thinking
skills of learners.

For Kindergarten learners, the ARAL Program shall focus
on building foundational skills aimed at strengthening their
literacy and numeracy competencies.

SEC. 6. Determination and Assessment of Learners
Under the ARAL Program. — The Learner Information System
(LIS) of the DepEd shall be used to determine those who have
returned or are returning to school after a furlough for
purposes of Section 3(a) of this Act.

The DepEd shall determine the learners to be covered
under Section 3(b) based on the results of the assessment to
be administered prior to the start of the ARAL Program.

Classroom-based assessments, such as examinations and
tests, shall be used by teachers to determine the learners to
be covered under Section 3(c).

To assess the progress of learners, appropriate
assessments shall be regularly administered.

Priority shall be given to learners from Kindergarten to
Grade 6.

SEC. 7. Tutors Under the ARAL Program. — The
following may be tutors under the ARAL Program:

(a) Teachers and para-teachers: Provided, That teachers
shall not be tutors of their own learners; and

(b) Pre-service teachers as defined under Republic Act No.
11713 or the “Excellence in Teacher Education Act”.

For purposes of this Act, teachers refer to all persons

engaged in teaching at the elementary and secondary levels,
whether on full-time or part-time basis. Para-teachers are those
who have taken the Licensure Examination for Teachers but
were unable to qualify, and have been issued by the Board
for Professional Teachers a special permit indicating their area
of assignment. Pre-service teachers refer to students enrolled
in a teacher education degree program offered by Teacher

Education Institutions. Except for teachers under paragraph .

(a) of this section, the tutors under the ARAL Program shall
not be considered practicing the profession of teaching under
Republic Act No. 7836 or the “Philippine Teachers
Professionalization Act of 1994”.

The DepEd may engage as tutors other individuals deemed
qualified, competent, and of good character based on conditions
stated under the implementing rules and regulations (IRR) of
this Act.

SEC. 8. Capability Building of Tutors. — To successfully
achieve the objectives of the ARAL Program, the DepEd shall
ensure that the tutors receive sufficient training, as needed,
focusing on effective pedagogies, interpersonal skills, social-
emotional learning, and cultural competency, among others.

SEC. 9. Campaigns for Learners to Return to School. —
The ARAL Program shall create mass awareness campaigns
through media and community engagement to encourage
learners to re-enroll and return to school through strategies
developed by the DepEd.

SEC. 10. Updated LIS. — The DepEd shall update its LIS
which shall contain the following additional information:

(a) Name and academic background of tutors;

(b) Name, grade level, and school of learners and their
corresponding pre- and post- assessment scores in standardized
measures of program effectiveness and grades in the subjects
taken under the ARAL Program; and

(c) Assessment of learner performance on tasks and
activities administered during the tutorial sessions.

SEC. 11. Free Access to All of DepEd’s Learning
Management Systems Applications; Subsidized Data Plans for
Learners and Tutors In Need. — Public Telecommunications
Entities (PTEs) shall provide free access to all of
DepEd-exclusively hosted learning management systems
applications with a static and public internet protocol (IP)
address. The learning management systems applications shall
include web-based applications, online educational platforms,
digital libraries, and other online knowledge hubs exclusively
hosted by DepEd. No data charges shall also be incurred in
downloading from, or uploading to, these applications.

The DepEd shall determine the learners and tutors in
financial need and ensure that they are provided subsidized
data plans for the use of these applications.

As used in this Act, (1) PTEs shall refer to entities duly
authorized by the National Telecommunications Commission
to provide users or other entities with data connection allowing
access to the internet; and (2) free access shall refer to the
use of all learning management systems applications without
incurring any corresponding data charges.

SEC. 12. Allotment of Air Time for Supplemental
Tutorial Video Materials. — Pursuant to Republic Act No. 8370
or the “Children’s Television Act of 1997”, a portion of the
mandated allotment in the daily total air time of each
broadcasting network shall be utilized for supplemental tutorial
video materials within the regular programming of all
networks granted franchises or as a condition of renewal of
their broadcast licenses hereinafter, to be included as part of
the responsibility of the network in serving the public.

The materials shall cover the essential learning
competencies under the K to 12 Basic Education Curriculum,
covering reading, mathematics, and science.

The applicable provisions of the legislative franchises of
the broadcasting networks shall be used as the basis to require
them to provide additional air time for the tutorial videos
under the ARAL Program.

SEC. 13. Remuneration of Teachers and Para-teachers
Who Serve as Tutors. — Teachers who serve as tutors shall
be compensated, subject to the pertinent provisions of
Republic Act No. 4670 or the “Magna Carta for Public School
Teachers” and the existing rules and regulations of the DepEd
and the Department of Budget and Management (DBM). Said
compensation for teachers shall be granted: Provided, That
they have already rendered the prescribed six (6) hours of
actual classroom teaching, and the amount paid for the
purpose shall not exceed the compensation for two (2) hours
based on the Prime Hourly Teaching Rate consistent with
DBM guidelines.

Para-teachers who serve as tutors under this Act shall
be compensated from the budget of the DepEd or the Special
Education Fund (SEF) of the Local School Board of the
local government unit (LGU) where the schools of the learners
are located.

SEC. 14. Incentives for Pre-service Teachers. — Services
rendered by pre-service teachers who serve as tutors shall be
considered relevant teaching experience when applying for a
plantilla position in the DepEd, subject to relevant rules and
regulations of the Civil Service Commission and the Merit
Selection Plan and hiring guidelines of the DepEd.

SEC. 15. Delivery Modes for Tutorial Sessions. — Tutorial
sessions shall be conducted using any of the following delivery
modes to ensure that the sessions are effective and accessible
to or within the reach of learners:

(a) Face-to-face tutorials where tutors and learners are
physically present in the same place;

(b) Online tutorials where tutors facilitate the tutorial
sessions and engage the learners’ active participation by using
various technologies so that learning can be accessed anytime
while they are geographically remote from each other; and

(c) Blended learning where a specified number of tutorial
sessions include online and face-to-face tutorials.

In determining the venue for the tutorial sessions, the
DepEd shall consider accessibility, cost-effectiveness, and
health safety risk. As far as practicable, the tutorial sessions
shall be conducted in the public schools where the learners
are or were previously enrolled, where the DepEd shall ensure
the security and safety of all learners, tutors, and other parties
involved pursuant to Republic Act No. 11313 or the “Safe
Spaces Act”.

SEC. 16. Local Government Support. — The DepEd shall
collaborate with the LGU concerned to provide a safe learning
environment for face-to-face tutorials. They may also collaborate
on other matters for the implementation of the ARAL
Program, such as the promotion of the program to potential
tutors in higher education institutions, identification, and
referral of potential tutors to DepEd, and encouragement of
parents and parent-substitutes to include their children in the
ARAL Program.

The initiatives of an LGU in implementing learning
recovery strategies may be added as one of the performance
indicators under the criterion on Programs for Sustainable
Education under Section 7(e) of Republic Act No. 11292 or “The
Seal of Good Local Governance Act of 2019”.

SEC. 17. Parental Involvement. — Schools and tutors shall
develop linkages and maintain regular communication with the
parents of the learners, as well as their parent-substitutes as
defined under Republic Act No. 11908 or “The Parent
Effectiveness Service Program Act’. The parents and parent-
substitutes, being a primary resource and essential support in
the education of their children, shall enhance their parental
roles by assisting their children through home learning
activities and making significant contributions in their
educational development at home.

SEC. 18. Implementing Agencies. - The DepEd shall
coordinate with the Commission on Higher Education (CHED),
Department of Information and Communications Technology
(DICT), Department of the Interior and Local Government
(DILG), and other stakeholders in the implementation of the
provisions of this Act.

SEC. 19. Tax Incentives. — Any donation, contribution,
or grant, in cash or in kind, made by individuals or
organizations, public or private, local or foreign, to the ARAL
Program through the DepEd, shall be exempt from donor’s tax
and considered an allowable deduction from the gross income
of the donor in accordance with the provisions of the National
Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended, and the Bureau
of Internal Revenue rules and regulations.

SEC. 20. Mandatory Review and Impact Evaluation. —
An annual evaluation shall be designed to collect comparable
data for the purpose of determining the impact of the program.

The impact evaluation report shall be submitted to
Congress not later than six (6) months after the end of every
school year of implementation.

SEC. 21. Appropriations. — The amount necessary for the
implementation of this Act shall be charged against those
authorized in the current appropriations of the DepEd.
Thereafter, the amount necessary for its continuous
implementation shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

The LGUs concerned may provide the necessary funds
for the purpose charged against the SEF.

SEC. 22. Implementing Rules and Regulations. —- Within
sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the DepEd, in
consultation with the CHED, DICT, DILG, and other relevant
government agencies and private stakeholders, shall issue the
necessary rules and regulations for its effective implementation.
The rules and regulations issued pursuant to this section shall
take effect thirty (30) days after its publication in a newspaper
of general circulation.

SEC. 23. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part
of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the
remaining provisions or parts not affected shall remain in full
force and effect.

SEC. 24. Repealing Clause. — All other laws, executive
orders, presidential decrees, administrative orders, rules and
regulations, issuances, or parts thereof inconsistent with or
contrary to the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or
amended accordingly.

SEC. 25. Effectivity. - Notwithstanding the non-issuance
of the IRR, this Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

Approved,

aE =x.

Speaker of the Hous President of the Senate
of Representatives

 


This Act, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill
No. 1604 and House Bill No. 8210, was passed by the
Senate of the Philippines and the House of Representatives
on August 13, 2024.

wie S. VELASCO

Secretary General
House of Representatives

Approved: OCT 16 2024

  

FERDINAND ROM, fps MARCOS JR.
Pre esident of the Philippines

/
oO

‘Cc OF THE PHILIPPINES

Uv AM IVAN

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERT FIED COPY

4 ‘OLENTINO-NAVA
S 10 1¢- n24ACTING DIRECTOR IV