H. No. 9334

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Nineteenth Congress

Third Regular Session
—_-—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

AN ACT CONVERTING THE SULU STATE COLLEGE IN
THE MUNICIPALITY OF JOLO, PROVINCE OF SULU,
INTO A STATE UNIVERSITY TO BE KNOWN AS THE
SULU STATE UNIVERSITY AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as the
“Sulu State University Charter”,

SEC. 2. Conversion. — The Sulu State College (SSC) in the
Municipality of Jolo, Province of Sulu, including all its satellite
campuses, is hereby converted into a state university to be known as
the Sulu State University (SSU).

SEC. 8. General Mandate. —The SSU shall primarily provide
advanced education, higher technological and professional courses, and
training programs in agriculture, education, engineering, forestry,
arts and sciences, and other relevant fields of study. It shall promote
advanced instruction, research, and extension services and provide
progressive leadership in its areas of specialization.

Sec. 4. Curricular Offerings. The SSU shall offer short-term
technical-vocational, undergraduate, and graduate courses in the fields
of agriculture, education, engineering, forestry, arts and sciences, and
other courses, as the Board of Regents may deem necessary to carry
out its objectives, and those which respond to the human resource
development needs of the Province of Sulu and the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM): Provided, That
the SSU shall comply with the policies, standards, and guidelines of
the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) for the offering of courses
and the introduction of new or revised programs.

The existing reasonably sized laboratory high school shall
continue to operate under the supervision of the College of Education
of the SSU to serve the in-campus requirements of its students.

SEC. 5. Administration. — The SSU shall have the general
powers of a corporation set forth in Republic Act (RA) No. 11232,
otherwise known as the “Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines”.
The administration of the SSU and the exercise of its corporate powers
shall be vested exclusively in the Board of Regents and the President
of the SSU.

Sxc. 6. The Board of Regents. The governing body of the SSU
shall be the Board of Regents, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
which shall be chaired by the Chairperson of the CHED and
vice-chaired by the President of the SSU, and with the following
as members:

(a) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher, Technical and
Vocational Education of the Senate;

(b) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher and Technical
Education of the House of Representatives;

(©) Regional Director of the Department of Economy, Planning,
and Development (DEPDev);

$————+

 

@Regional Director of the Department of Science
and Technology;

© President of the federation of faculty associations of the SSU;
@® President of the federation of student councils of the SSU;
(g) President of the federation of alumni associations of the SSU;

(hb) Representative of the non-teaching personnel association of
the SSU; and

Gi) Three (3) prominent citizens from the private sector
who have distinguished themselves in their professions or
fields of specialization.

The Board shall appoint three (3) prominent citizens who shall
be selected from a list of at least five (5) qualified persons from the
Province of Sulu, as recommended by a search committee constituted
by the President of the SSU, in consultation with the Chairperson of
the CHED and other members of the Board, based on the guidelines,
qualifications and standards for the position set by the Board. They
shall serve for a term of two (2) years from the date of appointment.

The presidents of the federation of faculty associations, the
federation of student councils, and the federation of alumni associations,
and the representative of the non-teaching personnel shall be
coterminous with their terms of office, as provided under their
respective constitutions and bylaws.

SEC. 7. Powers and Duties of the Board. —The administration
ofthe SSU and the exercise of its corporate powers are vested in the
Board, which shall have the following specific powers and duties in
addition to its general powers of administration and the exercise of all
the powers granted to the Board of Directors of a Corporation under
Section 35 of RA No. 11232:

(a) Promulgate and implement policies in accordance with the
declared State policies on education, other pertinent provisions of the
Constitution on education, agriculture, science and technology, and
the policies, standards and thrusts of the CHED under RA No. 7722,
otherwise known as the “Higher Education Act of 1994”;

(b) Approve the curricula, instructional programs, and rules on
student discipline drawn by the Administrative and Academic Councils,
as herein provided;

(c) Appoint, upon the recommendation of the President of the
SSU, the vice presidents, chancellors, deans, directors, heads of the
campuses, faculty members, and other officials of the SSU;

(d) Prescribe the salaries of faculty members and administrative
officials and employees, subject to the provisions of RA No. 11466,
otherwise known as the “Salary Standardization Law of 2019”, civil
service rules and regulations governing hours of service and such other
requirements and conditions, and other pertinent laws, rules and

regulations;

() Fix the tuition fees and other necessary school charges, such
as matriculation fees, graduation fees, and laboratory fees, as the Board
may deem proper to impose, after due consultation with the concerned
sectors. The fees and charges, including government subsidies and
other income generated by the SSU, shall constitute its funds to be
used exclusively in the pursuit of its mandate as a state university,
and shall be deposited in any authorized government depository bank.
Allinterests that shall accrue therefrom shall form part of the same
funds for the use of the SSU;

The fees and charges collected by the SSU, including government
subsidies and proceeds from other income sources, as well as interests
that would accrue therefrom, shall be retained by the SSU: Provided,
That in no case shall the said income be used for the payment of
allowances and other benefits not authorized by law: Provided, further,
That all fiduciary fees shall be disbursed for the specific purposes for
which they were collected.

Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Board
may authorize, for such reasonable and legal purposes it deems
necessary and urgent for the attainment of the objectives of the SSU,
the use of: (i) any unexpended balance whose fiduciary character has
been ipso facto removed pursuant to the grant of subsidy under RA
No. 10931, otherwise known as the “Universal Access to Quality
Tertiary Education Act”; and/or (ii) any appropriation for any project
under the duly approved program of expenditures of the SSU, which
the SSU, for reasons beyond its control, would not be able to pursue:
Provided, That funds collected from students for specific purposes
shall not be realigned or reprogrammed to other expenditures;

( Adopt and implement a socialized scheme of tuition and
other school fees for greater access of poor but deserving students
in accordance with RA No. 10931;

(g) Establish professorial chairs in the SSU and provide
fellowships for qualified faculty members, and scholarships to
deserving students;

(h) Receive and appropriate sums as may be provided for by
law for the support of the SSU, and all other sums in the manner
it may, in its discretion, determine to carry out the purposes and
functions of the SSU;

@) Set the policies on admission and graduation of students;

G) Award honorary degrees upon persons in recognition of
their outstanding contributions in the fields of education, public
service, arts, science and technology, sports and human kinetics,
or any field of specialization within the academic competency of
the SSU, and authorize the awarding of certificates of completion
of non-degree and non-traditional courses;

(k) Develop academic arrangements for institutional
capability building with appropriate institutions and agencies,
whether public, private, local or foreign, and appoint experts or
specialists as consultants, part-time, visiting or exchange
professors, scholars or researchers, as the case may be;

@ Adopt modern and innovative modes of transferring
knowledge to allow greater access to education such as the use of
information technology, online programs, dual training system,
open distance learning, and community laboratory;

(m) Absorb non-chartered tertiary institutions within the
Province of Sulu and BARMM as branches, extension or external
centers, in coordination with the CHED and in consultation with
the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), and offer
therein programs or courses to carry out the constitutional
mandate of providing equal access to educational opportunities;

(n) Authorize an external management audit of the SSU,
to be financed by the CHED, subject to the rules and regulations
of the Commission on Audit, and institute reforms, including
academic and structural changes, on the basis of the audit results
and recommendations;

(0) Develop consortia and other economic forms of linkages
with local government units, as well as public, private, local or
foreign institutions and agencies for the furtherance of the
purposes and objectives of the SSU;

(p) Import books or publications, instruments, equipment,
and apparatuses for economic, technical-vocational, scientific,
medical, philosophical, historical, legal or cultural purposes;

(q) Enter into joint ventures with business and industry,
after consultation with the DEPDev for the profitable growth and
management of economic assets, the proceeds of which shall be
used for the development and strengthening of the SSU;

(x) Receive, in trust, all legacies, gifts, and donations of
real and personal properties of all kinds and administer and
dispose of the same, when necessary, for the benefit of the SSU
and subject to the limitations, directions, and instructions of the
donor, if any;

(8) Extend the term of the President of the SSU beyond the
age of retirement but not beyond the age of seventy (70), based on
the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board:
Provided, That the President’s performance has been rated by
the Board as outstanding and a unanimous recommendation for
such extension has been decided upon by the Search Committee;

(t) Delegate any of its powers and duties to the President
and other officials of the SSU, as it may deem appropriate, so as
to expedite the administration of the affairs of the SSU;

(u)Establish policy guidelines and procedures for
participative and transparent decision making within the SSU;

(v) Where most advantageous to the SSU, outsource the
_ management of non-academic services such as health, food,

building or grounds or property maintenance, and such other
similar activities;

(w) Authorize the construction or repair of its buildings,
machinery, equipment, and other facilities, and the purchase and
acquisition of real property, including the necessary supplies,
materials, and equipment; and

(x) Promulgate rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry out the purposes and functions of the SSU.

SEC. 8. Meetings of the Board.—The Board shall regularly
convene once every three (3) months. The Chairperson of the Board
may, however, call a special meeting whenever necessary:
Provided, That members are notified in writing at least three (3)
days prior to the conduct of said meeting.

A quorum of the Board shall consist of a majority of all its
members holding office at the time of the meeting: Provided,
That the Chairperson of the Board or the President of the SSU is
among those present in the meeting.

In case the Chairperson of the CHED cannot attend a
meeting of the Board, a CHED Commissioner duly designated by
the Chairperson of the CHED as representative to the meeting,
shall have all the rights and responsibilities of a regular member:
Provided, That during the meeting, the President of the SSU, as
Vice Chairperson, shall be the presiding officer: Provided, further,
That this provision notwithstanding, the Chairperson of the CHED
may designate a CHED Commissioner as the regular Chairperson
of the Board, in which case, the said CHED Commissioner shall
act as the presiding officer.

In case the Chairpersons of the Senate Committee on
Higher, Technical and Vocational Education and the House
Committee on Higher and Technical Education cannot attend
the Board meeting, they may designate their respective
representatives who shall have the same rights and responsibilities
as regular members of the Board.

The members of the Board shall serve without compensation
other than reimbursements for actual and necessary expenses
incurred, either for their attendance to the meetings of the Board

or in connection with other official business authorized by
resolutions of the Board, subject to existing laws and regulations.

SEC. 9. The University President. - The SSU shall be
headed by a President who shall be appointed by the Board, subject
to its guidelines, qualifications, and standards, and based on the
recommendation of a Search Committee duly constituted for the
purpose of selecting the President. The SSU President shall render
full-time service for a term of four (4) years, and may be reappointed.
to another term.

Within six (6) months before the expiration of the term of
office of the incumbent President of the SSU, the Board shall
constitute the Search Committee for the Presidency and shall
ensure the appointment or reappointment of a President on or
before the expiration of the term.

The powers and duties of the President of the SSU, in
addition to those specifically provided in this Act, shall be those
usually pertaining to the Office of the President of universities
and those delegated by the Board.

The salary of the President of the SSU shall be in accordance
with RA No. 11466, and such other laws amendatory thereto
which may hereinafter be enacted, the joint circular for state
universities and colleges’ leveling instruments, and the guidelines
of the CHED and the DBM.

In case of vacancy in the Office of the President by reason
of death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal for cause,
or incapacity of the President to perform the functions of the
office, the Board shall designate an Officer-in-Charge of the SSU,
pending the appointment of a new President.

The President of the SSU shall be assisted by the following
officials: Vice President for Academic Affairs; Vice President for
Administration, Planning, and Finance; and Vice President for
Research, Development, and Extension. They shall all be
appointed by the Board upon the recommendation of the President
of the SSU.

Src. 10. The Secretary of the SSU. — The Board shall appoint
a Secretary who shall serve as such for both the Board and the
SSU and shall keep all records and proceedings of the Board in
addition to other duties and responsibilities. The Secretary of the SSU
shall serve upon each member of the Board the appropriate notice
of Board meetings.

SEC. 11. The Treasurer of the SSU. — The Treasurer of the
Philippines shall be the ex officio Treasurer of the SSU.

SEC. 12. The Administrative Council. — There shall be an
Administrative Council consisting of the President of the SSU, as
Chairperson, and the vice president, deans, directors, and other officials
of equal rank, as members, whose duty is to review and recommend to
the Board such policies governing the administration, management,
and development planning of the SSU.

SEC. 13. The Academic Council. — There shall be an Academic
Council consisting of the President of the SSU, as Chairperson, and
all academic staff with the rank of at least an assistant professor,
as members.

The Academic Council shall review and recommend the
curricular offerings and rules on student discipline, fix the
requirements for the admission of students, as well as for their
graduation and conferment of degrees, exercise disciplinary power over
the students and formulate rules and regulations on student discipline,
subject to the review and approval of the Board through the President
of the SSU.

SEC. 14, Academic Freedom. — The SSU shall enjoy academic
freedom pursuant to Paragraph 2, Section 5 of Article XIV of
the Constitution.

SEC. 15. The Faculty. —No political belief, sex, gender, cultural
or community affiliation, ethnic origin, or religious opinion or affiliation
shall be a matter of inquiry in the appointment of faculty members
of the SSU: Provided, That the appointment shall be subject
to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board:
Provided, further, That a member of the faculty shall not criticize,
vouch for, recruit members in behalf of, or preach about any particular
religious denomination.


SEC. 16, Heads of Campuses. -The Campus Directors shall
respectively serve as heads or administrators of the SSU’s
campuses and render full-time service for a term of two (2) years
eligible for reappointment to another term.

They shall be appointed or designated by the Board, upon
recommendation of the Search Committee and the President,
subject to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the
Board: Provided, That upon the effectivity of this Act, the
incumbent Campus Directors of the existing campuses of the SSC
shall continue to serve as such.

SEC. 17. Scholarship Programs and Admission. — The
SSU shall provide scholarship programs and other affirmative
action programs to assist poor but deserving students who qualify
for admission to the SSU. No student shall be denied admission
to the SSU by reason of sex, gender, religion, cultwral community
affiliation, or ethnic origin, or any other form of discrimination.

SEC. 18. Loan or Transfer of Supplies, Apparatuses, or
Equipment, or Detail of Personnel to the SSU. — Heads of national
government agencies and instrumentalities may, upon the request
of the Board through the President of the SSU, loan or transfer
supplies, apparatuses, or equipment, or detail personnel to the
SSU: Provided, That such loan, transfer, or detail shall not be
detrimental to public service.

The personnel to be detailed to the SSU shall perform such
duties as may be deemed required by the President of the SSU
and the time spent for such duties shall be counted as part of the
detailed personnel’s regular service.

SEC. 19. Assets, Liabilities, and Personnel. — All assets,
both real and personal, personnel, and records of the SSC, as well
as its liabilities or obligations, shall be transferred to the SSU:
Provided, That the positions, rights, and security of tenure of
faculty members and personnel therein employed under existing
laws prior to the conversion into a university shall be respected.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the SSC and all its satellite campuses are declared as property
of the SSU, and shall be titled under its name: Provided, That

il

all parcels of land of the SSU shall revert to the original owner or
donor, or the Republic of the Philippines, in the event that the SSU
ceases to exist or be abolished, or should the said parcels of land be no
longer needed by the SSU: Provided, further, That such reversion
shall not impair obligation of contracts.

Suc. 20. Duty and Tax Exemptions. —The importation of books
or publications, instruments, equipment, and apparatuses which are
for economic, technical, vocational, scientific, medical, philosophical,
historical, legal, or cultural purposes made by the SSU, upon
certification by the CHED, shall be exempt from customs duties in
accordance with the provisions of RA No, 10863, otherwise known as
the “Customs Modernization and Tariff Act (CMTA)”.

All grants, bequests, endowments, donations, and contributions
made to and used actually, directly, and exclusively for educational
purposes by the SSU shall be exempt from donor’s tax, and the same
shall be considered as allowable deductions from gross income
for purposes of computing the taxable income of the donor in accordance
with the provisions of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997,
as amended.

SEC. 21. Compliance with the CHED Requirements. — The
provisions of this Act notwithstanding, the conversion of the SSC toa
state university shall become effective only upon the determination
and declaration by the CHED, based on the recommendation of a panel
of experts constituted for the purpose, that the SSC has complied with
the requirements for a university status based on CHED Memorandum
Order No. 46, series of 2012 or the “Policy-Standard to Enhance Quality
Assurance (QA) in Philippine Higher Education Through an Outcomes-
Based and Typology-Based QA”: Provided, That the panel may issue
such recommendation when the SSC has substantially complied with
the requirements for the grant of university status.

The following operational requirements for a university, as
established by the CHED, shall be complied with:

(a) Employment of full-time, permanent faculty members who
possess relevant degrees in their areas of specialization, as required
by the CHED, and shall have participated in research and development
activities in their respective disciplines, as evidenced by refereed
publications and other scholarly outputs;


(b) Offering of a comprehensive range of degree programs in all
levels, from basic post-secondary to doctoral programs;

(c) Conduct of viable research programs in specific disciplinal
and multidisciplinary areas of study that produce new knowledge, as
evidenced by refereed publications, citations, inventions, and patents,
among others;

@) Establishment of comprehensive learning resources and
support structures, to include libraries, practicum laboratories,
relevant educational resources, and linkages with relevant disciplinal
and professional sectors, so as to allow students to explore basic,
advance, and even cutting-edge knowledge in a wide range of disciplines
or professions;

() Maintenance of linkage and affiliation with other research
institutions in various parts of the world to ensure that the research
activities of the SSU are functioning at current global standards; and

@® Conduct of outreach activities to allow the students, faculty,
and research staff to apply the new knowledge they generate to address
specific social development problems.

The CHED, through its regional office, shall regularly provide
technical assistance to the SSU and monitor its compliance with the
requirements of the CHED.

The SSC shall retain its status prior to the effectivity of this Act
until it is able to comply with the requirements provided herein.

SEC. 22, Development Plan and Organizational Structure. —
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after the approval of this Act,
the SSU shall accomplish the following:

(a) Submit a five (5)-year development plan, including its
corresponding program budget to the CHED and the DBM;

(b) Submit the revised Land Use Development and Infrastructure
Plan in accordance with RA No. 11896, otherwise known
as the “SUCs Land Use Development and Infrastructure Plan
(LUDIP) Act”;

(©) Undergo a management audit in cooperation with the
CHED; and

@ Set up its organizational, administrative, and academic
structure, including the designation of the key officials and other
administrative personnel of the SSU.

SEC. 23. Filing of Report. — On or before the fifteenth (15") day
of the second (2™*) month after the opening of regular classes each
year, the Board shall file a detailed report on its compliance with the
requirements for a university status with the Office of the President
of the Philippines and both Houses of Congress, through the
Chairperson of the CHED.

SEC. 24. Appropriations. —- The amount necessary to carry out
the initial implementation of this Act shall be charged against the
current year’s appropriation of the SSC. Thereafter, such sums as
may be necessary for the continued implementation of this Act shall
be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 25. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of RA No.
8292, otherwise known as the “Higher Education Modernization Act
of 1997”, shall form part of this Act.

SEC. 26. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within sixty
(60) days from the approval of this Act, the Board shall, in consultation
with the CHED, issue rules and regulations to implement
its provisions.

SEC. 27. Transitory Provision. — In order to effect a smooth
transition to a state university, the incumbent President of the SSC
shall serve as the first President of the SSU who shall not be eligible
for reappointment.

SEC. 28. Separability Clause, —If, for any reason, any part or
provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the
remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force
and effect.

SEC. 29. Repealing Clause. —- Batas Pambansa Blg. 208, titled
“An Act Converting the Jolo Community College and the Dayang-
Dayang Hadji-Piandao Memorial High School, Both in the Province of
Sulu, into a State College to be Known as the Sulu State College”, and


all laws, presidential decrees, executive orders, and rules and
regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act
are amended, repealed, or modified accordingly.

SEC. 30. Effectivity. -This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days
after its complete publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation.

Approved,

 
    

FRANCIS “CHIZ’ G. ESCUDERO_ FE
President of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives on November 22, 2023,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on June 8, 2025, and which
amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives

on June 9, 2025.
REGINALD S. a

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved:

SEP 15 2025
‘without the signature of the Presi.
dent, in accordance with Article VI,
Section 27. (1), of the Constitution

FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President of the Philippines

Oo Pot the President
ANG RECORDS OFFICE

FIED COPY

LY V. TOLENTINO-NAVA
DIRECTOR IV fadlte-ly-