H. No. 7499

Republic of the Philippines
Cougress of the Philippines
Aletrs Manila

Nineteenth Congress
Chirk Regular, Session

—s-——

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 12075]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A MULTI-SPECIES MARINE HATCHERY
IN THE CITY OF ZAMBOANGA, AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There shall be established, under the supervision
of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of the Department
of Agriculture (DA-BFAR), a multi-species marine hatchery in the
City of Zamboanga.

SEC. 2. Prior to the establishment of the multi-species marine
hatchery, the DA-BFAR shall conduct’a full-scale feasibility study
in support of its construction to comply with the requirements of the
Department of Budget and Management.

The DA-BFAR shall transfer the management of the
multi-species marine hatchery to the local government of Zamboanga
City within two (2) years after its construction through a memorandum
of agreement. It shall implement a training and phasing-in program
for local government personnel on the management and operation of
the hatchery.

Skc. 3. The DA-BFAR shall conduct continuing research and
experimentation on the breeding and production of marine species,
especially as they apply to local conditions, to discover new methods
and technology that shall benefit the fisheries industry.

Suc. 4. The Secretary of Agriculture shall include in the
Department’s programs the conduct of the feasibility study and the
consequent establishment of the multi-species marine hatchery in the
City of Zamboanga, the funding of which shall be included in the
General Appropriations Act. The local government unit concerned
shall set aside funds from any available local revenue in an amount
deemed appropriate for the operationalization of the hatchery.

SEC. 5. Within sixty (60) days from the passage of this Act,
the Secretary of Agriculture shall issue the rules and regulations on
the supervision, monitoring, and the transfer of the management of
the multi-species marine hatchery to the City of Zamboanga.

SEc. 6. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of

general circulation.

Approved,

FRANCIS “CHIZ” G, ESCUDERO
President of the Senate

 

of Representatives

This Act, which originated in the House of Representatives,
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the
Philippines on March 21, 2023 and September 16, 2024, respectively.

 
 
 
 

REGINA) 7
Secretary General
House of Representatives

 
   

REPUBLIC OF THE

WT

   
 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE