8. No, 2575

Aletra Manila
Chith Regular Sessian
—a—

day of July, two thousand twenty-four.

AN ACT FURTHER STRENGTHENING THE EARLY CHILDHOOD
CARE AND DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM, REPEALING FOR
THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10410, OTHERWISE
KNOWN AS THE “EARLY YEARS ACT (EYA) OF 2013”, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in
Congress assembled:

SECTION I. Short Title. ~ This Act shall be known as the
“Early Childhood Care and Development System Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is hereby declared the
policy of the State to safeguard and promote the right of every child
to holistic well-being, growth, and dedicated care, recognizing the
age-appropriate stages of development. The State commits to creating
nurturing environments for children that ensure a healthy and
sustainable program for nutrition, age-appropriate development, and
special protection with full recognition of the nature of childhood, as
well as the necessity to provide developmentally appropriate
experiences to address their needs. The State shall also support parents
and parent-substitutes in their roles as primary caregivers and as
their children’s first teachers. Further, the State hereby recognizes

the age from zero (0) to eight (8) years as the first crucial stage of
educational development. Without limiting the primary right and duty
of parents to rear their children, the Early Childhood Care and
Development (ECCD) Council shall be responsible for children below
five (5) years of age, while the responsibility to help develop children
in the formative years between age five (5) to eight (8) years shall be
with the Department of Education (DepEd) consistent with Republic
Act No. 10533 or the “Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013”.

Towards this end, the State shall institutionalize an ECCD
System, as defined in Section 4 of this Act, that is comprehensive,
integrative, and sustainable, even during times of emergency, that
involves multisectoral and interagency collaboration at the national
and local levels in government; among service providers, families,
and communities; among the public and private sectors and
non-government organizations (NGOs); and professional associations
and academic institutions.

Pursuant to Republic Act No. 11650 or the “Instituting a Policy
of Inclusion and Services for Learners with Disabilities in Support of
Inclusive Education Act”, the ECCD System shall promote the inclusion
of children with disabilities, where they shall be accorded the services
stipulated under the law and provided with reasonable accommodation
and accessible environments, and advocate respect for cultural and
linguistic diversity.

The ECCD System shall be anchored on complementary
strategies that include service delivery for children below five (5) years
of age, educating and training parents and parent-substitutes on
responsible caregiving, encouraging the active involvement of parents
and communities in ECCD programs, and raising awareness about
the important efforts that improve the quality of life for young children
and families.

SEC. 3. Objectives. — The ECCD System shall pursue the
following objectives:

(a) Reduce infant and child mortality rates, and subsequently
eliminate preventable deaths, by ensuring that adequate health and
nutrition programs are accessible to young children and their parents
and parent-substitutes, from the prenatal period throughout the early
childhood years;

(b) Enhance the physical-motor, socio-emotional, cognitive,
language, psychological, and spiritual development of infants and
young children;

; (©) Facilitate a seamless transition to, and ensure that young
children are adequately prepared for, the formal learning system that
begins at kindergarten;

@ Establish an efficient system for early identification,
prevention, referral, and intervention for the wide range of children
with special needs below five (5) years of age, using the Child Find
System under Republic Act No. 11650;

; () Reinforce the role of parents and parent-substitutes as the
primary caregivers and educators of their children especially those
below five (5) years of age;

() Improve the quality standards of public and private ECCD
programs through, among others, recognition and accreditation; and
upgrade and update the capabilities of service providers and their
supervisors through their continuing education, reskilling, and upskilling;

(g) Ensure that special support is provided in the delivery of
the ECCD programs and services for the poor, disadvantaged, and
minority communities, and that children with disabilities are
accommodated through the most appropriate languages and means of
communication, and in environments that maximize academic and
social development; and

(h) Employ teachers, including teachers with disabilities, who
are qualified to manage young children with developmental delays
and disabilities, and train professionals and staff who work at all levels
of education.

SEC. 4. Definitions. ~ As used in this Act:

(a) Child Development Center (CDC) refers to a facility in a
barangay, municipality, city, or province, where children below
five (5) years of age are cared for during part of the day by ECCD
service providers to deliver ECCD programs and services;

(b) ECCD Curriculum refers to the developmentally appropriate
educational objectives and practices, programs of activitiés, organized
learning experiences, recommended learning materials, and appropriate
assessment for children below five (5) years of age that are aimed
towards the seamless transition to, and adequate preparation for, the
formal learning system. The ECCD System shall be implemented by
ECCD service providers through center-based programs, home-based
programs, and other programs that provide innovations and alternative
modalities to ensure and promote the health, nutrition, and the

attainment of developmental milestones of children below five (5) years
of age. It shall be reviewed every two (2) years and shall consist of
national program goals and guidelines, instructional objectives, and
content outlines that are age-appropriate, individually appropriate,
and culturally relevant;

(© ECCD Services refer to the services delivered in implementing
ECCD programs for the early childhood education, health, nutrition,
and social development of young children below five (5) years of age;

(d) ECCD Service Providers include the various professionals,
paraprofessionals, and volunteer caregivers who are directly
responsible for the care and education of young children below
five (5) years of age through center-based modalities, home-based
modalities, and other alternative modalities that provide innovations.
They shall include, but shall not be limited to, child development
teachers (CDTs), child development workers (CDWs), teacher aides,
rural health midwives, social workers, community health workers,
barangay nutrition scholars, Parent Effectiveness Service volunteers,
parents, parent-substitutes, newborn to pre-school caregivers, and
play facilitators;

(e) ECCD System refers to the full range of health, nutrition,
early childhood education, and social services development programs
that provide for the basic holistic needs of young children below five (5)
years of age, and promote their optimum growth and development.

The modalities for the delivery of these programs shall include:

(1) Center-based modalities, such as the day care
service established under Republic Act No. 6972 or the
“Barangay-Level Total Development and Protection of Children
Act”, community or faith-based early childhood education programs
initiated by NGOs or people’s organizations, workplace-related child
care and education programs, child-minding centers, and health centers
and stations;

(2) Home-based modalities, such as the neighborhood-based play
groups, family child care programs, parent education, and home
visiting programs; and

(3) Other alternative modalities that provide innovations,
including those to be employed during and after disaster and emergency
situations, for the development, effective implementation, and
continuous delivery of ECCD services; and

x

() Parent Education refers to the various formal and alternative
means of providing parents and parent-substitutes with information,
skills, and support systems to assist them in their roles as their
children’s primary caregivers and educators. These include public
and private parent education programs linked to center, home, and
media-based child care and education programs.

SEc. 5. System Framework and Components. - The ECCD
System shall be implemented in accordance with Philippine laws and
regulations, and policies set forth by the ECCD Council, It shall include
the delivery of complementary and integrated programs and services
for good health, adequate nutrition, quality early childhood education,
safety and security, responsive caregiving, opportunities for learning,
well-being, sanitation, and cultural activities.

The ECCD System shall include the following components:

(a) ECCD Curriculum. — The curriculum shall focus on
children’s holistic development, take into account age, individual and
socio-cultural appropriateness, and utilize developmentally appropriate
practice, such as play, as its core component. It shall include programs
and activities designed to prepare a child for formal schooling
and facilitate a seamless transition from a home and community
environment to a classroom setting. The use of indigenous games shall
be encouraged;

(b) Parent Education and Involvement, Advocacy, and
Mobilization of Communities. —- This component shall harness and
develop parents’ strengths as providers of ECCD programs at home,
active partners of other stakeholders, advocates for community
concerns that affect children, and pillars of support for local and
national ECCD programs through community organization efforts.

To this end, the ECCD Council shall promote awareness of all
laws on the rearing, health, and development of the child, breastfeeding,
maternal and reproductive health, and other laws related thereto.

For this purpose, the ECCD Council shall integrate in the ECCD
System a referral mechanism for parents to relevant government
agencies with programs related to the rearing, health, and development
of the child, as well ag maternal and reproductive health, as provided
in Republic Act No. 11650, Republic Act No. 11148 or the “Kalusugan
at Nutrisyon ng Mag-Nanay Act”, Republic Act No. 10354 or “The
Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Act of 2012”, Republic
Act No. 10028 or the “Expanded Breastfeeding Promotion Act of 2009”,
and other related laws;

© Integrated Nutrition and Health Component. — This
component shall prioritize the utmost welfare of the child and integrate
the different programs and services for the nutrition and health of
children below five (5) years of age, lactating mothers, and pregnant
women under various laws and policies, which include Republic Act
No. 11148 and Republic Act No. 11087 or the “Masustansyang Pagkain
para sa Batang Pilipino Act”;

@ Human Resource Development Component. — This
component shall establish mechanisms for the systematic
professionalization of CDTs through enrollment in educational
programs, pre-service or in-service training, or continuing education
programs, It shall likewise provide enabling conditions for the
competency assessment, certification, reskilling, and upskilling of
CDWs and other service providers; and

() ECCD Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation. — This
component shall consist of a continuing process of planning,
implementation, supervision, financial management, monitoring,
evaluation, and reporting to persons concerned and shall encourage
the active involvement and build the capabilities of service providers,
parents, and local government officials to sustain the program.

SEC. 6. The ECCD System. -The ECCD System shall apply to
all provinces, cities, municipalities, and barangays to achieve universal
ECCD access for all children below five (5) years of age.

SEC. 7. Implementing Arrangements and Operational
Structures. —

(a) Responsibilities of the ECCD Council. - The ECCD Council
shall be responsible for establishing national standards, developing
policies and programs, ensuring compliance thereof, and providing
technical assistance and support to the ECCD service providers in
consultation with the coordinating committees at the provincial, city,
municipal, and barangay levels.

The ECCD Council shall meet in an annual workshop every
first quarter of the fiscal year to prepare work and financial plans
that will coordinate their technical assistance and support for the
ECCD programs. They shall observe existing implementing guidelines
that ensure consistency in integrated service delivery within the ECCD
System, as follows:

_

(1) The Department of the Interior and Local Government
(DILG) shall ensure that all local government units (LGUs) are
implementing the ECCD System and complying with the provisions
of this Act. It shall include capacitating the LGUs in implementing
the ECCD System and delivering the ECCD programs and services;

(2) The DepEd shall recognize early childhood education as the
foundation of the learning continuum and shall promote it for all
children below five (5) years of age;

(8) The DILG, the DepEd, the Department of Agriculture (DA),
the Department of Health (DOH), the Department of Social Welfare
and Development (DSWD), the Commission on Higher Education
(CHED), the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority
(TESDA), and the National Nutrition Council (NNC) shall provide
continuing professional development program support, supplementary
learning materials, reference materials, supplemental nutrition, and
healthcare services; and

(4) The DepEd, the CHED, the TESDA, and the LGUs, through
the DILG, shall coordinate on the promotion of early childhood
education careers to senior high school students and graduates. They
shall also facilitate the assessment of graduates for certification as
CDWs, and ensure their seamless progression to employment.

(b) Responsibilities of Local Government Units. - LGUs,
through its ECCD Offices as provided under Section 11 of this Act,
shall be primarily responsible for the implementation of the ECCD
System, including programs and services in their respective
jurisdictions. LGUs shall include allocations from their Special
Education Fund (SEF) and Gender and Development (GAD) Fund in
addition to other local funds to fulfill this primary responsibility.
Specifically, LGUs shall:

(1) Aim to achieve universal ECCD access by identifying young
children, including the poor, the vulnerable, and the marginalized,
and supporting their parents or parent-substitutes within their
respective jurisdictions;

(2) Submit their respective roadmaps to the ECCD
Council, to be updated every three (3) years, towards the achievement
of the goal of universal ECCD access;

(8) Issue and implement policies based on national policies
formulated by the ECCD Council, and ensure compliance with the

minimum requirements for the establishment of center-based
and home-based modalities, and other alternative modalities that
provide innovations;

(4) Provide the facilities and resources for the effective delivery
of the programs and services under the ECCD System. They shall
establish or convert existing day care centers to CDCs and maintain
them according to standards and specifications set by the ECCD
Council: Provided, That the LGUs shall ensure that there is at least
one (1) CDC in every barangay. They shall also implement
home-based modalities and other alternative modalities that provide
innovations, conforming to the needs of their respective barangays;

(5) Create plantilla positions for CDTs and CDWs;

(6) Recruit, hire, and ensure the professional development of
ECCD service providers, including but not limited to CDTs and CDWs,
in coordination with the CHED, the Department of Labor and
Employment, the TESDA, and other relevant government agencies:

(7) Supervise the service providers and monitor the delivery of
the ECCD programs and services;

(8) Administer the recognition and accreditation of private
ECCD programs;

(9) Conduct data collection, maintenance, and harmonization
of the existing databases relevant to ECCD, in accordance with the
parameters or metrics given by the ECCD Council. The submission of
reports to the ECCD Council shall be done annually;

(10) Endeavor to augment their local funds from private sources,
both local and international, for the implementation of the ECCD System;

(11) Implement, in coordination with the DSWD, feeding
programs for children below five (5) years of age, in accordance with
Republic Act No. 11087;

(12) Formulate and implement a localized comprehensive
emergency program for young children during disasters and other
emergency situations, prioritizing the needs of pregnant women, and
young children and their parent-substitutes, in accordance with
Republic Act No. 10821 or the “Children’s Emergency Relief and
Protection Act”;

(13) Develop innovative arrangements and partnerships with
private ECCD service providers through supporting the operations of
community-based, home-based, and other alternative modalities of
ECCD service delivery;

(14) Engage parents, parent-substitutes, government agencies,
civil society organizations, and other stakeholders in the delivery of
the ECCD programs and services;

(15) Promote ECCD programs to stakeholders through
information, education, and communication campaigns, with the aim
of increasing the attendance of children below five (5) years of age in
such programs;

(16) Provide for the training of parents and parent-substitutes, as
well as barangay health workers and nutrition scholars, on early
stimulation, care, growth, and development, especially for children
below three (3) years of age, consistent with the programs on health
and nutrition under various laws which include Republic Act No. 11148
and Republic Act No. 11037; and

(17) Attend meetings called by the ECCD Council.

(c) Responsibilities of Families and Communities. — Families
and communities shall support the local ECCD programs by
participating in various community-based projects such as, but not
limited to, health, nutrition, early childhood education, and social
development projects for the overall development of their children below
five (5) years of age.

SEC. 8. Strengthening the ECCD Council.—The ECCD Council
shall be strengthened to ensure the State’s focus on building a strong
foundation for the development and learning of children below five (5)
years of age, to support the full range of health, nutrition, early
childhood education, and social development programs for the child’s
holistic development, and to facilitate sustained interagency and
multisectoral collaboration.

The ECCD Council, which shall be attached to the DILG, shall
be composed of the following:

(1) Secretary of the DILG, as ex officio Co-Chairperson for Local
Government Mobilization and Overall Implementation;

(2) Secretary of the DepEd, as ex officio Co-Chairperson for
ECCD Curriculum and all matters related to early childhood education;

(8) Executive Director of the ECCD Council Secretariat,
as ex officio Vice Chairperson;

(4) Secretary of the DA, as ex officio member;

(5) Secretary of the DOH, as ex officio member;

©) Secretary of the DSWD, as ex officio member;

(71) Chairperson of the CHED, as ex officio member;

(8) Director General of the TESDA, as ex officio member;
(9) Executive Director of the NNC, as ex officio member;
(10) Early childhood education expert or practitioner; and

(11) Representative from the academe specializing in early
childhood education.

The ECCD Council shall meet quarterly or upon the call of the
Co-Chairpersons or three (3) members of the ECCD Council,

SEC. 9. The ECCD Council Secretariat. — The ECCD Council
Secretariat, to be headed by an Executive Director, shall be organized
to provide administrative and technical support services for the
coordination and monitoring of the implementation of, policies and plans
formulated by the ECCD Council. The Executive Director shall be
appointed by the President, upon the recommendation of the ECCD
Council. The Executive Director shall have a fixed term of five (5)
years, unless earlier removed for cause, and may be eligible for
reappointment for another term, The Executive Director shall have
the rank, privileges, and emoluments of an Executive Director V.
The ECCD Council shall fix the staffing pattern of the Secretariat
and determine the qualifications, functions, and compensation scheme
for the positions to be created, subject to existing laws, rules
and regulations.

SEC. 10. Functions of the ECCD Council. —The ECCD Council
shall carry out the objectives of the ECCD System by performing the
following functions:

(a) Formulate the national policies and guidelines in consultation
with LGUs and other stakeholders, including the regional and local
levels when appropriate, and promulgate and implement such policies
and guidelines, consistent with the objectives and system framework
as defined in this Act;

(b) Establish standards and review the ECCD Curriculum
every two (2) years to facilitate the seamless transition of young
children to, and their adequate preparation for, the formal learning
system that begins at kindergarten, in accordance with relevant laws
and regulations;

(©) Develop a national standard for the recruitment of qualified
CDTs and CDWs, and other service providers. It shall likewise develop
programs for the continuing education, reskilling, and upskilling
of CDTs, CDWs, and other service providers, supervisors, and
administrators, in coordination with the CHED and the TESDA, to
improve the ECCD sector and upgrade quality standards of public and
private ECCD programs;

@ Issue minimum requirements for the establishment of
center-based and home-based modalities, and other alternative
modalities that provide innovations, and the conversion of existing
public day care centers into CDCs such as specifications for the facilities
and resources to be used in the effective delivery of the ECCD programs;

@) Administer the recognition and accreditation of public
ECCD programs;

@ Provide guidelines for streamlining the delivery of ECCD
services, taking into consideration the number of young children
being serviced by each CDC, the physical accessibility of CDCs, and
the availability of funds and resources of the LGUs, among others.
Streamlining measures may include clustering of CDCs for multiple
barangays, and the promotion of center-based and home-based
modalities, and other alternative modalities that provide innovations
as far as practicable, particularly in areas where very few young
children are serviced by the CDCs and for LGUs with limited resources;

(g) Develop a national system of awards and recognition for
deserving ECCD program implementers and service providers;

(h) Conduct regular independent audits on the delivery of
services to the ECCD program beneficiaries nationwide;

@ Conduct research and policy studies on ECCD, evaluate and
assess the impact of various ECCD programs, and report the outcome
nationwide through an effective information system;

G) Recommend new legislation to promote the educational
welfare, and physical and psychosocial well-being of the child, or

amendatory legislation to enhance the provisions and improve the
implementation of this Act;

(k) Develop a national system for registration, early
identification, screening, and monitoring of young children below
five (5) years of age under the ECCD programs with the aim of universal
access while ensuring an interoperable network of information systems
with the DepEd;

@) Develop various support mechanisms and sustainable
financing models for scaling quality and effective ECCD programs
that maximize public and private resources, giving priority to the
needy and high-risk children from poor and disadvantaged communities;

(m) Promote and encourage private sector initiatives for the
establishment of ECCD programs;

(n) Provide guidelines for the conduct of solicitations from local
and international civic organizations, and request private foundations
to supplement available resources;

(0) Promote ECCD programs to stakeholders, targeting all
communities with special consideration for at-risk children and
families, through information, education, and communication
campaigns, with the aim of increasing the attendance of children below
five (5) years of age in such programs;

(p) Develop high-quality learning resources to support ECCD
for center-based modalities, home-based modalities, and community
programs; and

(q) Perform such other functions as the HCCD Council may deem necessary.

Suc. 11. Creation of ECCD Offices in LGUs; Organizational
Structure and Staffing Pattern. — Every province, city, and
municipality shall create an ECCD Office, and design and implement
its own organizational structure and staffing pattern taking into
consideration its service requirements and financial capability, subject
to the standards and guidelines prescribed by the Civil Service
Commission (CSC). The ECCD Office, which shall be under the
administrative supervision of the local chief executive, shall manage
the delivery of the programs and services under the ECCD System
within its jurisdiction and its daily operations, including the
supervision of CDTs and CDWs in the performance of their duties
and responsibilities.

The ECCD Office shall closely collaborate with the local councils
for the protection of children and local school boards to ensure the
coordination and harmonization of plans, programs, and activities,
and facilitate a seamless transition of children under five (5) years of
age to a classroom setting, with the utmost welfare of the child as the
paramount consideration.

The ECCD Office shall also require the CDTs and CDWs to
coordinate with the barangay health workers and barangay nutrition
scholars for the monitoring of the nutrition and health of children
under five (5) years of age, and the delivery of ECCD programs and
activities pertinent to nutrition and health, including the delivery
of ECCD programs and services under various laws. The ECCD
Office shall participate in the development of the local nutrition
action plan and render technical support to the LGU and the NNC,
and shall harmonize its local nutrition database with the national

nutrition information system as provided under Section 6 of Republic
Act No. 11037,

SEC. 12. Professionalization of CDTs; National Competency
Assessment of CDWs; Certification, Reskilling, and Upskilling of
Incumbent CDWs; Scholarships for Continuing Education. - There
shall be at least one (1) CDT and one (1) CDW for every CDC, and
every province, city, and municipality shall create plantilla positions
for CDTs and CDWs pursuant to Section 7(b)(5) of this Act.

The guidelines for the salary grades (SGs), eligibility and
qualifications, and duties and responsibilities, among others, shall be
issued by the local chief executive in consultation with and as approved
by the CSC and the Department of Budget and Management (DBM):
Provided, That the SGs shall not be lower than SG 11 for CDTs,
SG 10 for CDWs with an associate degree, and SG 8 for the other
CDWs: Provided, further, That a CDT shall be a holder of any
bachelor’s degree, preferably with units in early childhood education,
and has passed the Board Licensure Examination for Professional
Teachers (BLEPT): Provided, furthermore, That a CDW shall be a
holder of at least an associate degree in early childhood education, at
least a senior high school graduate and has passed the national
competency assessment for CDWs, or a high school graduate who has
finished two (2) years of tertiary education and has passed the same
assessment by the TESDA for CDWs: Provided, finally, That a CDT
or a CDW (a) must not have been convicted by final judgment of an
offense or crime involving moral turpitude; (b) must not have a pending
case in relation to Republic Act No. 11930 or the “Anti-Online Sexual

Abuse or Exploitation of Children (OSAEC) and Anti-Child Sexual Abuse
or Exploitation Materials (CSAEM) Act”; Republic Act No. 9208 or the
“Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act of 2003”, as amended; or Republic
Act No. 7610 or the “Special Protection of Children Against Abuse,
Exploitation and Discrimination Act”, as amended; and (c) must not
be included in the child sex offender registry list.

Incumbent CDWs shall complete mandatory reskilling and
upskilling training programs on ECCD or early childhood education
to be provided by the ECCD Council, and pass a certification by the
TESDA for CDWs.

The TESDA shall provide such assessment and certification free
of charge.

The ECCD Council, in collaboration with the CHED or the
TESDA, or both, shall ensure the availability of ECCD training
programs across the country, the formulation of degree and associate
programs in early childhood education, and the recognition of prior
learning and credit transfer mechanisms.

Further, the ECCD Council, in collaboration with the CHED,
shall develop a scholarship program for the continuing education of
CDWs who shall complete their bachelor’s degrees and be required to
take the BLEPT within an agreed period of time. The scholars shall
be required to fulfill an obligation to return service in the CDCs for
such reasonable period as may be determined by the ECCD Council.

SEC. 13. Financing ECCD Programs. - ECCD programs shall
be financed through a combination of public and private funds. All
public ECCD program providers shall prioritize children below five (5)
years of age from families who are in greatest need and who can least
afford private ECCD programs:

(a) Financial and Technical Support. ~ The DILG, the DSWD,
the DOH, the DepEd, the CHED, and the TESDA shall support the
implementation of the ECCD System by providing financial and
technical support packages to ECCD programs through adopting a
program convergence budgeting approach to promote the efficient
and effective allocation and management of fiscal resources for ECCD
programs and services.

(b) Other Forms of Support for ECCD Programs. — LGUs shall
support public ECCD programs in their respective localities. Additional
funds may be generated from intergovernmental donors and

government financial institutions to support the public programs
including the urban poor.

There shall be established a fund for an ECCD Program
Contracting Scheme with accredited private service providers at the
community levels.

(c) Fees and Contributions. — Fees and contributions collected
for both public and private ECCD programs shall be monitored by the
ECCD Council to ensure that these are affordable and within
reasonable limits. Families are encouraged to contribute their time
and services to support the ECCD programs.

Sec. 14. ECCD Indicators in the Seal of Good Local
Governance, ~The DILG shall incorporate ECCD indicators into the
Seal of Good Local Governance (SGLG) assessment criteria under the
social protection and sensitivity program, health compliance and
responsiveness, and programs for sustainable education, as provided
under Section 7(¢), (d), and (e) of Republic Act No. 11292 or “The Seal
of Good Local Governance Act of 2019”, to promote and recognize LGUs
commitment to ECCD. The DILG, together with the ECCD Council,
shall jointly develop the indicators and formulate incentives and
programs to support LGUs.

SEC, 15. Incentives for Private Sector Participation, —
Partnership between the government and the private sector catering
to the diverse needs of children below five (5) years of age shall be
encouraged. Any donation from the private sector in favor of public
CDCs for the provision of the necessary educational assistance,
facilities, materials, and other appropriate support and related services
for children below five (5) years of age shall be entitled to the benefits
and incentives provided under Section 5 of Republic Act No, 8525 or
the “Adopt-a-School Act of 1998”, allowing an additional deduction from
the gross income equivalent to fifty percent (50%) of such expenses.
Valuation of assistance other than money shall be based on the
acquisition cost of the property taking into consideration its depreciated
value in case said property has already been used. They may also be
entitled to the benefits of the first paragraph of Section 6 of Republic
Act No, 8525,

SEC. 16. Annual Report and Mandatory Evaluation and
Review. - The ECCD Council, at the close of each calendar year, shall
submit annual physical and financial reports to Congress, giving a
detailed account of its proceedings and accomplishments during
the year. On the fifth (5) year of the implementation of this Act

and every five (5) years thereafter, the ECCD Council shall conduct
a mandatory review and submit a report to Congress with
recommendations for the adoption of measures that will improve
the ECCD System and ensure achievement of universal access of
ECCD benefits to all children below five (5) years of age. In its
report, the ECCD Council shall provide comprehensive information
on the baseline data, targets, and the success indicators related to
its implementation.

SEC. 17. Joint Congressional Oversight Committee on
ECCD, - A Joint Congressional Oversight Committee (JCOC) is
hereby created to oversee, monitor, and evaluate the implementation
and impact of this Act. The JCOC shall be composed of six (6) members
each from the Senate and the House of Representatives and shall include
the Chairperson of the Senate Committee on Basic Education and the
Chairperson of the House Committee on Basic Education and Culture,
as Co-Chairpersons; the Chairperson of the Senate Committee on Local
Government and the Chairperson of the House Committee on Local
Government; the Chairperson of the Senate Committee on Women,
Children, Family Relations and Gender Equality and the Chairperson
of the House Committee on the Welfare of Children; the Chairperson
of the Senate Committee on Higher, Technical, and Vocational
Education and the Chairperson of the House Committee on Higher
and Technical Education; the Chairperson of the Senate Committee
on Finance and the Chairperson of the House Committee
on Appropriations; and one (1) member each from the Minority of
the Senate and the House of Representatives.

SEC. 18. Transitory Provision. — Upon the effectivity of this Act,
the DBM and the CSC are hereby mandated to review the qualification
requirements for the current plantilla positions of Day Care Worker I
(DCWD) and Day Care Worker II (DCW ID, and revise such plantilla
position titles and qualification standards to integrate the provisions
of this Act including education, certification, experience, training, and
eligibility, among others.

SEC. 19. Appropriations. — The amount needed for the initial
implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year’s
appropriations of the ECCD Council and other agencies concerned.
Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continued
implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act (GAA).

For LGUs, the same shall be charged against their respective
local budgets.

Allocations from the Local Government Support Fund under
the annual GAA shall include a line-item allocation to support the
establishment of CDCs and the hiring of CDTs and CDWs, including
addressing other human resource needs, in fourth (4") and fifth (5%)
class municipalities,

To enable LGUs to implement the provisions of this Act, the
personal services limitations under Sections 825(a) and 831(b) of
Republic Act No. 7160 or the “Local Government Code of 1991” shall

not be applicable to the expenses appropriated for the compensation of
CDTs and CDWs.

SEC. 20. Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR). ~ The
ECCD Council, in consultation with appropriate government agencies
and relevant NGOs, shall formulate and issue the necessary rules
and regulations within ninety (90) days after the effectivity of this
Act. The IRR issued pursuant to this section shall take effect thirty (30)
days after its publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

; SEC, 21. Separability Clause. —If any part or provision of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not
otherwise affected shall remain in force and effect.

. SEC, 22. Repealing Clause. — Republic Act No, 10410 or the
‘Early Years Act (EYA) of 2013” is hereby repealed. All references to
Republic Act No. 10410 shall hereafter refer to this Act.

All other laws, executive orders, presidential decrees,
administrative orders, rules and regulations, issuances or parts
thereof contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act
are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC, 23. Effectivity, — Notwithstanding the non-issuance of
the IRR, this Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication
in the Official Gazette or ina newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

FRANCIS “CHIZ"°G ESCUDERO ERDINAND MARTIN G,. RO
President of the Senate Speaker of the Hous
of Representatives

DEZ

This Act, which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 10142 and
Senate Bill No. 2575, was passed by the House of Representatives
and the Senate of the Philippines on February 5, 2025 and

February 4, 2025, respectively.
REGINALD‘S. VELASCO i

House of Representatives

/ 0
FERDINAND ROMYALDEZ MARCOS JR.
President ff the Philippines

oO

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

Office of the President mmm)
CORDS OFFICE

» COPY