REVISED RULES AND REGULATIONS IMPLEMENTING 
REPUBLIC ACT (RA) NO. 10742, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE 
“SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN REFORM ACT OF 2015,” AS AMENDED BY RA NO. 11768

INTRODUCTION 
Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) are hereby prescribed as follows:

RULE I 
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

SECTION 1. Title. - These Rules and Regulations shall be known as the Revised Implementing 
Rules and Regulations (IRR) of RA No. 10742, otherwise known as the “Sangguniang Kabataan 
[SK] Reform Act of 2015,” as amended by RA No. 11768.

SEC. 2. Declaration of State Policies and Objectives. – The State recognizes the vital role of 
the youth in nation-building and thus, promotes and protects their physical, moral, spiritual, 
intellectual, and social well-being, inculcates in them patriotism, nationalism, and other desirable 
values, and encourages their involvement in public and civic affairs.

Towards this end, the State shall establish adequate, effective, responsive, and enabling 
mechanisms and support systems that empower the youth and ensure their meaningful 
participation in local governance and nation-building.

In line with the foregoing, this Revised IRR seeks to better empower the SK to fulfill the mandate 
of providing representation to the youth and serve as venues for young people to directly 
participate in the day-to-day affairs, as well as the long-term improvement of the communities.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. – As used in this Revised IRR, the following terms shall mean:

(a) Annual Barangay Youth Investment Program (ABYIP) shall refer to the yearly program 
based on the Comprehensive Barangay Youth Development Plan. It shall contain the specific 
programs, projects, and activities with corresponding project costs including the necessary 
fund flow to approximate the reasonable timing in the release of funds;

(b) Bonded Officer shall refer to an accountable public officer who shall be considered bonded 
upon payment of the bond premium in accordance with Public Bonding Law (Revised 
Administrative Code of 1917);

(c) Commission shall refer to the National Youth Commission created under RA No. 8044;

(d) Comprehensive Barangay Youth Development Plan (CBYDP) shall refer to the three (3) 
year comprehensive youth development plan of the barangay that is formulated by the SK in 
consultation and with the concurrence of the Katipunan ng Kabataan (KK) and anchored on 
the Philippine Youth Development Plan (PYDP) and other Local Youth Development Plan 
(LYDP) in provincial, city and municipal level;

(e) Internal Rules of Procedure shall refer to the guidelines adopted by the members of the SK 
in the discharge of their official functions, particularly in so far as internal organization, order 
of session, process, parliamentary procedure, and discipline of members;

(f) Local Chief Executive (LCE) shall refer to the provincial governor and city/municipal mayor;

(g) Local Government Operations Officer (LGOO) shall refer to the duly designated head of 
the office of the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) stationed in the 
concerned local government unit (LGU);

(h) Local Sanggunian shall refer to the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, Sangguniang Panlungsod, 
Sangguniang Bayan and Sangguniang Barangay;

(i) Local Youth Development Council (LYDC) – A multi-sectoral youth association, which shall 
be called, Provincial Youth Development Council (PYDC), City Youth Development Council

(CYDC), and Municipal Youth Development Council (MYDC), respectively, headed by the 
concerned SK Pederasyon President and composed of representatives of youth and youth 
serving organizations in the provincial, city, and municipal level;

(j) Local Youth Development Plan (LYDP) shall refer to the provincial, city, or municipal youth 
development plan as initially drafted by the SK Pederasyon, finalized by the LYDC, and 
approved by the local sanggunian. The LYDP shall be anchored on the Philippine Youth 
Development Plan (PYDP) and the local development plans of the LGU concerned;

(k) Mandatory and Continuing Training Providers shall refer to persons or institutions 
accredited by the Commission to conduct mandatory and continuing training programs for SK 
and LYDC members. These shall include officers and personnel of the Local Youth 
Development Office (LYDO), persons designated by the chief executive in case there is no 
LYDO, state universities and colleges, educational and training institutions, government, and 
non-government agencies, and other personnel or institutions experienced in youth 
development;

(l) National Service Training Program (NSTP) shall refer to the civic education and defense 
preparedness program for students instituted by the Government of the Philippines on 23 July 
2001 by virtue of RA No. 9163, otherwise known as the ‘[NSTP] Act of 2001’;

(m) Non-traditional media shall refer to websites, short and multi-media messaging systems, 
social media platforms, and other media not considered traditional;

(n) Philippine Youth Development Plan (PYDP) shall refer to the comprehensive national plan 
expressing the convergence efforts of the different youth-serving national agencies, civil 
society organizations (CSOs), and youth organizations designed to promote the general 
welfare, development, and empowerment of the youth, in preparation for their vital role in 
nation-building. The formulation of the plan shall be spearheaded by the Commission and 
shall be based on the findings of the National Youth Assessment Study, Youth Development 
Index, and the directions set by the Philippine Development Plan. It may also take into 
consideration the findings of the different international organizations;

(o) Traditional media shall refer to advertisements and announcements on bulletin boards, 
newspapers, magazines, tabloids, periodicals, radio, television, and other similar media;

(p) Youth Affairs Provincial Officer (YAPO) shall refer to the person duly appointed or 
designated by the Commission to serve as its agent in the province with the tasks provided 
for in this IRR or as the Commission may deem necessary;

(q) Youth shall refer to those persons whose ages range from fifteen (15) to thirty (30) years old 
as defined in RA No. 8044. For the purpose of targeted programming for the youth, the age 
disaggregation that shall be considered are the following:

15-17 – child youth 
18-24 – core youth 
25-30 – adult youth

(r) Youth Organizations shall refer to those organizations whose membership or composition 
are youth;

(s) Youth-Serving Organizations shall refer to those registered organizations whose principal 
programs, projects, and activities are youth-oriented and youth-related, and whose 
composition is not limited to the youth. The organization shall be duly-recognized or 
accredited either by proper national or local government registering entities.

RULE II
THE KATIPUNAN NG KABATAAN AND THE SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN

SEC. 4. Katipunan ng Kabataan (KK). – (a) There shall be in every barangay a KK to be 
composed of all citizens of the Philippines residing in the barangay for at least six (6) months, 
who are fifteen (15) but not more than thirty (30) years of age, and who are duly registered in the 
list of voters of the Commission on Elections (COMELEC) and/or based on the list of members of 
the KK under the custody of the secretary of the SK.

The rules and procedures to be followed in the registration of voters, in connection with the SK 
election shall be in accordance with existing laws.

(b) The secretary of the SK shall continuously update the list of members of the KK. To support 
the application for membership in the KK, the original or certified true copy of the birth certificate 
or any valid ID or any legal document indicating the date of birth and residence shall be presented. 
The Registry of Barangay Inhabitants shall be used as a reference for the residency of the 
applicant.

SEC. 5. Powers and Functions of the KK. – The KK shall:

(a) Elect the SK chairperson and seven (7) members. For the purpose of electing the officials of 
the SK, all youth included in the list of SK voters of the COMELEC shall be qualified to vote.

(b) Serve as the highest policy-making body to decide on matters affecting the youth in the 
barangay. As such, the SK shall consult and secure the concurrence of the majority of the 
KK members present, there being a quorum, based on the list of the SK Secretary, in the 
formulation and approval of all its policies, plans, programs, and activities that promote the 
welfare of the youth, such as the CBYDP and ABYIP.

SEC. 6. Meetings of the KK. - (a) The SK chairperson shall convene the first KK general 
assembly not later than three (3) months after the proclamation of the results of the SK elections.

(b) Regular assemblies of the KK shall be held at least once every six (6) months, to be 
convened by the SK.

(c) Special assemblies may also be called by the SK chairperson or upon written petition of at 
least one-twentieth (1/20) of its members.

(d) In all assemblies of the KK, the SK chairperson, shall notify all KK members through both 
traditional and non-traditional media stating the purpose, time, date, and venue of the 
meeting. In addition, a written notice shall be posted in at least three (3) conspicuous places 
within the barangay. All notices shall be posted at least three (3) days prior to the conduct of 
the assembly, except for special assemblies where the notice shall be posted at least one 
(1) day before the meeting.

(e) All assemblies of the KK shall be held preferably in a venue within the barangay, or within 
the municipality/city where the barangay is located.

(f) The DILG and the Commission shall formulate guidelines for determining a quorum on KK 
assemblies based on the updated list of the SK secretary.

(g) The SK chairperson, or in her/his absence, the highest-ranking elected SK member, shall act 
as the presiding officer. In their absence, the SK members shall choose from among 
themselves the presiding officer.

The SK secretary, or in her/his absence, any KK member designated by the presiding officer shall 
act as secretary. The designated KK member shall discharge the duties of the secretary during 
assemblies and turn over the minutes of the assembly to the SK secretary.

SEC. 7. Creation and Election of the SK. – There shall be in every barangay an SK to be 
composed of a chairperson and seven (7) members who shall be elected by the KK, based on 
the COMELEC list of registered voters.

The SK chairperson shall, with the concurrence of the majority of all the SK members, appoint 
from among the members of the KK, a secretary and a treasurer.

SEC. 8. Powers and Functions of the SK. – The SK shall:

(a) In consultation and with the concurrence of the KK and within three (3) months from their 
assumption of office, formulate and publicize a three (3)-year rolling plan, which shall be 
known as the CBYDP, which shall serve as a basis for the preparation of the ABYIP. This 
plan shall be aligned with the PYDP and other LYDPs at every level, municipal, city, and 
provincial as is relevant;

(b) Approve the annual budget which is the annual slice of the ABYIP before the start of the 
succeeding fiscal year. For purposes of the annual budget, the SK shall consider the three 
(3)-year CBYDP which can be sliced into three (3) ABYIPs.

If the SK funds allow, a supplemental budget shall be approved. Any changes in the annual 
budget shall be in accordance with the existing applicable budget, rules, and procedures;

(c) Promulgate resolutions necessary to carry out the objectives of the youth in the barangay in 
accordance with the CBYDP and the applicable provisions of this IRR;

(d) Initiate and implement, in coordination with any national government agency and/or any 
private or non-government institution, programs, and projects designed to promote the 
general welfare, development, and empowerment of the youth;

(e) Hold fund-raising activities that are in line with the CBYDP, the proceeds of which shall be 
tax-exempt and shall accrue to the general fund of the SK: Provided, however, that in the 
appropriation thereof, the specific purpose for which such activity has been held shall be first 
satisfied: Provided, further, that any appropriations thereof shall be in accordance with 
existing applicable budget, accounting, and auditing rules and regulations such as those 
issued by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and the Commission on Audit 
(COA);

(f) 
Create regular or special committees, whose chairpersons and members shall come from 
among the members of the SK or from among the members of the KK as it may deem 
necessary to effectively carry out its programs, projects, and activities, that will promote and 
attain the thrusts of the PYDP such as health, education, environment, global mobility, active 
citizenship, governance, social equity and inclusion, peace-building and security, human 
rights, gender equality, and economic empowerment;

(g) 
Submit the annual and end-of-term program accomplishments and financial reports to the 
sangguniang barangay and present the same during the KK assembly, copy furnished to the 
LGOO, LYDC, COA, and the Commission, in accordance with the form prescribed by the 
DILG and the Commission;

(h) 
Partner with the LYDC in planning and executing projects and programs of specific 
advocacies including good governance, climate change adaptation, disaster risk reduction 
and resiliency, youth employment and livelihood, health including health services and 
adolescent sexual and reproductive health, anti-drug abuse, gender sensitivity, sports 
development, accessible education, sustainable development, human rights advocacy, and 
social protection;

(i) 
Conduct youth profiling, establish, maintain and update a database of youth in the barangay 
and ensure submission to the Commission, and proper turn-over to the next set of SK officials 
in compliance with the Data Privacy Act of 2012 (R. A. No. 10173). For barangays within the 
National Capital Region (NCR), the youth profile and database shall be submitted directly to 
the Commission. The templates shall be designed by the Commission in coordination with 
DILG; 
(j) Assist in the establishment and registration of youth organizations and youth-serving 
organizations in the barangay, in accordance with the guidelines of the Commission;

(k)  Adopt and implement a policy on full public disclosure of all its transactions and documents 
involving public interest. The rules and procedures to be followed in the implementation of 
the policy on full public disclosure shall be promulgated by the DILG; 
(l) 
Authorize the SK Chairperson to enter into contracts on behalf of the SK, subject to the 
provisions of Sangguniang Kabataan Reform Act of 2015 (R. A. No. 10742), this IRR, Local 
Government Code of 1991 (R. A. No. 7160), Government Procurement Reform Act (R. A. 
No. 9184) and such other pertinent laws and regulations;

(m) Comply with the bonding requirements in accordance with existing laws, rules, and 
regulations, when necessary, as in the case of the SK chairperson and the SK treasurer;

(n) Within sixty (60) days from their assumption of office, the SK shall:

(1) Formulate and approve its Internal Rules of Procedures (IRP) which shall govern the 
organization and operation of the SK which shall include, among others, the creation of 
committees, the date, time, and place of SK monthly regular or special meeting, order and 
calendar of business for each meeting, the legislative process, parliamentary procedures 
which include the conduct of members during sessions, and discipline of members for 
disorderly behavior and absences without justifiable cause;

(2) Appoint its secretary and treasurer. The SK secretary and treasurer shall be appointed 
by the SK Chairperson, subject to the concurrence of the majority of all the SK members. For 
the said appointment, the SK Chairperson and members shall ensure that the secretary and 
treasurer meet all the qualifications and none of the disqualifications as provided for under 
Section 10 of these Rules;

(3) Establish the schedule of the regular Sangguniang Kabataan meetings and Katipunan ng Kabataan assemblies.

(o) 
Exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be prescribed by law 
or ordinance, or delegated by the sangguniang barangay or the Commission.

SEC. 9. Meetings of the SK. - (a) The SK shall fix the date, time, and place of their regular 
monthly meeting. Special meetings may be called by the SK chairperson or any four (4) of its 
members by giving written notice of the date, time, place, and agenda of the meeting, which can 
be sent either through personal delivery, registered mail, fax or email, to all members, and must 
be received at least one (1) day in advance. The sangguniang barangay and the Municipal or City 
Youth Development Council (M/CYDC) shall be furnished with notices of regular and special 
meetings and the minutes of the meetings thereafter.

(b) A majority of the SK members including the SK chairperson shall constitute a quorum.

(c) The SK chairperson, or in her/his absence, the highest-ranking elected SK member, shall act 
as the presiding officer. In their absence, the remaining SK members, there being a quorum, 
shall choose from among themselves the presiding officer. The SK secretary, or in her/his 
absence, any KK member designated by the presiding officer shall act as secretary. The 
designated KK member shall discharge the duties of the secretary during SK meetings and 
turn over the minutes of the meeting to the SK secretary.

(d) All SK meetings shall be held in a venue within the barangay. However, in case of health 
emergencies and/or calamities, the meetings of the SK may be conducted through online 
platforms, subject to the Internal Rules and Procedures of the SK.

SEC. 10. Qualifications. - (a) An elected or appointed official of the SK must be: 
(1) A citizen of the Philippines;

(2) A qualified voter and registered member of the KK;

(3) A resident of the barangay for not less than one (1) year immediately preceding the 
day of the elections;

(4) At least eighteen (18) years old and above but not more than twenty-four (24) years 
of age on the day of the election. A day in excess of twenty-four (24) years old is a 
ground for disqualification. Provided further, that the SK treasurer and secretary 
must be at least eighteen (18) years but not more than thirty (30) years of age on 
the day of the appointment. Provided finally, a day in excess of thirty (30) years old 
is a ground for disqualification;

(5) Able to read and write Filipino, English, or the local dialect;  
(6) Must not be related within the second civil degree of consanguinity or affinity to any 
incumbent elected national official, or to any incumbent elected regional, provincial, 
city, municipal, or barangay official, in the locality where the appointive or elective 
official seeks to be elected (Annex A – Persons Included within the Second Degree 
of Affinity and Consanguinity); and

(7) Must not have been convicted by final judgment of any crime involving moral 
turpitude.

(b)  Any candidate for the SK election must declare in her/his Certificate of Candidacy (COC), the 
following statement: “The candidate is not related within the second civil degree of 
consanguinity or affinity to any incumbent elected national official or to any incumbent elected 
regional, provincial, city, municipal, or barangay official, in the locality where the candidate 
seeks to be elected.”

(c) The SK chairperson shall appoint a treasurer with an educational or career background 
relating to business administration, accountancy, finance, economics, or bookkeeping. 
Provided that, only if no person meets the requirements can the SK chairperson consider 
other suitable nominees.

(d) The appointed SK treasurers shall undergo mandatory bookkeeping training from, and must 
be duly certified by the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) before 
the assumption of office. Provided that, the mandatory bookkeeping training shall be in 
addition to the mandatory training under Section 31 of this Rules. Provided further, that only 
the certification from TESDA shall be considered for purposes of appointment as SK treasurer.

Provided finally, that the appointed SK treasurers shall be prioritized in the allocation of 
appropriate TESDA scholarships in accordance with the guidelines to be issued by the 
TESDA for the purpose.

SEC. 11. Term of Office. - (a) The SK chairperson and members shall hold office for a fixed term 
of three (3) years unless sooner removed for cause, permanently incapacitated, have died, or 
resigned from office. Any elected SK official who possesses all the qualifications and none of the 
disqualifications is eligible for re-election.

(b) The SK secretary and treasurer shall be co-terminus with the appointing authority, unless 
sooner removed for cause, found to have failed from the discharge of her/his duties, or has 
committed an abuse of authority as stipulated in existing laws pertaining to the conduct of 
public officials, through a majority vote of all the members of the KK in a regular or special 
assembly called for the purpose.

(c) An SK official who, during her/his term of office, shall have passed the age of twenty-four (24) 
years shall be allowed to serve the remaining portion of the term for which she/he was elected.

SEC. 12. SK Chairperson. – The SK Chairperson shall automatically serve as an Ex-Officio 
Member of the Sangguniang Barangay upon assumption of office. As such, she/he shall exercise 
the same powers, discharge the same duties and functions, enjoy the same privileges as the 
regular Sangguniang Barangay members, and shall be the chairperson of the Committee on 
Youth and Sports Development. She/He shall be entitled to pro-rata honoraria for every session 
of the Sangguniang Barangay she/he has attended.

SEC. 13. Powers and Functions of the SK Chairperson. – The SK Chairperson shall exercise 
the powers and discharge such duties as follows:

(a)  Call and preside over all meetings of the SK and assemblies of the KK, and vote in case of a 
tie, except when one (1) of the agenda to be discussed in such assembly involves disciplinary 
action against the SK Chairperson, in which case, the highest-ranking SK Member shall 
preside.

The highest-ranking SK member shall mean the council member who obtained the highest 
number of votes during the SK elections, as reflected in the Certificate of Canvass and 
Proclamation of the COMELEC;

(b) Take the lead in the formulation of the CBYDP and the preparation and implementation of the 
ABYIP;

(c) Ensure the implementation of policies, programs, and projects as contained in the ABYIP, in 
coordination with the Sangguniang Barangay and the M/CYDC;

(d) Sign all required documents and warrants/checks drawn from the SK funds for all 
expenditures, including financial reports and other related documents in the implementation 
of the CBYDP and ABYIP and other related programs, projects, and activities;

(e) Exercise general supervision over the affairs and activities of the SK and the KK as well as 
the official conduct of its members;

(f) With the concurrence of the majority of all the SK members, appoint from among the members 
of the KK a secretary and a treasurer;

(g) Coordinate with the Sangguniang Barangay and other youth organizations within her/his 
barangay on youth-related programs and projects that they wish to initiate and implement; 
and

(h) Exercise such other powers and perform such other duties and functions as may be 
prescribed by law or ordinance.

SEC. 14. SK Secretary. – The SK Secretary shall:

(a) Keep and, in coordination with the other SK members, prepare and update all the records of 
the KK, including the list of its qualified and registered members, youth policies, profile, 
database studies, research and registry of youth, and youth-serving organizations in the 
barangay, if any, and ensure submission to the Commission and proper turn-over to the next 
set of SK officials;

(b) Prepare and keep the minutes of all meetings of the SK, reflecting the attendance of all SK 
Officials, including all the assemblies of the KK;

(c) Cause the posting, on the barangay bulletin board and at least three (3) conspicuous places 
within the jurisdiction of the barangay, and if possible, including the use of traditional and/or 
non-traditional media, and make these available for any person with legal purpose, of the 
following:

i. all resolutions approved by the SK;

ii. the annual and end-of-term reports of the programs and projects implemented by 
the SK;

iii. the CBYDP; and

iv. Adolescent and Youth in Vulnerable Circumstances.

These shall be disseminated to the concerned offices, institutions, and individuals; and

(d) To perform such other duties and discharge such other functions as the SK chairperson may prescribe or direct.

SEC. 15. SK Treasurer. – The SK Treasurer, who shall be a bonded officer in accordance with 
Public Bonding Law, shall:

(a) Take custody of all SK properties and funds and ensure proper turnover to the next SK 
treasurer;

(b) Collect and receive contributions, monies, materials, and all other resources intended for the 
SK and the KK, and issue the corresponding official receipts thereto;

(c) Serve as cosignatory in all withdrawals from the SK funds and disburse funds in accordance 
with the approved annual budget and supplemental budget, as the case may be, of the SK;

(d) Certify the availability of the SK funds whenever necessary;

(e) Submit to the SK and the Sangguniang Barangay, certified and detailed statements of actual 
income and expenditures at the end of every quarter and the posting of the same on the 
barangay bulletin board and at least three (3) conspicuous places within the jurisdiction of the 
barangay, and if possible, including the use of traditional and non-traditional media;

(f) Render a written financial report of all SK funds and property under her/his custody and shall 
be made available to the KK members during the regular KK assembly; and

(g) Perform such other duties and discharge such other functions as the SK chairperson may prescribe or direct.

SEC. 16. Privileges of SK Officials. - (a) All SK officials in good standing, whether elected or 
appointed, shall, during their incumbency:

(1) Be exempt from payment of tuition and matriculation fees while enrolled in any public 
tertiary school including state colleges and universities and those CHED-recognized 
locally funded public educational institutions within or nearest their area of jurisdiction.

The National Government through the DILG shall reimburse said college or university 
the amount of the tuition and matriculation fees.

(2) Be exempt from taking any of the components of the NSTP provided that such SK 
official submits a certification by the City/Municipal Local Government Operations 
Officer that the subject SK official is a bona fide member of the Local Sanggunian at 
time of his/her enrolment for the covered semester.

Further, the concerned Sangguniang Kabataan officials shall submit written reports, 
preferably with photographs, or other documentations of their participation in the 
implementation of programs, projects and activities as outlined in the Comprehensive 
Barangay Youth Investment Program.

The CHED and the Commission shall jointly promulgate the guidelines for the 
implementation of this provision.

(3) Be excused from attending their regular classes, if they are currently enrolled in any 
school, while attending their regular or special SK meetings, and the Sangguniang 
barangay sessions, in the case of the SK Chairperson. A certification of attendance 
shall be issued by the SK Secretary, attested by the SK Chairperson and duly noted by 
the punong barangay, and shall be submitted to the concerned faculty member and the 
dean of the educational institution as proof of attendance. In the case of the SK 
Secretary, the SK Chairperson shall issue the certification duly noted by the Punong 
Barangay. In the case of the SK Chairperson, the Barangay Secretary shall issue the 
certification of attendance duly noted by the Punong Barangay. Any person who shall 
falsely certify as to the attendance of any SK official shall be criminally and

administratively liable.

Participation or performance of duties in the SK shall not be construed as a substitution 
for the requirements of the subjects in the program being completed in school;

(4) Be provided by the National Government with the Philippine Health Insurance 
(PhilHealth) coverage, the amount of which is to be included in the yearly General 
Appropriations Act (GAA), as provided for under the Revised IRR of the National Health 
Insurance Act of 2013 (RA No. 10606);

(5) Be entitled to receive actual traveling reimbursements as may be authorized by law, 
and subject to the availability of funds: Provided, that such travel is directly related to 
the performance of their functions as SK officials and is supported by duly approved 
travel order by the punong barangay, in the case of the SK chairperson, or by the SK 
chairperson, in the case of the other SK officials.

The SK official shall secure a Certificate of Appearance and other documents as may 
be required by law to be issued by the concerned authority.

Reimbursement of actual traveling expenses shall be governed by existing laws, rules, 
and regulations;

(6) The SK members, including the SK Treasurer and Secretary, shall receive a monthly 
honorarium, chargeable against the SK funds, in addition to any other compensation 
provided by this Revised IRR and shall be granted at the end of every regular monthly 
SK meeting. Provided, that the monthly honorarium shall not exceed the monthly 
compensation received by the SK Chairperson. Provided, further, that not more than 
twenty-five percent (25%) of the SK Fund shall be allocated for personnel services. The 
DBM, in coordination with DILG and the Commission, shall issue the necessary 
guidelines implementing this provision;

The province, city, municipality, and barangay may provide additional honorarium as 
well as social welfare contributions and hazard pay to the SK chairperson, SK 
members, SK treasurer, and secretary through local ordinances. Provided, that the 
honorarium as stated in this section shall be subject to the post-audit jurisdiction of the 
COA; and

(7) Be entitled to the appropriate civil service eligibility based on the years of service to the 
barangay pursuant to the guidelines, rules, and regulations to be promulgated by the 
Civil Service Commission (CSC).

(b) The SK chairperson shall have the same privileges enjoyed by other Sangguniang Barangay 
officials under this IRR, subject to such requirements and limitations provided herein.

SEC. 17. Persons in Authority. – For purposes of the Revised Penal Code, the SK chairperson 
and members in each barangay shall be deemed as persons in authority in their jurisdictions.

SEC. 18. Suspension and Removal from Office. – (a) Any elected official of the SK may, after 
due process, be suspended, for not more than six (6) months or removed from office by a majority 
vote of all members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod or Sangguniang Bayan which has jurisdiction 
over the barangay of the concerned SK official which shall be final and executory on any of the 
following grounds:

(1) Absence from the regular SK meetings without valid cause for two (2) consecutive 
meetings or accumulated absences of four (4) days within a period of twelve (12) 
months. Valid cause includes, but is not limited to, illness as certified by a public health 
officer; natural or human-induced disaster; and attendance to trainings, seminars, and 
workshops related to her/his duties and functions as an SK official.

(2) Failure of the SK Chairperson to convene the regular assembly of the KK for two (2) 
consecutive times;

(3) Failure to convene the regular SK meetings for three (3) consecutive months in the 
case of the SK Chairperson;

(4) Failure to formulate the CBYDP and the ABYIP, or approve the annual budget within 
the prescribed period of time without justifiable reason;

(5) Failure to implement programs and projects outlined in the ABYIP without justifiable 
reason, as evaluated by the C/MYDC;

(6) Four (4) consecutive absences during the regular sangguniang Barangay sessions 
without valid cause in the case of the SK Chairperson;

(7) Conviction by final judgment of a crime involving moral turpitude; and violation of 
existing laws against graft and corruption and other civil service laws, rules, and 
regulations; and

(8) Failure in the discharge of his/her duty or has committed an abuse of authority.

(b) The Sangguniang Panlungsod or bayan shall promulgate the rules on suspension and removal 
from office of any elected SK Official, taking into consideration the Local Government Code of 
1991, and other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.

SEC. 19. Succession and Filling up of Vacancies.  
(a) In case an SK chairperson refuses to assume office, fails to qualify, voluntarily resigns, dies, 
is permanently incapacitated, or is removed from office, the SK member who obtained the 
highest number of votes in the election immediately preceding shall assume the office of the 
chairperson for the unexpired portion of her/his term. In case said member refuses to assume 
the position or fails to qualify, the SK member obtaining the next highest number of votes shall 
assume the position of the chairperson for the unexpired portion of the term.

(b) After the vacancy shall have been filled, the SK chairperson shall, within thirty (30) days, call 
for a special KK assembly to elect an SK member to complete the membership of said 
sanggunian. Provided, that, such special assembly is coordinated with the Office of the LGOO 
and the Election Officer of the municipality or city where the concerned barangay belongs. 
Such SK member shall hold office for the unexpired portion of the term of the vacant seat. For 
this purpose, any citizen of the Philippines residing in the said barangay for at least six (6) 
months who attains the age of fifteen (15) years old but not more than thirty (30) years old at 
the time of the special election and who registers as member of the KK before the SK 
secretary shall be entitled to vote in the said special election. Provided, that the COMELEC 
shall issue guidelines on the conduct of SK Special Election to guide the Chairperson in the 
performance of her/his mandate in the filling-up of vacancies in the SK.

(1) SK Special Elections shall be conducted under the following instances:

i. Where the number of SK officials who were elected and qualified is less than the 
required quorum. In this case, the SK Chairperson shall notify, within twenty (20) 
working days from assumption to office, the Local DILG, Office of the Election 
Officer, and/or NYC;

ii. Where no SK official has been elected at all as nobody filed the necessary 
Certificate of Candidacy, or no candidate has qualified. The Mayor and/or the 
Local DILG shall notify the Office of the Election Officer within twenty (20) working 
days from the elections.

(2) If the vacancy for an SK Member happens during the term of office, such vacancy 
shall be filled up through the KK Assembly; provided, that the results shall be 
provided to the local DILG and local COMELEC. The DILG and NYC shall issue 
guidelines to implement this provision.

(c) All other vacancies in the office of the SK shall be filled in accordance with the immediately 
preceding provision.

(d) In case of suspension of the Sangguniang Kabataan chairperson, the successor, as 
determined in subsection (a) of this section, shall assume the position during the period of 
such suspension.

(e) If the reason for the vacancy in the office of SK Chairperson does not fall under the conditions 
set forth in subsection (a) of this Section, the city or municipal mayor of the concerned 
barangay shall appoint an Officer-in-Charge (OIC) from a list of at least three (3) nominees as 
submitted by all the SK members. Provided, further, that the appointed OIC must meet the 
qualifications set under Section 10 of this IRR. The DILG and the Commission shall issue the 
guidelines for the implementation of this provision.

SEC. 20. SK Funds. – The SK funds shall be governed by the following provisions:

(a) All the income of the barangay derived from whatever source shall accrue to its general fund 
and shall, at the option of the barangay concerned, be kept as a trust fund in the custody of 
the city or municipal treasurer or be deposited in a bank, preferably government-owned, 
situated in or nearest to its area of jurisdiction. Ten percent (10%) of the general fund of the 
barangay shall be set aside for the SK. The sangguniang barangay shall appropriate the SK 
funds in lumpsum which shall be disbursed for youth development and empowerment 
purposes. Such funds shall be disbursed in accordance with the provisions of RA No. 10742, 
as amended by RA No. 11768, this Revised IRR, RA No. 7160, RA No. 9184, and such other 
pertinent laws, rules, and regulations;

(b) The SK shall have financial independence in its operations, disbursements, and encashment 
of its funds, income, and expenditures. As such, the SK funds shall be deposited in the name 
of the SK of the concerned barangay in a government-owned bank situated in or nearest to 
its area of jurisdiction with the SK chairperson and the SK treasurer as the official signatories;

(c) All SK funds shall be allocated in an annual budget, and if the funds allow, in a supplemental 
budget in accordance with the adopted ABYIP. Both the CBYDP and ABYIP shall give priority 
to programs, projects, and activities that will promote and attain the thrusts of the PYDP such 
as health, education, environment, global mobility, active citizenship, governance, social 
equity and inclusion, peace-building and security, human rights, gender equality, and 
economic empowerment, including:

(1) Student stipends, food, book and transportation allowances, and other 
educational assistance programs that will reduce the incidence of out-of-school 
youth and drop-outs;

(2) Sports and wellness projects to address physical and mental health, teenage 
pregnancy, substance abuse, and other health issues;

(3) Skills training, summer employment, on-the-job training, and livelihood 
assistance;

(4) Projects promoting the participation of the youth and their initiation in 
agricultural, fishery, and forestry enterprises;

(5) Programs and projects that will locate the youth at the forefront of climate action, 
environmental protection, and conservation efforts, and enlist their involvement 
in calamity preparedness, information dissemination, and other disaster-related 
activities; 
(6) Capacity-building for grassroots organization and leadership, and values 
education; and

(7)  Programs and activities that address context-specific and intersectional 
vulnerabilities of young people;

(d) The budget cycle of the SK shall be synchronized with that of the barangay. As such, the

sangguniang panlungsod or sangguniang bayan shall, within sixty (60) days upon receipt 
hereof, review the annual budget and supplemental budget of the SK on their compliance 
with the immediately preceding provision and other existing laws, rules, and regulations. Non-
compliance shall render said budgets inoperative either in whole or in part. Failure on the 
part of the sanggunian to complete the review within the prescribed period shall render the 
said annual budget deemed approved.

All SK funds derived from any source shall be stated in its financial records which shall be 
kept by the SK treasurer, copy furnished to the sangguniang barangay, in a simplified manner 
as may be prescribed by the COA. All SK funds shall be subject to all existing accounting 
and auditing laws, rules and regulations.

(e) The Sangguniang Kabataan may set aside an amount for the mandatory and continuing 
training of Sangguniang Kabataan to complement the training fund herein provided under 
Section 29 of the Sangguniang Kabataang Reform Act of 2015. The total amount 
appropriated for training shall not be more than fifteen (15%) of the Sangguniang Kabataan 
fund. The Sangguniang Kabataan may also consult nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) 
and civil society organizations (CSOs) in the development of mandatory programs and 
training for its officials.

SEC. 21. COA Accounting and Auditing Rules and Regulations. – The COA shall formulate 
accounting and auditing guidelines pertaining to the proper recording, reporting, and audit of SK 
funds and such other funds, including but not limited to, funds of Pederasyon at all levels.

SEC. 22. Federation of SKs. - (a) There shall be an organization of the Federation of SKs to be known as follows:

(1) In municipalities, the Municipal Federation of SKs, which shall be composed of the SK chairpersons of barangays in the municipality;

(2) In cities, the City Federation of SKs, which shall be composed of the SK chairpersons of barangays in the city; and

(3) In provinces, the Provincial Federation of SKs, which shall be composed of the presidents of the Municipal and City Federations of SKs.

(b) The Pederasyon ng mga SK shall, at all levels, elect from among themselves a president, a 
vice-president, a treasurer, a secretary, and such other officers as they may deem necessary. 
The concerned LGOO in coordination with the Election Officer shall facilitate the conduct of 
the elections which shall be held within fifteen (15) days from the SK elections in the case of 
the Pambayan and Panlungsod na Pederasyon, and within thirty (30) days in the case of the 
Panlalawigang Pederasyon.

In case the president of the Pambayan and Panlungsod na Pederasyon is elected president 
of the Panlalawigang SK Pederasyon, the vice president of the Pambayan and Panlungsod 
na Pederasyon shall perform the duties and functions of the president of the Pambayan and 
Panlungsod na Pederasyon. No SK Official shall serve as president of the Panlalawigang 
Pederasyon and Panlungsod/Pambayang Pederasyon at the same time.

(c) The president of the Pambayan and Panlungsod na Pederasyon shall secure clearance for 
cash and property accountability upon the assumption of a higher office.

(d) The manner of election, suspension, and removal of the officers of the Pederasyon at all 
levels and the term of office of the other officers of the Pederasyon shall be governed by the 
guidelines to be jointly issued by the DILG, the COMELEC and the Commission within sixty 
(60) days upon the effectivity of the SK Reform Act of 2015.

(e) All funds derived from any source of the Pederasyon at all levels, shall be stated in its financial 
records which shall be kept by the Pederasyon treasurer. The Pederasyon shall furnish a 
copy of such records to their respective provincial, city, or municipal accountants as the case 
may be. All Pederasyon funds shall be subject to all existing accounting and auditing laws,

rules and regulations.

(f) Duties and Functions of the Pederasyon ng Sangguniang Kabataan. – The Pederasyon ng 
Sangguniang Kabataan and the Local Youth Development Council (LYDC) shall draft the 
Local Youth Development Plan (LYDP). The Pederasyon and the LYDC shall convene 
quarterly to ensure the implementation and monitoring of the LYDP and the alignment of the 
Comprehensive Barangay Youth Development Program and Annual Barangay Youth 
Investment Program to the LYDP. The Pederasyon shall also cascade information and 
facilitate knowledge transfer to their respective localities.

(g) Membership in the National Advisory Council. – The presidents of the Provincial Federations of SK and the presidents of the City Federations of SK of Highly Urbanized Cities (HUC) and Independent Component Cities (ICC) shall elect, from among themselves, one (1) representative from Luzon, one (1) representative from Visayas, and one (1) representative from Mindanao to serve as members of the Advisory Council created under Section 14 of Republic Act. No. 8044 or the “Youth in Nation-Building Act.” The Commission shall promulgate supplemental guidelines to implement this provision.

SEC. 23. Membership in the Sanggunian and Local Special Bodies. - (a) The duly elected 
president of the Pederasyon ng SK, at all levels, shall serve as ex-officio member of the 
Sangguniang Bayan, Sangguniang Panlungsod and Sangguniang Panlalawigan, respectively, 
and shall: 
(b) Be the chairperson of the Committee on Youth and Sports Development in the said 
Sanggunian, and a regular member of the Committees on Education, Environment, 
Employment and Livelihood, Health and Anti-Drug Abuse, and Gender and Development; 
(c) Serve as ex-officio member of Local School Board, Local Council for the Protection of 
Children, Local Development Council, Local Health Board, Local Tourism Council, and Local 
Peace and Order Council;  
(d)  Convene the LYDC every three (3) months to conduct consultations with youth 
organizations; and  
(e) Exercise the same power, discharge the same duties and functions, and enjoy the same 
benefits and privileges of a regular member of the local sanggunian concerned.

SEC. 24. Membership in the National Youth Commission. – (a) The presidents of the Provincial Federations of the Sangguniang Kabataan and the presidents of the City Federations of the Sangguniang Kabataan of highly urbanized cities and independent component cities shall elect, among themselves, a representative who shall sit as an ex-officio member of the National Youth Commission, consistent with Section 5 of Republic Act No. 8044, otherwise known as the “Youth in Nation-Building Act.” The Commission shall promulgate supplemental guidelines to implement this provision.

RULE III
THE LOCAL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL (LYDC)

SEC. 25. Creation. – (a) To ensure wide and multi-sectoral youth participation in local 
governance, there shall be in every province, city, and municipality an LYDC which shall be called 
PYDC, CYDC, and MYDC, respectively. The LYDC shall be headed by the concerned SK 
Pederasyon President and composed of representatives of youth and youth-serving organizations 
at the provincial, city, and municipal levels. The LYDC shall assist in the planning and execution 
of projects and programs of the SK, and the Pederasyon at all levels.

(b) Formal Organization of Non-Organized Youth – To give equal opportunity for the youth, from 
the time of the enactment of these rules and up to the deadline for registration set by the 
Commission and DILG, non- organized youth groups may formally organize themselves and 
register in accordance with paragraph d and e of this section.

(c) Composition of Youth Organization and Youth-Serving Organization – Youth Organization is 
an organization with members entirely composed of the youth, whose ages range from fifteen 
(15) to thirty (30) years old with core advocacy that serves the youth. On the other hand, 
Youth-Serving Organization is an organization with the same core advocacy but whose 
members are not entirely composed of the youth which may include civil society 
organizations (ie. people’s organizations and non-government organizations).

(d) Local Registration of Youth Organization and Youth-Serving Organization - All youth 
organizations and youth-serving organizations, with a minimum number of ten (10) members 
in good standing and which are operating in the concerned, province, city, and municipality 
shall be registered in the following manner:

(1)  Those from the component city or independent component city and municipality 
must register with the City or Municipal Youth Development Office (C/MYDO) 
(2)  Those from the province or highly urbanized city must register with the Provincial 
or Highly Urbanized City Youth Development Office (P/HUCYDO) 
(3)  In the absence of a Local Youth Development Office (LYDO) in the province, city, 
or municipality the LCE shall designate existing personnel from the local 
government unit, who shall register these organizations, until such time that the 
local government unit can already create the office. 
(4)  Youth and youth-serving organizations registered in other national government 
agencies shall also be recognized as registered organizations by the LYDO, 
provided that the organization is based and/or operates in the province, city, or 
municipality. 
(e)  Local Verification of Youth Organization and Youth-Serving Organization - The designated 
personnel, or the agencies in Section 24 (d) shall verify the registration information provided 
by these organizations. The LYDO or the designated personnel in Section 24 (d) shall send 
a list of registered and verified youth organizations and youth-serving organizations to the 
Commission. 
(f)  Renewal, Verification, and Continuing Local Registration - Registered youth and youth-
serving organizations shall renew their local registration and verification every three years. 
The LYDO, the designated personnel, or the agencies in Section 24 (d) shall conduct a 
continuing registration procedure taking into consideration the budgetary and manpower 
requirements and the presence of youth and youth-serving organizations. 
(g)  Condition Precedent - Local registration and verification of youth organizations and youth-
serving organizations is a condition precedent for participation in the LYDC elections. 
However, if a youth organization or youth-serving organization is denied local registration 
and verification, such organization can apply for special registration and verification to the 
Commission. Such special registration and verification entitle the organization to participate 
in the LYDC elections. An appeal mechanism shall be formulated by the Commission. 
(h)  Qualifications of the Members of the LYDC – A member of the LYDC must be a citizen of the 
Philippines, a resident of the province, city, or municipality for not less than one year 
immediately preceding the day of her/his election to the LYDC. She/He should be at least 
fifteen (15) years, but not more than thirty (30) years of age on the day of her/his election at 
the council, able to read and write Filipino, English, or the local language, and must not have 
been convicted by final judgment of any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(i) Composition of the LYDC - The LYDC shall be composed of at least seven (7) but not more 
than twenty-one (21) members including the two (2) core members from the SK. The two (2) 
core members shall be composed of the president and the vice-president of the concerned 
Pederasyon and shall be supported by at least five (5) but not more than nineteen (19) other 
representatives from registered youth organizations or youth-serving organizations, provided 
that all other incumbent SK officials shall not be eligible as a member of the LYDC.

The following advocacies shall be represented: education, employment, health and 
participation, and others as identified by the LYDC.

If necessary, representatives from national government agencies may be invited as resource persons.

For the C/MYDC, youth organizations and youth-serving organizations shall be city-wide and 
municipal-wide, respectively.

(j) Manner of Election - Within forty-five (45) days after the SK elections, the LYDO or the 
designated existing personnel from the local government unit shall notify all the presidents or 
authorized representatives of the registered youth organizations or youth-serving 
organizations in that locality, assemble them in a public venue, and by consensus or secret 
balloting, they shall choose at least five (5) but not more than nineteen (19) representatives. 
These representatives shall serve for a term of three (3) years in the LYDC.

(k) Convening of the LYDC – The duly elected presidents or vice presidents of the Municipal Federation of SKs, City Federation of SKs and Provincial Federation of SKs shall automatically become members of the municipal, city and provincial youth development councils, respectively. The SK Federation president, or in his/her absence, the vice president shall convene the council and shall preside over all its meetings.

(l) Meetings and Quorum. –

(1) The LYDC shall schedule a meeting every quarter, and as often as needed. 
However, if the president or the vice president of the SK Pederasyon of the 
Province/City/Municipality fails to convene the LYDC as scheduled, at least one-
third of the total membership of the LYDC may call for a meeting. In both 
instances, a written notice shall be sent, either through traditional or non-
traditional means, to all members setting the date, time, place, and agenda of the 
meeting which must be received at least two (2) days in advance.

(2) The presence of the majority of all members of the LYDC shall constitute a 
quorum.

(m) Duties and Functions of the LYDC – The LYDC shall discharge the following duties and 
functions:

(1) Serve as the core of the advocacy on youth participation in nation-building and 
youth empowerment;

(2) Finalize the three (3) year LYDP that is anchored in the PYDP and the 
development plans of the local government units.

The LYDP shall be initially drafted by the respective SK Pederasyon and shall be 
finalized by the LYDC. This shall be submitted to the LCE for inclusion in the Local 
Development Plan and subsequently endorsed to the Sanggunian of the local 
government unit concerned for approval. These plans shall give priority to 
programs, projects, and activities that will promote and ensure meaningful youth 
participation in nation-building, sustainable youth development and empowerment, 
equitable access to quality education, environmental protection, climate change 
adaptation, disaster risk reduction and resiliency, youth employment and 
livelihood, health and anti-drug abuse, gender sensitivity, social protection, 
capability-building, and sports development;

(3) Monitor and evaluate the implementation of the Local Youth Development Plan; 
and

(4) Perform such other functions as may be prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(n) Additional guidelines in the implementation of Section 24 of this rule shall be promulgated by 
the Commission as necessary.

SEC. 26. Local Youth Development Council Funds. - The LYDC shall be funded by their

respective sangguniang panlalawigan, sangguniang panlungsod, and sangguniang bayan. All 
expenditures of these funds shall be subject to COA rules and regulations.

RULE IV
THE LOCAL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT OFFICE

SEC. 27. Creation. – (a) There shall be in every province, city, and municipality a Youth 
Development Office which shall be headed by a youth development officer with the rank of at 
least division chief. Such may be put under the Office of the LCE, the Office of the Planning and 
Development, the Office of the Social Welfare, or any other office deemed appropriate by the 
LGU. If the funds of the LGU are sufficient, it can be a separate department with divisions and 
units for policy and planning, administration and finance, and programs and operations. In the 
event that the LGU has exceeded the prescribed personal services limitations, the LCE may 
designate existing personnel deemed fit to serve this purpose. Provided, that a local youth 
development officer shall be appointed within one (1) year from the effectivity of this Revised IRR.

(b) Qualifications of the Youth Development Officer – In addition to the requirements prescribed 
by the Civil Service Commission (CSC), the youth development officer shall:

(1) be preferably not more than thirty years of age at the time of her/his appointment;

(2) be of good moral character;

(3) must have acquired experience in youth development affairs or involvement in 
youth or youth-serving organizations for at least three (3) years; and

(4) She/He shall be appointed by the concerned LCE, but in no case, is she/he be 
within the fourth (4th) civil degree of consanguinity or affinity of the appointing 
authority.

(c) Other Personnel of the Youth Development Office – The local government unit, upon the 
recommendation of the Local Youth Development Officer, may provide additional staffing 
requirements in the Local Youth Development Office and shall be appointed by the 
concerned LCE in whatever status deemed appropriate, and in accordance with civil service 
rules and regulations.

(d) Functions of the Local Youth Development Office - The youth development office shall have 
the following functions:

(1) In accordance with Section 24 (d) of these rules, register and verify youth and 
youth-serving organizations (Subject to the revitalized Youth Organizations’ 
Registration Program (YORP) guidelines);

(2) Provide technical assistance to the LYDC of the concerned LGU in the formulation 
of the LYDP;

(3) Facilitate the election of the LYDC representatives, the expenses for said elections 
shall be shouldered by NYC, other incidental expenses are not included;

(4) Serve as secretariat to the LYDC;

(5) Conduct the mandatory and continuing training of SK officials and LYDC members, 
Commission and the DILG. The local youth development officer and/or her/his staff 
shall apply for accreditation from the Commission in order for them to conduct the 
mandatory and continuing training programs of SK officials and LYDC members. 
In the absence of a Youth Development Office in the province, city, or municipality, 
the designated existing personnel by the LCE shall apply for accreditation with the 
Commission in order for the said official to conduct the mandatory and continuing 
training programs of SK officials and LYDC members.

(6) Provide technical, logistical, and other support in the conduct of the mandatory and 
continuing training programs, and to such other programs of the Commission and 
DILG; 
(7) Coordinate with the Commission, with regard to the youth programs within their 
jurisdiction; and

(8) Perform such other functions as may be prescribed by law, ordinance, or as the 
LCE, the Commission, or the DILG may require.

SEC. 28. Funding. The LGU may appropriate not less than one percent (1%) of its annual budget 
for the Local Youth Development Office, which shall be used for the implementation of the LYDP, 
convening the meetings of the concerned Pederasyon ng mga SK and LYDC, as well as its 
operations and effective functioning.

SEC. 29. The LGU concerned may provide office space and/or desk within the province and 
preferably within the Youth Development Office, upon the request of the Commission.

SEC. 30. Specific Functions of the Provincial/City/Municipal Youth Development Officers shall be 
provided in Annex B of this IRR.

RULE V 
CAPABILITY-BUILDING AND ORIENTATION TOWARDS NATION-BUILDING AND 
EMPOWERMENT

SEC. 31. Mandatory and Continuing Training. - (a) For the purpose of emphasizing the role of 
the youth in nation-building and molding them to become better citizens with the values of 
patriotism, nationalism, and honor as a Filipino, any SK official, whether elected or appointed or 
any member of the LYDC must undergo the mandatory training programs before she/he can 
assume office.

(b) During their incumbency, they must attend the continuing training programs to be undertaken 
by the Commission in coordination with the DILG. Deliberate failure to attend the said training 
programs shall constitute sufficient ground to disqualify said SK official or LYDC member or 
subject them to disciplinary actions.

(c) The Commission in coordination with DILG and CHED and other relevant agencies shall 
develop an accreditation system for mandatory and continuing training providers.

(d) For the purpose of this Rule, and in accordance with Section 10 (i) of RA No. 8044, the 
Commission shall establish additional regional offices in order to effectively carry out its 
function of undertaking the training programs of SK officials and LYDC members as well as 
the accreditation of training providers.

(e) The Commission shall identify an effective strategy of implementation for the training 
programs to cover all SK officials and LYDC members, whether elected or appointed which 
may include ensuring the presence of a competent pool of trainers or coaches in all the 
provinces.

(f) The Commission shall develop a capacity development program, which shall not be limited 
to seminars and training, for the SK officials and LYDC members based on identified 
competency requirements which shall include the following components, among others: 
(1)  A basic orientation highlighting their roles and functions, and values formation, 
including basic leadership and skills management training;

(2)  Development or enhancement of skills needed to perform their functions such as 
planning, program/project management, transparency, accountability and 
integrity management, financial management, etc.; and

(3) Capacity development interventions targeting the affective domain (i.e. developing 
a sense of commitment, patriotism, volunteerism, and becoming change makers).

(g) The province, city, municipality, barangay, and state universities and colleges shall provide 
logistics and other support, with regard to the mandatory and continuing training programs 
of SK officers in their locality.

(h) The SK shall also implement a program to transfer the knowledge learned from the 
mandatory, continuing, and other training programs by the SK officers to the members of the 
KK. These programs of knowledge transfer may include dialogues, fora, lectures, classes, 
and other means of transferring knowledge. These shall be mandatorily included in the 
CBYDP and ABYIP as capability-building programs that emphasize leadership training.

SEC. 32. Components of the Mandatory Training Programs. – The Commission and the DILG 
with the assistance of the Development Academy of the Philippines (DAP), the Local Government 
Academy (LGA), the University of the Philippines - National College of Public Administration and 
Governance (UP- NCPAG), and in consultation with youth stakeholders shall form a steering 
committee to jointly design and implement the mandatory and continuing training programs. The 
mandatory training program must include among others, the following components:

(a) 1. The Philippine cultural history, political systems, ethics, and ideologies 2. The Filipino as 
a nation builder 3. The Filipino youth and its role in nation building; and

(b) Capability-building on leadership, program and project development and sustainability, 
financial management, and accountability and transparency.

(c) The Commission and the DILG, through LGA, may also coordinate with the Department of 
Education (DepEd), Commission on Higher Education (CHED), and TESDA for the offering 
of relevant courses that emphasize the role of education and skills development in nation-
building and would further enhance the knowledge, network, and capacity of SK officials and 
LYDC members to craft and implement relevant youth development plans.

SEC. 33. Training Fund – A training fund with an initial amount of Fifty Million Pesos 
(P50,000,000.00) is hereby established and appropriated from any available source to be 
managed by the Commission. Thereafter, such amount needed for this purpose shall be included 
in the Annual General Appropriations Act.

RULE VI
WEEK OF THE YOUTH
SEC. 34. Observance of Linggo ng Kabataan. - (a) Every province, city, municipality, and
barangay shall conduct an annual activity to be known as the Week of the Youth on the week
when the 12th of August falls to coincide with the International Youth Day. The SK, in the case of
barangays, and the respective LYDC in cooperation with the Pederasyon ng mga SK, in the case
of provinces, cities, and municipalities, shall take the lead in this observance.

(b) The observance of the Linggo ng Kabataan shall include the election of counterparts of all 
local elective and appointive officials, as well as heads of national offices or agencies 
stationed or assigned in the territorial jurisdiction of the LGU, among in-school and 
community youth residing in the local government concerned from ages thirteen (13) to 
seventeen (17). During the said week, they shall hold office as boy and girl officials and shall 
perform such duties and conduct such activities as may be provided in the ordinance enacted 
pursuant to this IRR.

RULE VII 
REGISTRATION, ELECTION, AND ASSUMPTION OF OFFICE

SEC. 35. Registration. – For purposes of the next regular SK election under this IRR, the 
COMELEC shall set a special registration of the KK which shall in no case be less than one (1) 
month and shall include Saturdays and Sundays. Subsequent registration of the KK shall be 
governed by RA No. 8189 including the system of continuing registration. The manner of 
registration shall be governed by existing laws.

SEC. 36. Date of Election. – The SK elections shall be synchronized with the barangay elections 
and subsequently every three (3) years thereafter.

RULE VIII 
FINAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 37. Funding and Appropriations. – The amounts necessary to carry out the 
implementation of this Act shall be charged against the SK funds or as may be authorized by the 
LGUs pursuant to Section 16 of RA No. 10742, as amended by RA No. 11768.

SEC. 38. Separability Clause. – If for any reason or reasons, any part or provision of this IRR 
shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid, other parts or provisions not affected thereby shall 
continue to be in full force and effect.

SEC. 39. Any issuance, letter of instruction, administrative order, proclamation, rule or regulation, 
and/or parts thereof contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of RA No. 10742, as amended 
by RA No. 11768, and this IRR is hereby repealed, modified, or amended accordingly.

SEC. 40. Amendment and Revision. - The Commission, DILG, COMELEC, DBM, CHED, DepEd, and COA may amend or revise these rules.

(a) A written petition of at least two (2) of the seven (7) member agencies is needed to call a 
meeting for the purpose of amending and revising these rules.

(b) Such written petitions must be received by all of the seven (7) member agencies.

(c) There being a quorum, in a meeting duly called for, any amendment or revision of these 
rules shall be made through a motion stating the proposed amendment or revision and 
the reasons therefor.

(d) For the proposed amendment or revision to be effective, an affirmative vote of at least four 
(4) of the seven (7) member agencies is needed.

SEC. 41. Effectivity Clause. These rules shall take effect fifteen (15) days after complete 
publication in the Official Gazette and upon filing three (3) certified copies of it with the Office of 
the National Administrative Register (ONAR) of the UP Law Center.

ANNEX A - Persons Included within the Second Degree of Affinity and Consanguinity.

2nd 
degree 
Affinity

Grandfather-in-law, 
Grandmother-in-law, Brother-in-law, 
Sister-in-law 
1st 
degree

Mother-in-law, Father-in-law

YOU / Spouse 
1st degree 
Consanguinity

Mother, Father, Son, Daughter

2nd degree 
Consanguinity

Brother, Sister, Grandfather, 
Grandmother, Grandson, Granddaughter

ANNEX B – Functions of Provincial Youth Development Office, City Youth Development 
Office, Municipal Youth Development Office

Provincial Youth 
Development Office 
City Youth Development 
Office 
Municipal Youth 
Development Office 
a) register and verify youth 
and youth-serving 
organizations (Subject to the 
revitalized YORP guidelines) 
– province level; 
b) provide technical 
assistance to the LYDC of the 
concerned LGU in the 
formulation of the LYDP; 
c) facilitate the election of 
the LYDC representatives in 
the province; 
d) serve as secretariat to the 
LYDC in the province and as 
such, shall provide the 
necessary administrative, 
operational, staff and 
technical support to the 
LYDC 
e) Upon being accredited by 
the Commission, conduct the 
mandatory and continuing 
training of LYDC members in 
the province, in accordance 
with the programs jointly 
designed and implemented by 
the Commission and the 
DILG; 
f) provide technical, logistical, 
and other support in the 
conduct of the mandatory 
and continuing training 
programs, and to such other 
programs of the Commission 
and DILG; 
g) coordinate with the 
Commission in terms of 
policy and PPA guidance; 
h) Assist the M/CYDO in the 
training of the SK Officers; 
and 
i) perform such other 
functions as may be 
prescribed by law, ordinance, 
or as the LCE, the DILG or 
the Commission may require. 
a) register and verify youth 
and youth-serving 
organizations (Subject to the 
revitalized YORP guidelines) 
– city level; 
b) provide technical 
assistance to the LYDC of 
the concerned LGU in the 
formulation of the LYDP; 
c) facilitate the election of the 
LYDC representatives in the 
city; 
d) serve as the secretariat 
of the LYDC in the city and 
as such, shall provide the 
necessary administrative, 
operational, staff, and 
technical support to the 
LYDC; 
e) Upon being accredited by 
the Commission, conduct the 
mandatory and continuing 
training of SK and LYDC 
members in the city, in 
accordance with the 
programs jointly designed 
and implemented by the 
Commission and the DILG; 
f) provide technical, logistical, 
and other support in the 
conduct of the mandatory and 
continuing training programs, 
and to such other programs 
of the Commission and DILG; 
g) coordinate with the 
Commission in terms of policy 
and PPA guidance; and 
h) perform such other 
functions as may be 
prescribed by law, ordinance, 
or as the LCE, the DILG or 
the Commission may require. 
a) register and verify youth 
and youth-serving 
organizations (Subject to the 
revitalized YORP guidelines) 
– municipal level; 
b) provide technical 
assistance to the LYDC of 
the concerned LGU in the 
formulation of the LYDP; 
c) facilitate the election of the 
LYDC representatives in the 
municipality; 
d) serve as the secretariat of 
the LYDC in the municipality 
and as such, shall provide the 
necessary administrative, 
operational, staff, and 
technical support to the 
LYDC; 
e) Upon being accredited by 
the Commission, conduct the 
mandatory and continuing 
training of LYDC members in 
the municipality, in 
accordance with the 
programs jointly designed 
and implemented by the 
Commission and the DILG; 
f) provide technical, logistical, 
and other support in the 
conduct of the mandatory and 
continuing training programs, 
and to such other programs 
of the Commission and DILG; 
g) coordinate with the 
Commission in terms of policy 
and PPA guidance; and 
h) perform such other 
functions as may be 
prescribed by law, ordinance, 
or as the LCE, the DILG or 
the Commission may require.