@ftice of the President
of the Whilippines

Malacaiiang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 13

DIRECTING THE ABOLITION OF QUEDAN AND RURAL CREDIT
GUARANTEE CORPORATION AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the Quedan and Rural Credit Guarantee Corporation
(QUEDANCOR), a government-owned and controlled corporation (GOCC) created
pursuant to Letter of Instruction (LOI) No. 704 (s. 1978), as amended by Republic
Act No. (RA) No. 7393 or the “Quedan and Rural Credit Guarantee Corporation Act,”
is mandated io establish a sustainable guarantee system towards improving access
to credit in the agriculture sector and accelerating productivity and the flow of
investments and credit resources;

WHEREAS, QUEDANCOR is now legally prohibited from continuing its
guarantee function under its charter, having exceeded the allowable outstanding
guarantee obligation provided therein;

WHEREA, the Philippine Export-Import Agency, Small Business Corporation
and the Agricultural Guarantee Fund Pool, which is placed in trust with Land Bank
of the Philippines, operate more successful agricultural guarantee programs,
activities and projects;

WHEREAS, QUEDANCOR has been operating at a loss for the last five (5)
years; and

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 5(a)(ii) of RA No. 10149 or the “GOCC
Governance Act of 2011,” the Governance Commission for GOCCs (GCG)
recommended the abolition of QUEDANCOR for the following reasons: (a)
QUEDANCOR is dormant or nonoperational; (b) it performs functions or purposes
that duplicate or unnecessarily overlap with functions, programs, activities, or
projects already provided by a government agency; and (c) it is not producing the
desired outcomes, or no longer achieving the objectives and purposes for which it
was originally designed and implemented, and/or not cost efficient and does not
generate the level of social, physical and economic returns vis-a-vis the resource
inputs;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

SECTION 14. Abolition of QUEDANCOR. The QUEDANCOR is_ hereby
abolished.

SECTION 2. Liquidation of Assets and Settlement of Liabilities. The
assets of QUEDANCOR shall be liquidated to settle the outstanding liabilities of the
corporation in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations.

SECTION 3. Compensation for Affected Officials and Personnel. Affected
officials and personnel of QUEDANCOR, whether regular or contractual personnel,
may avail of the separation benefits below in addition to retirement or separation
benefits allowed under existing laws:

Years In Service Rates

First 20 years 1.00 x BMP* x No. of years

20 years and 1 day to 30 years |_ 1.25 x BMP x No. of years

30 years and 1 day and above | 1.50 x BMP x No. of years
*Basic Monthly Pay

Funding for the separation pay and other benefits of affected officials and
personnel of QUEDANCOR shall be sourced from its corporate funds. The
Department of Budget and Management shall ensure that there are sufficient funds
to cover the compensation for affected officials and personnel.

 

 

 

 

 

 

SECTION 4. Creation of Technical Working Group. To implement the
provisions of this Order, GCG shall be assisted by a Technical Working Group
composed of the following:

a. Department of Agriculture;

b. Department of Finance;

c. Department of Budget and Management; and
d. Land Bank of the Philippines.

SECTION 5. Repeal. All other orders, issuances, or parts thereof, which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby repealed or modified

accordingly.

SECTION 6. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 28th day of June , in
the year of our Lord Two Thousand and Seventeen.

By authority of the President:

»
ye
at PG

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary