Office of the President

of the Philippines
Malacanang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 49

DIRECTING ALL CONCERNED GOVERNMENT AGENCIES TO
COORDINATE AND POOL THEIR RESOURCES AND EFFORTS
INTO THE PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF FACE MASKS

WHEREAS, Article 11, Section 15 of the Constitution provides that the State
shall protect and promote the right to health of the people and instill health
consciousness among them;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 922 (s. 2020) declared a State of Public Health
Emergency in recognition of the COVID-19 public health event as a threat to national
security, and to prompt a whole-of-government approach in addressing the COVID-19
outbreak in the country;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 929 (s. 2020) declared a State of Calamity in the
entire country for a period of six (6) months, and enjoined government agencies and
local government units (LGUs) to render full assistance to and cooperation with each
other and mobilize the necessary resources to undertake critical, urgent and
appropriate disaster response aid and measures in a timely manner;

WHEREAS, the COVID-19 outbreak is unlike any other calamity or emergency
that confronted our country in recent years, as it has already dealt an incomparable
blow to the overall health and security of the population and the economy, and
continues to threaten more lives and livelihoods; and

WHEREAS, it is imperative to reinforce non-pharmaceutical interventions, such
as minimizing face-to-face interaction, wearing of face masks and face shields, and
observing social distancing, to complement our healthcare facilities and support our
health workers in containing the further spread of the COVID-19 virus;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

1. The following agencies shall coordinate and pool their resources and efforts
into the production of face masks and their expedited distribution to the public

free of charge:

. Department of Trade and Industry (DTI);

. Department of Health (DOH);

Department of Budget and Management (DBM);

Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA);
Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD); and
Presidential Management Staff (PMS).

~oao0op

2. Consistent with their respective mandates, and subject to applicable laws, rules
and regulations, the foregoing agencies are specifically directed as follows:

a. The DTI shall be the lead implementing and coordinating agency relative to
the production and procurement of face masks. In this regard, the DTI shall
consolidate various Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise producers,
cooperatives and community organizations relative to the production of the
face masks. The DTI shall likewise support the TESDA in gaining access to
production networks and supplier markets for the raw materials and finished
goods to attain the objectives of this Order;

b. The DOH and DTI shall determine the minimum, most cost-efficient and
good quality specifications necessary for the face masks to be effective in
protecting against the transmission of COVID-19;

c. The DBM-Procurement Service (PS) shall assist in the procurement of the
face masks. The funds required for the said procurement shall be charged
against the available released allotments of the DOH. For this purpose, the
DBM shall provide technical assistance in the appropriate downloading and
utilization of the funds, subject to existing budgeting, accounting and
auditing rules and regulations;

d. In view of providing livelihood and assistance to the learners of the TESDA,
the DTI and DBM-PS shall coordinate with the TESDA for the procurement
of face masks produced by said learners, as may be consistent with the
prescribed specifications;

e. The DSWD shall utilize its networks and facilities for the identification of and
distribution to the priority beneficiaries of the face masks, such as those who
are financially disadvantaged and persons with disability, including the
partner-beneficiaries of the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (4Ps),
among others; and

f. The PMS Assistant Secretary for Regional Concerns shall lead in monitoring
the progress of the distribution of face masks and submit a report thereon
to the President.

3. All other departments, agencies and offices of the government, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations, government financial
institutions and state universities and colleges are directed, and LGUs are
enjoined, to cooperate and render full assistance to ensure the prompt and
effective implementation of this Order.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Manila, 16 September 2020
By Order of the President:

PMP &

VADOR-C-M
FSR ESE
CERTIFIED COPY