Office of the President
of the Philippines
Malacaiang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. |»

PROHIBITING ALL OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES, AND OTHER
PERSONS EMPLOYED, CONTRACTED, OR ENGAGED BY
THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT FROM PREMATURELY
DISCLOSING UNRELEASED OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS TO
THE MEDIA AND OTHER UNAUTHORIZED THIRD PERSONS

In view of the rising number of incidents involving premature disclosure
or leakage of official documents emanating from the Office of the President,
such as but not limited to appointments to government positions, acceptance
of resignations, decisions and orders pertaining to cases on appeal with or
being investigated by the Office of the President, Executive Orders and other
similar issuances, Presidential action on legislative matters, proclamations of
special holidays, suspension of work and/or classes, and other similar official
action, ail officers, employees, and other persons employed, contracted. or
engaged in any manner whatsoever by the Office of the President, or detailed
or seconded therewith, or who have access in any manner to official
information, directly or indirectly, are hereby prohibited from making any
premature disclosure of such information to all forms of media, including
social media, and other interested but unauthorized third persons in general,
prior to the official release of such official documents or information by the
Malacanang Records Office.

This prohibition includes sharing the contents of, or information
contained in, an official document that is meant for internal communication
between government offices or agencies, as well as one that has not been
signed at the time the contents thereof or information contained therein were
leaked.

The prohibition also covers sharing any statement that purports to be
official when no official document has been released to support such
statement.

This prohibition is for the purpose, among others, of avoiding confusion
and speculation, preserving executive prerogatives and flexibility, and
addressing security considerations.

Any employee, officer, or other persons covered by this Order who
knowingly and willfully violate the same shall be held administratively liable for
insubordination after due notice and hearing and shall be meted the
appropriate penalty of suspension or dismissal, as may be warranted under
the relevant provisions of the Revised Administrative Code.

For strict compliance.
Manila, 30 October 2017 By Authority of the President
(sone ue cote TR
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary A

 
 
   
   

[PRA Oa he eg ee eee ea ee ee a Ee TY

i CMa! thes Prowtiend

i PARAS Sa Be i tie OPP TCE

i oom , Pa +e oy ee wy t “r

t Nas eae ae ‘Mh ib wae bah nO ;

7
pe tt oa ee

t AVY. Cc o he we eee bd

Buen De PON! pap ay!