MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 31

DIRECTING THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE AND
OTHER CONCERNED AGENCIES TO STRICTLY
IMPLEMENT EXISTING LAWS, RULES AND
REGULATIONS ON THE SALE, MANUFACTURE,
DISTRIBUTION AND USE OF FIRECRACKERS AND
PYROTECHNIC DEVICES

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 7183 contains illustrative lists of what
comprises allowable firecrackers and pyrotechnic devices, and provides for the
regulation and control of the manufacture, sale, distribution and use thereof consistent
with, and in furtherance of, public safety, order and national security;

WHEREAS, the Philippine National Police (PNP) is primarily responsible for the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of RA No. 7183;

WHEREAS, the said law authorizes the PNP to process applications for the
issuance of licenses or permits of any person desiring to manufacture, sell or distribute
allowable firecrackers and pyrotechnic devices, and to promulgate rules and
regulations necessary to regulate and control their manufacture, sale, distribution and
use, including the determination and review of the gun powder and other raw material
content of firecrackers and pyrotechnic devices;

WHEREAS, local chief executives are likewise authorized to promulgate the
necessary rules and regulations on firecrackers and pyrotechnic devices within their
territorial jurisdiction in conformity with the national standards, rules and regulations;

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 28 (s. 2017) was issued providing for
the regulation and control of the use of firecrackers and pyrotechnic devices; and

 

WHEREAS, based on the report of the Department of Health, the Piccolo, a
type of prohibited firecracker, is the top cause of firecracker-related injuries;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order the PNP, in coordination with other concerned agencies and the
local government units, to carry out the following:

1. Conduct inspections to ensure that manufacturers, distributors, retailers and
users of firecrackers and pyrotechnic devices are in compliance with the
safety guidelines, reportorial requirements and other requisites laid down
under existing laws, rules and regulations including but not limited to RA No.
7183, its Implementing Rules and Regulations, and EO No. 28;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

2. Confiscate and destroy prohibited firecrackers and pyrotechnic devices as
provided by law, rules and regulations, as well as firecrackers used outside
community fireworks displays in violation of EO No. 28;

3. Cancel/revoke the licenses and permits, and confiscate the inventory or
stock, of those found in violation of existing laws, rules and regulations;

4. Strictly enforce the prohibition on the sale of firecrackers and pyrotechnic
devices to anyone under 18 years of age; any buyer of firecrackers and/or
pyrotechnic devices who is suspected to be below 18 years of age, but
claims otherwise, shall be required to show proof of his age;

5. Strictly enforce the prohibition on importing finished firecrackers and
fireworks under Section 6 of RA No. 7183; and

6. Suspend the processing of new licenses and permits for the manufacture,
sale, and distribution of firecrackers and pyrotechnic devices pending
review of existing licensees’ and permittees’ compliance with laws, rules and
regulations; provided that other permits necessary for the operations of such
existing licensees and permitees (e.g. permit to purchase/import
ingredients, permit to transport) may continue to be issued unless such
entities are found to have violated the relevant laws and issuances. The
suspension herein ordered shall remain in effect until declared lifted by the
Office of the President upon recommendation of the PNP Chief and his
submission of a report on the review undertaken on existing licenses and
permits.

All other departments, agencies and instrumentalities of the government,
including government —owned or -controlled corporations are directed to provide the
support and assistance required in the implementation of this Order.

For strict compliance.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this29t#ay of October in the year of Our Lord,
Two Thousand and Eighteen.

 

 

By the President:

M1
SALWADOR C. MEDIALD

Executive Secretary

   

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 007696

   

S baormy