Oftice of the resident
of the Wbhilippines

HMalacanang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 29

DIRECTING THE ABOLITION OF THE PARTIDO DEVELOPMENT
ADMINISTRATION, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the Partido Development Administration (PDA) was established
in 1994 pursuant to Republic Act (RA) No. 7820 or the “Partido Development
Administration Act of 1994,” as amended by RA No. 8989, to accelerate the
development of the following municipalities comprising the 4" District of the Province
of Camarines Sur: (a) Sagnay; (b) Tigaon; (c) Goa; (d) San Jose; (e) Lagonoy; (f)
Tinambac; (g) Siruma; (h) Presentacion; (i) Garchitorena; and (j) Caramoan;

WHEREAS, despite the operation of the PDA for almost twenty (20) years,
the 4" District of the Province of Camarines Sur has the highest poverty incidence
level compared to other districts of the Province, and has a higher poverty
incidence compared to the average for the entire Bicol Region;

WHEREAS, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of Camarines Sur, through its
Resolution No. 474 (s. 2017), urged the President and the Governance
Commission for Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporations (GCG) to cause
the immediate abolition of the PDA in view of its failure to serve the lawful purpose
for which it was created;

WHEREAS, the PDA and its various operating units have been consistently
operating at a loss for several years, which necessitates continuous subsidy from
the National Government;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 5(a) of RA No. 10149 or the “GOCC
Governance Act of 2011,” the GCG recommended the abolition of the PDA for the
following reasons: (a) the PDA performs functions or purposes that duplicate or
unnecessarily overlap with functions, programs, activities or projects already
provided by a government agency; and (b) the PDA is not producing the desired
outcomes, or no longer achieving the objectives and purposes for which it was
originally designed and implemented, and/or not cost efficient and does not generate
the level of social, physical and economic returns vis-a-vis the resource inputs;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

SECTION 1. Abolition of the PDA. The PDA is hereby abolished.

SECTION 2. Disposition of Assets, Settlement of Liabilities, and
Relinquishment of Functions. The Privatization Management Office (PMO) shall
dispose of the assets of the PDA to settle its outstanding liabilities in accordance
with applicable laws, rules and regulation.

The planning and developmental functions of the PDA shall be relinquished to
the appropriate local government units, while the administration and operations of
the Nato Port shall be relinquished to the Philippine Ports Authority.

SECTION 3. PDA Board of Directors as the Administrator and Liquidator.
The PDA Board of Directors shall act as the administrator and liquidator of the PDA,
and implement the following activities:

a. Preserve and maintain the assets of the PDA, and assist the PMO in the
disposition of such assets;

b. Settle the liabilities of the PDA;

c. Issue the Notice of Termination to all affected officers and employees of the
PDA within sixty (60) days from the issuance of this Order;

d. Maintain a minimum number of personnel necessary to preserve and maintain
the assets of the PDA, and assist in the liquidation of its corporate affairs;

e. Settle the retirement and/or separation benefits of affected officers and
employees of the PDA; and

f. Perform other acts necessary to implement the abolition of the PDA.

For purposes of monitoring, the PMO and PDA Board shall provide the GCG
with the respective quarterly status reports on the disposition of assets and
implementation of the abolition.

SECTION 4. Compensation for Affected Officials and Personnel. All
affected officials and personnel of the PDA, whether regular or contractual, may avail
of the separation benefits below in addition to retirement or separation benefits
allowed under existing laws:

Years In Service Rates

First 20 years 1.00 x BMP* x No. of years

20 years and 1 day to 30 years |_1.25 x BMP x No. of years

30 years and 1 day and above | 1.50 x BMP x No. of years
*Basic Monthly Pay

Funding for the separation pay and other benefits of affected officials and
personnel of the PDA shall be sourced from its corporate funds. The Department of
Budget and Management shall ensure that there are sufficient funds to cover the
compensation for affected officials and personnel.

 

 

 

 

 

 

SECTION 5. Repeal. All other orders, issuances, or parts thereof, which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

SECTION 6. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 25th qayof September _in
the year of our Lord Two Thousand and Eighteen.
By authority of the President:

Stk
SALVADOR C. MEDIALD

Executive Secretary

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE