@ffice of the Iresident
of the Wbhilippines
Malacaiang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 28

DIRECTING THE NATIONAL FOOD AUTHORITY TO IMMEDIATELY
RELEASE EXISTING RICE STOCKS IN ITS WAREHOUSES

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 7581, or the “Price Act,” declares
the policy of the State to (i) ensure the availability of basic necessities and prime
commodities at reasonable prices at all times without denying legitimate business a fair
return on investment; (ii) provide effective and sufficient protection to consumers against
hoarding, profiteering and cartels with respect to the supply, distribution, marketing and
pricing of said goods, especially during periods of calamity, emergency, widespread
illegal price manipulation and other similar situations; (iii) develop, adopt and promulgate
measures to stabilize prices at reasonable levels; and (iv) establish a mechanism that will
readily protect consumers from inadequate supply and unreasonable price increase on
occasions of calamities, emergencies and like occurrences;

WHEREAS, the National Food Authority (NFA), created under Presidential Decree
(PD) No. 4 (s. 1972), or the “National Grains Authority Act,” as amended, and attached to
the Office of the President pursuant to PD No. 1770, or the “National Food Authority Act,”
is mandated to (i) maintain and manage a national buffer stock, the quantity and locations
of which shall be determined by the NFA; and (ii) to register, license and supervise
persons, natural or juridical, who shall engage or are engaging in the wholesale, retail,
processing, manufacturing, storage, transporting, packaging, importation, exportation of
food products/commodities;

WHEREAS, certain administrative constraints and fees unduly add to the costs of
importation of basic agricultural commodities, and contribute to price increases; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to promulgate measures to stabilize the prices of basic
agricultural commodities at reasonable levels, to maintain their sufficient supply in the
domestic market and to provide effective and sufficient protection to consumers against
hoarding, profiteering and cartels with respect to the supply, distribution, marketing and
pricing of said goods;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA, Executive Secretary, by
virtue of the powers vested in me by law, hereby direct the NFA to immediately release
to markets approximately 230,000 metric tons of rice currently in stock in its warehouses

across the country. The NFA shall likewise immediately release the 100,000 metric tons
of rice previously contracted to be delivered before the end of September.

Subject to applicable laws and issuances, the NFA is further directed to adopt
measures to ensure access by consumers to regular milled and well milled rice.

The NFA shall submit to the Office of the Executive Secretary, within one (1) month
from effectivity of this Order, a progress report on the status of implementation of this

Order.
This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this21sday of September, in the year of Our Lord,
Two Thousand and Eighteen.

By authority of the President

A EN

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary (&

 

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

  

ATTY. COACERG]

irs
°

if

8