Office of the President
of the Philippines
Malacaiiang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 60

AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 46 (s. 2020)
“ADOPTING THE PROGRAM ON AWARDS AND INCENTIVES FOR SERVICE
EXCELLENCE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT PROPER”

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order (MO) No. 118-B (s. 1993) provides for the
implementation of the Employee Suggestions and Incentive Awards System (ESIAS)
of the Office of the President (OP) Proper;

WHEREAS, the Civil Service Commission (CSC), pursuant to its Resolution
No. 010112 dated 10 January 2001 and through its Memorandum Circular (MC) No. 1
(s. 2001), adopted the revised Policies on Program on Awards and Incentives for
Service Excellence (PRAISE);

WHEREAS, pursuant to CSC MC No. 1, the OP-PRAISE Committee was
constituted through Memorandum Order (MO) No. 12 (s. 2011);

WHEREAS, under MO No. 1 2, the OP-PRAISE Committee is tasked, among
others, to formulate the revised OP ESIAS;

WHEREAS, MO No. 12 was amended by MO No. 35 (s. 2012), and MO No. 69
(s. 2014) which reconstituted the OP-PRAISE Committee;

WHEREAS, upon the recommendation of the OP-PRAISE Committee, the OP-
ESIAS provided under MO No. 118-B was amended by MO No. 46 (s. 2020) to adopt
the PRAISE in the OP-Proper, referred to as OP-PRAISE;

WHEREAS, OP aspires to achieve better planning and implementation of
specific functions for the four (4) Human Resource Management Systems (HRMS)
which can lead to higher human resource and organization performance, through the
application of the Program to Institutionalize Meritocracy and Excellence in Human
Resource Management (PRIME-HRM) indicators;

WHEREAS, the OP Proper Competency Tables and Logo/Framework that
were approved by the Executive Secretary in August 2021, may enhance and
strengthen the implementation of the HRMS on rewards and recognition;

WHEREAS, under MO No. 46, the OP-PRAISE Committee is also tasked to
ensure that productivity, innovativeness, suggestions and exemplary behavior are
identified, considered, managed and implemented on a continuing basis to cover
employees at all levels;

WHEREAS, further under CSC MC No. 1, subsequent amendments to our
agency’s PRAISE shall be submitted to the CSC Regional or Field Office for proper
implementation;

NOW, THEREFORE, upon the recommendation of the OP-PRAISE
Committee, MO No. 46 (s. 2020), is hereby amended to read as follows:

I. OBJECTIVES
1. General

The OP-PRAISE is designed to encourage creativity, innovativeness, efficiency,
integrity and productivity, by recognizing and rewarding employees, individually and
in groups, for their suggestions, innovative ideas, inventions, discoveries, superior
accomplishments, competencies, heroic deeds, exemplary behavior, extraordinary
acts or services in the public interest.

2. Specific

2.1 To establish a mechanism for identifying, selecting and
rewarding/providing incentives to deserving human resources;

2.2 To identify outstanding accomplishments and best practices of human
resources on a continuing basis;

2.3 To provide incentives and interventions to motivate human resources who
have contributed ideas, suggestions, inventions, discoveries, superior
accomplishments and other personal efforts;

2.4 To acknowledge and provide awards and incentives to human resources
who display exemplary behavior; and

2.5 To instill the drive for excellence among OP human resources by improving
their competencies and encouraging them to pursue their own career
development.

ll. SCOPE
The OP-PRAISE shall apply to all appointive OP Proper human resources.

In the provision of incentives and awards, this Program shall not discriminate
against civil status, age, gender identity, sexual orientation, disabilities, religion
and/or indigenous group membership.

Hl. DEFINITION OF TERMS

1. AWARD - recognition which may be monetary or non-monetary conferred on
individuals or group of individuals for ideas, suggestions, inventions,
discoveries, superior accomplishments, exemplary behavior, heroic deeds,
extraordinary acts or services in the public interest that contribute to the
efficiency, economy, and improvement in government operations, and to
organizational productivity.

2. INCENTIVE - monetary or non-monetary motivation, privilege or reward given
to a human resource or group of human resources for laudable/extraordinary
performance or service, pursuance of career development, or long and
dedicated service in government.

3. CONTRIBUTION - any input which can be in the form of an idea or
performance.

4. DISCOVERY - is the uncovering of something previously existing but found or
learned of for the first time, which will improve public service delivery.

5. IDEA TYPE CONTRIBUTION - refers to an idea, a suggestion or an invention
or discovery for improvement to effect economy in operation, to increase
production and improve working conditions.

6. INVENTION - the creation of something previously non-existent which will
benefit government.

7. SUGGESTION - idea or proposal which improves work performance, systems
and procedures and economy in operations that will benefit the government.

8. GROUP - shall refer to two or more individuals bound by a common objective,
a task force, a technical working group or a special working team,
formed/created/organized formally or informally to undertake certain
projects/programs.

9. COMPETENCY - refers to observable, measureable and vital behavioral skills,
knowledge, and personal attributes deemed essential for organizational
success.

10. HEROIC DEED - refers to the prompt and immediate courageous and selfless
action that involves risking one’s life or safety for the common good and/or that
would benefit others.

11.CONTINUOUS SERVICE - for purposes of the grant of OP-PRAISE awards
and incentives, refers to non-incurrence of leave without pay, for reasons other
than illness, of not more than five (5) days per year.

12. ONBOARDING - refers to the process of integrating and acculturating newly
hired employees, as indicated in the OP Onboarding Program, into the
organization and providing them with the tools, resources and knowledge to
become successful and productive OP Proper human resources. This process
is done within six (6) months upon assumption to duty.

IV. TYPES OF AWARDS
A. Honor Awards.

OP shall regularly undertake a search for deserving employees, for the purpose
of granting awards administered by OP, and for nominating them for awards given
by other government agencies, private entities, non-government organizations
(NGOs) and other award giving bodies, such as the:

1. Presidential Lingkod Bayan Award — conferred to an individual or group of
individuals comprised of five members for exceptional or extraordinary
contributions resulting from an idea or performance that had nationwide
impact on public interest, security and patrimony. The contribution may be
a suggestion, innovation, invention or superior accomplishment.

2. Civil Service Commission Pagasa Award — conferred to an individual or
group of individuals comprised of five members for outstanding
contribution/s resulting from an idea or performance that directly benefit

3

more than one department of the government which resulted in the
successful achievement of its goal or has greatly improved public service
delivery, economy in operation, improved working conditions or otherwise
benefited the government in many other ways.

For group nominations, the group/team should have demonstrated teamwork,
cooperation, camaraderie and cohesiveness. Each group/team member should
have verifiable/actual contribution in the attainment of the group’s/team’s
accomplishment. This should be specified in the nomination.

3. Outstanding Public Officials and Employees or “Dangal ng Bayan” Award
— conferred to an individual for performance of an extraordinary act or
public service and consistent demonstration of exemplary ethical behavior
on the basis of his or her observance of one or more of the eight (8) norms
of behavior described under Republic Act (RA) No. 6713, otherwise known
as the “Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Government Officials
and Employees”. The application of this type of award in OP shall be
operationalized under its Exemplary Behavior Award as detailed in B.2 of
this MO.

4. Other Awards — given by other government agencies, private institutions or
NGOs to an individual or team for contributions of an idea or performance
that directly benefited the government.

The OP-PRAISE Committee shall choose from among those nominated by
the heads of offices as Officially submitted to the Committee up to the month of
February, for qualifications that had been met during the immediately preceding
year. Nominations by the heads of offices shall include the following:

¢ Name and position of nominee;
e Nominated for what type of award ; and
e Reason for nomination.

Nominees must meet the following qualifications, and such other
qualifications/requirements as may be provided by CSC covering the period of
nominations:

¢ Have rendered at least three (3) years of continuous government
service as of the deadline of submission of nominations;

e Have a performance rating of at least Very Satisfactory or its
equivalent for six (6) semestral, or three (3) annual rating periods prior
to the nominations; and

¢ Have not been found guilty of any administrative or criminal offense
involving moral turpitude or do not have any pending case against
them at the time of nomination.

B. OP Proper Awards

The OP-PRAISE shall develop and initiate recognition of individuals or group
of individuals for ideas, suggestions, inventions, discoveries, superior
accomplishments, exemplary behavior, heroic deeds and other extraordinary acts
or services that contribute to the efficiency, economy, and improvement in
government operations, and to organizational productivity:

1. Idea Type Contribution Award (ITCA) — granted to a human resource who
has contributed an idea, suggestion, or invention, which generated
economic improvement in operation, increased productivity, improved
working conditions or service, or otherwise benefited OP.

a. Qualifications - Must have rendered service for at least one (1)
calendar year in OP, with a very satisfactory rating for the last two
(2) regular rating periods

b. Criteria:

i. Impact of Achievement (40%)
- the extent to which the idea has increased productivity and
improved systems and procedures; the paradigm shift it has
caused; and the number of persons that benefited from it;

ii. Reliability and Effectiveness (20%)
- the extent to which the bright idea has effectively and efficiently
addressed a pressing need and improved service delivery;

iii. Economy in Operations (20%)
- the extent to which minimum amount of resources (people,
time, etc.) have been used to achieve the resultant output; and

iv. Relevance (20%)
- Addresses the improvement of working condition or services
beneficial to OP

c. Documents Required — a nomination letter with details on the idea
type contributed, addressed to the OP-PRAISE Committee, and/or
Re-Entry Action Plan or Recommendations in the After Activity
Report/Learning Application Plan that have been implemented, if
applicable

d. Form of Award — a plaque of recognition and a cash award to be
determined by the OP-PRAISE Committee will be given during the OP
Anniversary, or in such other appropriate occasion as may likewise be
recommended by the Committee.

2. Exemplary Behavior Award (EBA) in the form of a plaque or a Certificate
of Recognition and/or Cash Award as may be determined by the OP
PRAISE Committee, will be granted to a human resource who has
exemplarily demonstrated any one of the eight (8) norms of conduct as
provided under RA No. 6713 (Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards). The
awardee shall be automatically nominated by the Executive Secretary to the
Dangal ng Bayan Award.

a. Qualifications, criteria, and documents required for the said award
shall be aligned with the guidelines set by the CSC for the Dangal ng
Bayan Award.

b. Form of Award - a plaque of recognition and a cash award to be
determined by the OP-PRAISE Committee will be given during the OP
5

Anniversary, or in such other appropriate occasion as may likewise be
recommended by the Committee.

3. Extra Mile Employee Award will be given to a human resource who
extended prompt, courteous, and extra mile service to clients.

Feedback Mechanism — Each OP office shall develop a feedback form for
accomplishment of its clients. The said form shall contain three (3) parts —
i.e., type of transaction made, description of the service received by the
client, and the compliment, complaint, or suggestion of the client.

Heads of offices are encouraged to give “on-the-spot” recognitions for
human resources who were given a commendable remark in any part of the
feedback form. Every end of the month, heads of offices may award human
resources with at least three (3) commendable remarks from at least three
(3) different clients. The commendable remark must indicate the extra mile
done by the employee. Rewards may be in such forms as Certificate of
Commendation or simple tokens.

a. Qualifications —

i. Those with salary grades below 22, or whose equivalent
positions/functions are below that of an Assistant Division Chief;

fi. |The commendable service must be beyond the employee’s
functions/duties and performed without additional form of
compensation (e.g., compensatory overtime credit, overtime
pay, honorarium); and

iii. Must have rendered service for at least one (1) calendar year in
OP, with a very satisfactory rating for the last two (2) regular
rating periods.

b. Criteria —

The OP PRAISE Committee shall determine the top five (5)
employees from among the list of employees who were given
Certificates of Commendation submitted by the heads of offices to the
OP PRAISE Committee. Criteria for judging shall be as follows:

i. Consistency (60%)
- the number of Certificates of Commendation or valid written
commendations received in a calendar year
ii. Purpose of the Extra Mile (40%)
- the nature and work impact of the extra mile

c. Form of Award — a plaque of recognition and a cash award to be
determined by the OP-PRAISE Committee will be given during the OP
anniversary celebration, or in such other appropriate occasion as may
likewise be recommended by the Committee.

4. Retirement Award — conferred in recognition of the human resources’
continuous dedicated and satisfactory service in the government, under the
following criteria and types of awards:

6

 

CRITERIA INCENTIVE
Monetary Non-Monetary
Compulsory retirees with at least 20,000.00 | Certificate of

 

 

 

15 years of creditable government Appreciation signed

service by the President

At least 60 years of age, with at | 15,000.00 | Certificate of

least 15 years of continuous Appreciation signed
| creditable government service by the Executive

Separated OP Proper human | P41 5,000.00 | Secretary
resources, at any age, with at least
30 years of creditable government
service

Retirees who do not fall under any | P10,000.00
of the aforesaid categories

 

 

 

 

 

Satisfactory service shall be measured through the accomplished Individual
Performance and Commitment Review Forms (IPCRF) for the last two (2)
regular rating periods prior to awarding/nomination.

The Human Resource Management Office (HRMO) shall prepare a list from
its database to identify retirement awardees (Annex A).

Retirement Awards will be given either during the OP Anniversary Month or
the Civil Service Month, or in such other appropriate occasion as may
likewise be recommended by the Committee.

5. Such other awards that the OP-PRAISE Committee may decide to confer.
V. INCENTIVES

The OP shall continuously reward deserving employees to motivate them to
improve the quality of their work performance by demonstrating positive behavior,
and pursuing career development/improve their competencies.

1. Loyalty incentive - initially granted to a human resource who has
completed at least ten (10) years of continuous service in government, and
every five (5) years thereafter, with at least satisfactory performance rating
for the last two (2) rating periods prior to the year of awarding.

A Loyalty Awardee shall be given monetary incentive of Ten Thousand
Pesos (P 10,000.00) for the first 10 years of continuous government service,
and ®5,000.00 for every five (5) years thereafter, as prescribed in CSC MC
No. 06, s. 2002.

In addition to the monetary incentive, an awardee shall receive the following:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

No. of Years in Token or an Equivalent Certificate of
Service Memorabilia/Item Bearing | Appreciation
the Same Value
10 and 15 years Bronze OP watch Signed by
20 and 25 years Silver OP Watch DESFA
30, 35, and 40 years Gold OP Watch Signed by ES

 

The HRMO shall prepare a list from its database to identify awardees for the
incentive (Annex B).

The Loyalty Award will be given during the CSC Month, or in such other
appropriate occasion as may likewise be recommended by the Committee.

Career and Self-Development Incentive (CSDI) - shall be granted in
recognition of an individual who pursued his/her personal and career
development, as detailed hereunder, during his/her employment in OP,
without cost from the government (i.e., not a recipient of any scholarship
grant, did not avail himself/herself of study leave, attendance to the program
was not done during office hours), and with a very satisfactory performance

rating in all the regular rating periods when he/she was enrolled/took the
exam:

2.1 Graduate of Doctoral or Master's Degree in a university/school
accredited by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED); or

2.2 Passed the Bar/Board Exams while employed in OP, and the license
acquired must be relevant to the employee’s functions in OP (e.g.,
lawyer, CPA, engineer)

It is understood that the inclusive period of study/exam/conferment must
have started and ended during his/her employment in OP.

a. Criteria and documents to be submitted:

The Documents that should be submitted to the OP-PRAISE Committee
Secretariat at the beginning of the calendar year are as follows:

 

 

Criteria Documents to be presented
Doctoral degree Authenticated copy of the Diploma and
graduate Transcript of Records, Officially transmitted by
Master’s degree the concerned employee and duly noted by
_graduate his/her head of office

 

Bar/Board Passer | Authenticated Copy of Bar/Board
Certificate/License, Officially transmitted by the
concerned employee and duly noted by his/her
head of office

 

 

 

Only submissions with complete documentary requirements will be
considered. However, those not considered for a certain year due to
incomplete documentary requirements may still be nominated on the year
the complete documentary requirements are submitted.

b. Form of Reward

The monetary incentive shall be as follows:

 

Criteria Monetary Certificate of
Incentive Recognition
Doctoral degree graduate P 15,000.00 | Signed by the Chair
Master's degree graduate | 10,000.00 | of OP PRAISE
Bar/Board Passer P 10,000.00

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The incentives will be granted/conferred during the CSC Month, or in such other
appropriate occasion as may likewise be recommended by the Committee.

3. Punctuality and Best in Attendance Awards will be given to an OP Proper
human resource in recognition of his/her punctuality and best attendance in
Office for one full year, to include attendance in the Flag Raising Ceremonies.

a. Qualifications and Criteria

Only those who are using the regular fingerscan machine and
observing the regular office hours are qualified to receive this award.

Qualified employees must have attained perfect office attendance for
the whole calendar year, including perfect attendance in the regular
flag raising ceremonies.

Perfect attendance means no incurrence of leaves of absence,
tardiness, and undertime during the reference year. Leaves of absence
incurred for purposes of Forced Leave are excluded in the count.

b. Nomination Procedure

Duly designated timekeepers will identify human resources who meet
the above-mentioned qualifications/criteria and submit the names to
the OP-PRAISE Committee Secretariat.

c. Form of Reward - Gift cards at popular malis, book stores, or
drugstores, or its equivalent cash price, may be given to awardees, as
may be determined by the OP-PRAISE Committee.

4. Rookie of the Year - will be given to an “Onboarding” individual who
obtained an “Outstanding” rating during the onboarding period, with
submitted supporting documents for such rating.

a. Qualification - The HRMO will identify human resources who meet the
above-mentioned qualifications/criteria.

b. Form of Award - a monetary incentive of f5,000.00 may be given to an
awardee, as may be determined by the OP-PRAISE Committee. The
Rookie of the Year Incentive will be given during the CSC month, or in
such other appropriate occasion as may likewise be recommended by
the Committee.

5. Anniversary Bonus - will be given to qualified human resource on OP's
milestone anniversaries, to improve and enhance employee morale.

The human resources must have rendered at least one (1) year of
Satisfactory service in OP as of the date of the milestone year.

6. On-the-Spot Incentives - In Support of the objectives of this Program,
heads of offices are encouraged to establish their respective non-monetary
and “on the spot” incentives following certain criteria that are consistent with
this Order. “On-the-Spot” documentary evidence (i.¢., Office Order
containing the set criteria, certified photocopies of the certificates of

9

commendation/recognition, photographs of the awarding activity/ceremony)
shall be officially endorsed by the concerned head of office to the OP-
PRAISE Committee, through its Secretariat, for documentation purposes.

Heads of offices/delivery units are encouraged to give simple notes of
appreciation, certificates of appreciation, simple tokens, free meals, simple
“salu-salo” or any type of incentive to qualified employees within their
Office/delivery unit to motivate them to give prompt and quality
service/performance.

7. Other Incentives that the OP-PRAISE Committee may recommend by
virtue of special achievements, innovative approaches to assignments,
exemplary service to the President, the public, and other interested parties.

VI. SPECIAL RECOGNITIONS/REWARDS

1. Special Recognition of Service ~ OP employees/retirees from other
government agencies who were not conferred any form of reward and/or loyalty
incentives.

In the event that a retiree or an OP employee has not received any
token/memorabilia for his/her loyal service to the government, either in OP or
in the agency where he/she retired prior to joining OP, the retiree/OP employee
may receive the token/memorabilia for the aforesaid calendar year, to be
conferred on the year of the implementation of these guidelines and, thereafter,
on the year following his/her joining OP, provided he/she complies with the
following criteria:

 

 

 

 

 

No. of Years in Token or an Equivalent Memorabilia/Item
Government Service Bearing the Same Value
15 to 19 years Bronze OP watch
20 to 29 years Silver OP Watch
30 to 45 years | Gold OP Watch

 

 

2. Pamana ng Paglilingkod — given to the family of an OP human resource who
died in the line of duty or in pursuit of his/her official duties and responsibilities
as a civil servant. Said human resource should have rendered at least three (3)
years of continuous government service with performance ratings of at least
Very Satisfactory for all the regular rating periods, and had neither been found
guilty of any administrative or criminal offense involving moral turpitude, nor had
any pending case against him/her at the time of nomination.

 

CRITERIA AWARD
Monetary Non-Monetary
Those who died in the service at age 60 | 15,000.00 | Certificate of

 

 

 

and above, with at least 15 years of Appreciation signed
continuous government service by the President
Those who died in the service with at 15,000.00 | Certificate of

least 30 years of continuous Appreciation signed
| government service by the Executive

 

Those who died in the service not 10,000.00 | Secretary
falling under any of the above-stated
criteria

 

 

 

 

10

Vil.

Vill.

This will be awarded before the end of the calendar year, or in such other
appropriate occasion as may likewise be recommended by the Committee.

GENERAL CONDITIONS

Nominees to any form of award/incentive must have at least a satisfactory
performance rating for the last two (2) regular rating periods prior to nominations,
unless otherwise specified in this M.O. Thus, before the deliberations on official
nominees, the HRMO must have submitted a report on the nominees without
accomplished Office Performance Commitment and Review Form (OPCRF) and
Individual Performance Commitment and Review Forms (IPCRFs) and/or Division
Performance Commitment and Review Forms (DPCRFs). The OPCRF and/or
IPCRF and/or DPCRFs must have been submitted on or before the deadline of
submission as specified in the OP Strategic Performance Management System
Calendar.

The candidates/nominees must likewise have not been found guilty of an
administrative case in the year prior to, and of, the conferment of the award, which
shall be validated by the OP-PRAISE Committee Secretariat from the Office of the
Deputy Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs.

The OP-PRAISE Committee shall recommend to the Executive Secretary the
human resource(s) who are nominated for both the Honor Awards and the OP
Proper Awards, the Project Design for the other awards and incentives, and the
proposed tokens/incentives.

FLOW CHART AND LINKS WITH THE OTHER SYSTEMS

Attached (Annex C) is the flow chart on awards and recognition, from planning
to awarding, which likewise shows the Programs link with the other HR Systems.

FUNDING

OP Proper shall set aside in its annual budget (i.e., Work and Financial Plan
and Budget), not more than 5% of the HR development budget, to cover the
necessary appropriations/expenses that may be incurred in granting both the
monetary and non-monetary awards in accordance with the provisions of the OP
PRAISE.

The Finance Office shall submit to the OP-PRAISE Committee, within the
month of February of the succeeding year, a report on the following:

1. Budget utilization for the grant of the OP-PRAISE, which contains the estimated
budgetary expense and the actual budgetary expense from the preceding year;
and

2. Liquidation Report.

- OP-PRAISE COMMITTEE

The OP-PRAISE Committee, as reconstituted under MO No. 69, s. 2014, is
comprised as follows:

11

Chairperson - Deputy Executive Secretary for Finance and
Administration
Senior Official Designee of the Executive Secretary
with the rank of at least an Assistant Secretary
Members - Head, HRMO
- Head, Legal Office
- Head, Finance Office
- One (1) Representative from 3" Level Officials to be
assigned by the Executive Secretary
- One (1) Alternate Representative ‘from 3" Level
Officials to be assigned by the Executive Secretary
- One (1) Representative from the Office of the
President Employees’ Network (OPEN) for 2"4 level
positions
One (1) Alternate Representative from OPEN for 2"
level positions
- One (1) Representative from OPEN for 15 level
positions
One (1) Alternate Representative from OPEN for 1st
level positions

Vice-Chairperson

The OP-PRAISE Committee shall:

=

. Ensure that productivity, innovativeness, suggestions and exemplary behavior
are identified, considered, managed and implemented on a continuing basis to
cover employees at all levels;

2. Be responsible for the development, administration, monitoring and evaluation

of the awards and incentives system of OP;

3. Establish its own internal procedures and strategies;

4. Recommend to the Executive Secretary its proposed annual budget to cover
whatever necessary expenses it will incur in granting both the monetary and
non-monetary awards in accordance with the provisions of the revised OP
PRAISE; and

5. Propose necessary guidelines to cover situations not specifically covered by

this Order.

The HRMO shall provide secretariat and administrative support to the
Committee.

Xl. SCHEDULES OF INCLUSION
In determining qualified nominees/candidates to OP Proper Awards, the following

applicable schedules of inclusion shall be observed for the first round of
implementation:

 

OP Internal Awards Inclusion Schedule
Loyalty Award October 2018 ~ December 2019
Retirement Award
Pamana ng Paglilingkod
| Idea Type Contribution Award
Exemplary Behavior Award January 1, 2019 ~ December 31, 2019
Extra Mile Employee Award

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12

 

Punctuality and Best in Attendance
Award

Career and Self-Development Award January 1, 2021 — December 31, 2021
Rookie of the Year

 

 

 

 

 

 

For succeeding years, the inclusion period shall be from January 1 to December
31 of the preceding year, unless otherwise recommended by the OP-PRAISE
Committee and approved by the Executive Secretary.
XII. REPEAL

Other orders and circulars inconsistent with the foregoing provisions are hereby
modified or repealed accordingly.

XIll. SEPARABILITY

If any provision of this Memorandum Order is declared invalid or unconstitutional,
the other provisions not affected shall remain valid and subsisting.

XIV. EFFECTIVITY
This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila this 23rd day ofFebruary , in the year of Our Lord,
Two Thousand and Twenty-Two.

By authority of the President:

7

ik Le

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA,..
Executive Secretary

13