FROM : -
8 .
Fa NOS 3A May. 2817 Gd:24AM PS

@Pffice af the President
of the Bhileppines
filulacatang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. _ 07

CONSTITUTING THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT PERFORMANCE
MANAGEMENT GROUP

Relative to the implementation of the Performance Based incentive System (PBIS)
and the Strategic Performance Management System (SPMS) in the Office of the President-
Proper, a Performance Management Group (PMG) is hereby created and constituted as

follows:
Designation Designee
Chair : Deputy Executive Secretary for Finance and Administration
Vice-Chair : Deputy Executive Secretary for Internal Audit
Members : Deputy Executive Secretary for General Administration

: Deputy Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs

: Chief-of-Staff, Office of the Executive Secretary

: Chief-of-Staff, Office of the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary
: President, Office of the President Employees’ Network

the OP-PMG shail perform the following functions and responsibilities:

Review the OP Organizational Performance Indicators Framework (OPIF),

2, Ensure that office performance targets and measures, aS well as the budgets, are
aligned with the OP-OPIF and related issuances on performance management,

3, Issue guidelines to office heads regarding their annual performance indicators and
targets;

4. Recommend approval of the office performance commitments and ratings to the
Executive Secretary,

5, Act as final arbiter for performance management issues in OP;

6. Recommend potential top performers and provide inputs to the Program on Awards
and Incentives for Service Excellence (PRAISE) Committee for the grant of awards
and incentives; :

7. Set policies and ensure the implementation of the 4-stage SPMS Cycle for the 1%
and 2"™ levels; and '

8. Undertake performance-related initiatives as directed by the Executive Secretary.

—

The OP-PMG shali form sub-committees and/or teams necessary and appropriate to
ensure efficient, proper and transparent implementation of PBIS and SPMS in OP-Proper.

A Secretariat composed of select personnel from the Office of the Deputy Executive
Secretary for Finance and Administration, Human Resource Management Office, Finance
Office, and the Information and Communications Technology Office shall pe formed to
provide administrative and secretarial support to the Group.

All other issuances that are inconsistent with the provisions in this Order are hereby
revoked, amended or modified accordingly. .

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

Wm te
SALWADOR GC. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary

Manila, 08 NOV 2016