Office of the jpresident
of i hilippines
al

acahang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 32

REINFORCING THE GUIDELINES FOR THE ARMED FORCES OF THE
PHILIPPINES AND THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE IN THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF MEASURES TO SUPPRESS AND PREVENT
LAWLESS VIOLENCE.

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 55 (s. 2016) declared a state of national emergency
on account of lawless violence in Mindanao and called out the Armed Forces of the
Philippines (AFP) and the Philippine National Police (PNP) to undertake all necessary
measures to suppress any and all forms of lawless violence in Mindanao and prevent the
spread and escalation thereof elsewhere in the country; é

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order (MO) No. 3 (s. 2016) provided guidelines for the
AFP and the PNP for an effective and expeditious implementation of the President’s
directive under Proclamation No. 55;

WHEREAS, a number of sporadic acts: of violence have occurred recently in
particular areas of the country, particularly in the proyinces of Samar, Negros Oriental,
Negros Occidental, and the Bicol Region, which appear to have been committed by
lawless groups; .

WHEREAS, there is a need to reinforce the directive of the President in order to
prevent further loss of innocent lives and destruction of property and bring the whole
country back to a state of complete normalcy as quick as possible;

WHEREAS, to ensure respect and protection of the fundamental civil and political
rights of our citizens, there is a need to reiterate the measures that the AFP and PNP can
undertake during the state of national emergency on account of lawless violence;

WHEREAS, Section 27, Chapter 9, Title Ill, Book Ill of Executive Order No. 292,
otherwise known as the “Administrative Code of 1987,” empowers the Executive Secretary
to implement presidential directives, orders’and decisions;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA, by the authority and order of
President Rodrigo Roa Duterte, do hereby promulgate the following directives and
guidelines to be observed during the subsistence of a state of national emergency on
account of lawless violence:

SECTION 1.The.salient provisions of MO No. 3 are herein reinforced and
reiterated. Further, the Department of National Defense (DND) and the Department of the
Interior and Local Government (DILG) shall coordinate the immediate deployment of
additional forces of the AFP and PNP to suppress lawless violence and acts of terror in
the provinces of Samar, Negros Oriental, Negros Occidental, and the Bicol Region, and
prevent such violence from spreading and escalating elsewhere in the country.

SECTION 2. The AFP, PNP and the Department of Justice, in close coordination
with each other and other law-enforcement agencies and with the assistance of the

 

intelligence community, shall intensify their local and transnational intelligence operations
against individuals or groups suspected of, or responsible for, committing or conspiring to
commit acts of lawless violence in the Philippines, as well as the prompt investigation and
prosecution of all individuals or groups apprehended for committing, or conspiring to
commit, acts of lawless violence.

SECTION 3. All local government units are enjoined to give their full support and
utmost cooperation to ensure the effective implementation of this Order.

SECTION 4, At all times, the constitutional rights of every individual shall be
respected and given due regard by the AFP and PNP in the implementation of this Order.
No civil or political rights are suspended during the existence of a state of national
emergency on account of lawless violence. In particular, the AFP and PNP are enjoined to
observe existing rules and jurisprudence in instances that may justify the implementation
of warrantless arrests, searches and seizures, as well as ensure compliance with
guidelines for police/military checkpoints and stop-and-frisk situations.

SECTION 5. Any AFP or PNP personnel found violating any of the foregoing
constitutional rights shall be held administratively, civilly or criminally liable therefor.

SECTION 6. This Order shall take effect immediately.

By Order of the President:

8

at
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary
Manila, 22 November 2018

sanurmstttdvernrnce ir aan Sih SS

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

|
| CERTIELED COPY
|

   
  

ATTY. CONCEPCTOI
CTE ee