Office of the jhresident
of i hilippines
Malacattany

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 24

IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES FOR THE BUREAU OF IMMIGRATION
SPECIAL PROVISION NO. 1 UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10964,
OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE GENERAL APPROPRIATIONS ACT
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2018

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 31, Title III, Book IV of Executive Order (EO)
No. 292, or the Administrative Code of 1987, the Bureau of Immigration (Bl) shall be
principally responsible for the administration and enforcement of immigration,
citizenship and alien admission and registration laws in accordance with the
provisions of Commonwealth Act No. 613 or the Philippine Immigration Act of 1940,

WHEREAS, in his Veto Message for Republic Act No. 10964, or the General
Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (FY 2018 GAA), the President
acknowledged the important function of BI employees, particularly as the first line of
defense in securing and protecting the country’s territorial borders;

WHEREAS, the vital, exacting, and ceaseless nature of the functions of Bl
employees, and the constant flow of their clientele, require them to render extended
hours of public service;

WHEREAS, pursuant to the BI Special Provision No. 1 of the FY 2018 GAA,
the express lane fees and charges to be collected by the BI may be used to augment
the salaries of BI personnel;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Immigration Act has not been updated since its
passage in 1940, and the basic monthly pay of BI employees has remained
extremely low in spite of the nature of their work, thereby leading to a large number
of resignations and causing prejudice to the efficient delivery of frontline services;

WHEREAS, Congress has yet to pass an Immigration Modernization Law,
which seeks, among others, to upgrade the current compensation system of the BI;

WHEREAS, there is a need for an interim measure to augment the salaries of
BI employees, in recognition of the indispensability of their functions, the apparent
disparity between the basic pay of BI employees and employees of agencies
performing comparable functions, and to promote the continuous and unhampered
delivery of basic government services;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA, Executive Secretary,
by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Augmentation Pay to BI Personnel. The Department of Justice
and the Department of Budget and Management shall adopt the following guidelines

in the implementation of Special Provision No. 1 of the FY 2018 GAA as regards the
use of express lane fees and charges to augment the salaries of BI personnel:

1.

Express lane fees and charges collected by the BI shall be deposited in a
Special Trust Fund Account with a government bank. The said collections
shall comprise the “Express Lane Fund” (ELF);

The ELF shall be used exclusively for the following purposes —

a. 64% shall be used to augment the salaries of the Bl’s organic
personnel who render service beyond regular office hours;

b. 25% shall be used to pay for the salaries of the BI’s contractual
personnel; and

c. The remaining 11% shall be remitted to the National Treasury as
income of the General Fund;

The FY 2018 GAA entitles the BI organic personnel to augmentation of
their salaries, on the condition that they render overtime services;

Item | of Immigration Administrative Order (IAQ) No. JHM-2018-002
provides that the monthly augmentation pay of organic personnel who
render services beyond office hours shall be determined based on the
designation of personnel, the amount of the monthly ELF collections, and
the total number of organic personnel;

The base pay of an Assistant Division Chief in the BI (Salary Grade 22),
reduced by 20% of such amount, is set as the cap or limitation on the
augmentation pay rates;

Entitlement to augmentation pay is conditioned on compliance with
Section 5 of Immigration Administrative Circular (IAC) No. JHM-18-003,
such that organic personnel must render service from 7:00 A.M. to 5:30
P.M., Monday to Friday, or the equivalent work hours for those working
beyond 5:30 P.M. and/or Saturday, Sunday, and Holiday, with the BI
rendering service continuously through the work day/period without lunch
break;

The ELF shall be deposited in a Special Trust Fund Account in a
government bank, and shall be made available for use in accordance with
the abovementioned FY 2018 GAA Special Provision, and subject to the
terms hereof. Thus, the augmentation pay covering the months of
January to May 2018 for the entitled organic personnel shall be
immediately released; and

ELF collections in excess of the total augmentation pay requirements in
accordance with these rules and the contractual salary requirements for
the year shall be remitted to the National Treasury, as income of the
General Fund.

SECTION 2. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect
immediately, and shall continue to be effective until 31 December 2018, or until the
passage of an Immigration Modernization Law, or a law which would increase the
base pay rates of BI personnel, whichever comes first.

DONE, in the City of Manila, thisl 3tRiay of July _ in the year of our
Lord, Two Thousand and Eighteen.

By authority of the President:

~

es
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary @