MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 61
APPROVING THE 2022 STRATEGIC INVESTMENT PRIORITY PLAN

WHEREAS, under Section 300 of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997
(NIRC), as amended by Republic Act (RA) No. 11534, otherwise known as the
“Corporate Recovery and Tax Incentives for Enterprises” (CREATE) Act, the Board of
Investments (BOI), in coordination with the Fiscal Incentives Review Board (FIRB),
investment promotion agencies (IPAs), other government agencies administering tax
incentives, and the private sector, is mandated to formulate the Strategic Investment
Priority Plan (SIPP) to be submitted to the President for approval;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Executive Order No. 226 or the “Omnibus Investments
Code,” as amended, the 2020 Investment Priorities Plan (IPP) was signed by the
President on 18 November 2020, and took effect on 06 December 2020. Following the
enactment of the CREATE Act, the FIRB, through Resolution No. 05-21 dated 14 April
2021, adopted the 2020 IPP and its General Policies and Specific Guidelines, to serve
as the transitional SIPP, pending the issuance of the newly formulated SIPP;

WHEREAS, the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of
Representatives endorsed the newly formulated SIPP as presented in its meeting on
07 February 2022;

WHEREAS, the FIRB, in its Resolution No. 001-22 dated 21 February 2022,
adopted the proposed SIPP and endorsed the same to the BOI for approval of the
President;

WHEREAS, the BOI, through Board Resolution No. 08-21 dated 25 March 2022,
approved the submission of the newly formulated SIPP to the President for approval, in
compliance with Section 300 of the NIRC, as amended, and Rule 4, Sections 2 and 7
of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the CREATE Act;

WHEREAS, the newly formulated SIPP is aligned with the updated Philippine
Development Plan 2017 - 2022, and with the long-term aspiration and vision of the
Inclusive Innovation Industrial Strategy (13S) of the Department of Trade and Industry
and Pagtanaw 2050 of the Department of Science and Technology's National Academy
of Science and Technology;

WHEREAS, the activities listed in the 2020 IPP are retained and included under
Tier | of the newly formulated SIPP;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the activities proposed to be included under Tier {I are envisioned
to promote a competitive and resilient economy and fill in gaps in the Philippines’
industrial value chains, and are deemed critical in promoting green ecosystems,
ensuring a dependable health system, achieving robust self-reliance in defense
systems, and realizing modem, competitive, and resilient industrial and agricultural
sectors;

WHEREAS, the activities proposed to be included under Tier Ill are projected to
accelerate the transformation of the economy primarily through the application of
research and development, and attracting technology investments. It also includes
activities involving the production of equipment, parts, and services that embed new
technologies, and the commercialization of research and development output; and

WHEREAS, as represented by the Department of Trade and Industry, the newly
formulated SIPP underwent a formal evaluation process, including comprehensive
consultations with the FIRB, IPAs, other govemment agencies administering tax
incentives, and the private sector, as required under the CREATE Act;

NOW, THEREFORE, upon the recommendation of the BOI, consistent with the
requirements of the CREATE Act, the attached Strategic Investment Priority Plan is
hereby APPROVED, subject to relevant laws, rules, and regulations.

Upon effectivity of the SIPP, all goverment agencies are enjoined to issue the
necessary regulations to ensure its implementation in a synchronized and integrated
manner. No goverment body shail adopt any policy or take any course of action
contrary to, or inconsistent with the SIPP and relevant laws.

All IPAs shall facilitate and expedite, to the extent possible, the setting up and
conduct of registered projects.or activities through the one-stop action center
established pursuant to Section 310 of the NIRC, as amended. Further, the local
government units and other government agencies shall coordinate with the concerned
{PA to comply with RA No. 11032 or the “Ease of Doing Business and Efficient
Goverment Service Delivery Act of 2018.”

This Order Shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a newspaper
of general circulation or in the Official Gazette, as required under Section 303 of the
NIRC, as amended by the CREATE Act.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 2,+i,day of may , in the year of
Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Two.

By the President: ~
i———___e., .

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA,
Executive Secretary

 

PRRD 2016 - 022221

The 2022 Strategic Investment Priority Plan

The 2022 Strategic Investment Priority Plan (SIPP) List of Priority Activities

I. Tier I

This includes all activities listed in the 2020 Investment Priorities Plan, as amended by
Memorandum Circular No. 2021-005', unless listed herein under Tier I or Tier III.

I. Tier I
This includes, but not limited to, the following activities:
1. Green Ecosystems

This covers electric vehicle (EV) assembly (e.g., pure EV, plug-in hybrid EV,
hybrid EV, fuel cell EV), manufacture of EV parts, components and systems,
establishment and operation of EV infrastructure; manufacture of energy efficient
maritime vessels and equipment; electronic devices and circuits for smart grid and
renewable energy (includes wearable solar devices); bioplastics and biopolymers;
renewable energy; energy efficiency and conservation projects; energy storage
technologies; and integrated waste management, disposal, & recycling.

2. Health related activities

This covers health related activities such as manufacturing in support of the Vaccine
Self-Reliance Program or other health-related programs as endorsed by Department
of Health (DOH), Department of Science and Technology (DOST) or other similar
agencies; medicines; active pharmaceutical ingredients; and specialty hospitals.

3. Defense related activities

This covers defense related activities as endorsed by the Department of National
Defense (DND), Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), or National Security
Council (NSC).

4. Industrial Value-chain Gaps

This covers activities that will address value chain gaps in, among others, steel,
textiles, chemicals; green metals processing (e.g. copper, cobalt, nickel), crude oil
refining; and lab-scale wafer fabrication.

5. Food Security related activities

1 Amendments to the General Policies and Specific Guidelines to Implement the 2020 Investment Priorities
Plan on the Lifting of the Locational Restriction of Contact Centers and Non-Voice Business Processing
Activities Located in Metro Manila (22 July 2021). The moratorium on the processing of applications for
economic zones (ecozones) in Metro Manila under Administrative Order 18 series of 2019 shall apply, unless
otherwise lifted.

The 2022 Strategic Investment Priority Plan

This covers products and services critical to competitively ensure food security or
in support of green/organic agriculture, as endorsed by the Department of
Agriculture (DA) or Philippine Council for Agriculture, Aquatic and Natural
Resources Research and Development (PCAARRD) such as but not limited to
integrated food production and processing activities (e.g., dairy); production and/or
adoption of hybrid seeds contained in the National Seed Industry Council (NSIC)
Crop Variety Registration; manufacture of animal vaccine, pesticides and
fertilizers; and agricultural and fisheries machinery and equipment, and parts and
components therefor.

Wl. Tier It

This includes, but not limited to, the following activities:

1.

Research & development (R&D) and activities adopting advanced digital
production technologies of the fourth industrial revolution, such as but not limited
to, robotics; artificial intelligence (AI); additive manufacturing; data analytics;
digital transformative technologies (e.g. cloud computing services, hyperscalers,
data centers, and digital infrastructure); nanotechnology (includes
nanoelectronics); biotechnology; production and/or adoption of new hybrid seeds;
and other Industry 4.0 technologies.

. Highly technical manufacturing and production of innovative products and

services such as but not limited to manufacture of equipment, parts & services;
commercialization of intellectual property (IP) and R&D products/services,
aerospace, medical devices (except personal protective equipment); internet of
things (IoT) devices and systems (includes wireless sensors and devices); full-scale
wafer fabrication; and advanced materials.

Establishment of innovation support facilities such as but not limited to R&D hubs;
Centers of Excellence; science & technology parks; innovation incubation center;
tech startups, startup enablers: incubators & accelerators; and space-related
infrastructures.

Pursuant to Section 302 of the CREATE Act, additional activities that comply with Section
296 of the CREATE Act can qualify under Tiers II and III; Provided that, the additional
activities under Tier III are duly endorsed by the relevant agencies such as the Department of
Science and Technology.