Office of the President
of the jihilippines

alacaftang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 38

REACTIVATING AND RECONSTITUTING THE EL NINO TASK FORCE
CREATED PURSUANT TO EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 16 (S. 2001), AND
FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 16 created a Presidential Task Force
to enhance agency coordination in the formulation and implementation of measures
that will mitigate the effects of the El Nifto and La Nifa phenomena;

WHEREAS, EO No. 16 also ordered the formulation and regular monitoring of
the implementation of a Comprehensive Disaster Preparedness and Rehabilitation
Plan for the El Niflo phenomenon to help the public cope therewith and minimize its
disastrous effects;

WHEREAS, the El Nifio Task Force reconvened in 2015, and crafted the
Roadmap for Addressing the Impacts of El Niflo (RAIN) to mitigate the effects of the
El Nifilo phenomenon on four areas: (a) food security; (b) energy security; (c) health,
and (d) safety;

WHEREAS, recent monitoring and analyses of the Department of Science
and Technology (DOST) — Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical, and Astronomical
Services Administration (PAGASA) indicate that the warm sea surface temperature
which started in November of last year in the Central and Eastern Equatorial Pacific
has fully developed into the El Nifio phenomenon;

WHEREAS, current climate models of the DOST-PAGASA suggest that there
is a seventy-five per cent (75%) probability that the El Nifto phenomenon will persist
from June until August 2019; and

WHEREAS, the recurrence of the El Nifo phenomenon calls for the
implementation of both short and long-term solutions to ensure food, water and
energy security, safeguard livelihoods, and improve the country’s disaster and
climate resilience;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

Section 1. Reactivation and Reconstitution of the El Nifio Task Force.
The Presidential Task Force (Task Force) to mitigate the effects of the El Nifto
phenomenon created pursuant to EO No. 16 is hereby reactivated and its
membership reconstituted as follows:

Over-all Head : Director-General and Socioeconomic Planning
Secretary, National Economic and Development
Authority

Head for Food Security : Secretary, Department of Agriculture

Head for Water Security : Secretary, Department of Environment and Natural
Resources

Head for Energy : Secretary, Department of Energy
Security

Head for Health : Secretary, Department of Health

Head for Safety : Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local
Government

Members : Secretary, DOST

Secretary, Department of National Defense and
Chairperson of the National Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC)
Secretary, Department of Social Welfare and
Development

Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment
Secretary, Department of Trade and Industry
Secretary, Presidential Communications Operation
Office

Director-General, Technical Education and Skills
Development Authority

Administrator, Office of Civil Defense and
Executive Director, NDRRMC .
Administrator, National Food Authority
Administrator, National Irrigation Authority
Administrator, PAGASA

Section 2. Updating of the RAIN. The Task Force shall revise and update
the RAIN, and monitor the implementation of short and long-term solutions and
programs identified therein, especially on the five (5) critical areas, namely: (i) food
security; (ii) water security; (iii) energy security; (iv) health; and (v) safety.

Section 3. Agency Support. The Task Force may call upon the Department
of Foreign Affairs, Department of Tourism and all other government entities to
extend support as may be necessary to implement the foregoing directives.

Section 4. Reporting Requirement. The Task Force shall submit to the
President through the Executive Secretary a monthly report on the implementation of
this Order.

Section 5. Funding. The funding requirements for the implementation of
this Order shall be charged against the existing appropriations of the member
agencies of the Task Force.

Section 6. Repeal. All other orders, issuances, or parts thereof, which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

Section 7. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 13th day of August jn the year of
Our Lord, Two Thousand Nineteen.

By authority of the President:

el
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary (/:

 

[ Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

| CERTIFIED COPY

‘py woul n/ |
1 JAPTY, CONPEPCIGH ZenY E. FeenOLING-ENaD |
Re€ A~any DIRECTOR IV