MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 50
APPROVING THE 2020 INVESTMENT PRIORITIES PLAN

Pursuant to Article 29 of Executive Order (EO) No. 226 (s. 1987) or the
“Omnibus Investments Code of 1987,” as amended, the attached 2020 Investment
Priorities Plan (IPP) is hereby APPROVED, subject to relevant laws, rules and
regulations.

Upon effectivity of the IPP, all government agencies and entities are enjoined
to issue the necessary regulations to ensure its implementation in a synchronized
and integrated manner. No government body shall adopt any policy or take any
course of action contrary to, or inconsistent with, the IPP and relevant laws.

In the grant of incentives, it is understood that the Board of Investments shall
ensure the attainment of and consistency with the State policies under EO No. 226
and the national goals under Republic Act (RA) No. 11469 or the “Bayanihan to
Heal as One Act,” and RA No. 11494 or the “Bayanihan to Recover as One Act.”

The Chairman of the Board of Investments shall render an annual report to
the President on the accomplishments and implementation of the IPP.

This Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a
newspaper of general circulation as required under Article 31 of the Omnibus
Investments Code of 1987.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18thdayof November | jn the year
of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty.

 

By the President:

 

ncn AW NCO

A Office of the Pres!

bu
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary (-

 

  

OF THE PHILIPPINES THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 015878

The 2020 Investment Priorities Plan

I. PREFERRED ACTIVITIES FOR INVESTMENT
A. Preferred Activities

1, All Qualified Activities Relating to the Fight against the COVID - 19 Pandemic

a, Essential Goods

This covers the production or manufacture of medicines, medical
equipment and devices, personal protective equipment (PPE), surgical
equipment and supplies, laboratory equipment and its reagents, medical
supplies, tools, and consumables such as but not limited to sanitizers and
cleaning materials, sodium hypochlorite, povidone iodine, including the
production or manufacture of raw materials, semi-finished/intermediate
goods, and machinery and equipment for use in the production or
manufacture of the aforementioned products.

This include repurposing of manufacturing activities to produce the
abovementioned products.

b. Essential Services

This covers the provision of services such as but not limited to
crematoriums, health waste treatment and disposal, laboratories, test
facilities, hospitals, and quarantine facilities.

The above notwithstanding, subject to the determination by the Board, this
also covers such other products and services relating to the fight against
COVID-19 or to mitigate its impact such as but not limited to those included
in the programs by the National Government or by any of its agencies or
departments, or by local government units.

2. Investments in activities, subject to the determination by the Board, supportive
of Programs to generate employment opportunities outside of congested urban
areas such as but not limited to the proposed Balik Probinsya Program or any
similar Program that may be implemented by Government.

Pursuant to Article 41 of EO 226, the Board may provide up to 6 years of
Income Tax Holiday to qualified activities under listing 1 and 2 upon
determination that it is highly essential to the attainment of the national goal
under RA 11469 to mitigate or avoid serious threat to the lives, health, safety
and security of the Filipinos and address the long-term adverse effects on
their livelihood and the severe disruption of economic activities in the
country.

The 2020 Investment Priorities Plan

3. All Qualified Manufacturing Activities including Agro-Processing!
This covers the manufacture of industrial goods and processing of
agricultural and fishery products, including Halal and Kosher food, into (a)
semi-finished/intermediate goods for use as inputs in the production of other
goods, or (b) finished products or consumer goods for final consumption.

This also covers the manufacture of modular housing components and
machinery and equipment including parts and components.

For Metro Manila, only modernization projects may qualify for registration.
4. Agriculture, Fishery and Forestry

This covers commercial production of agricultural, fishery and forestry
products.

This also covers nurseries, hatcheries, postharvest facilities, and other
support services and infrastructures.

For Metro Manila, only agricultural infrastructure and support services and
urban agriculture projects may qualify for registration as new, expansion, or
modernization.

5. Strategic Services!
a. IC Design

This covers all logic and circuit design techniques required to design
integrated circuits (ICs).

b. Creative Industries/Knowledge-Based Services
This covers IT-BPM services for the domestic market (e.g., contact
centers, data analytics), and those that involve original content such as

animation, software development, game development, healthcare
information management systems, and engincering design.

This also covers digital or technological start-ups/activities.
c. Maintenance, Repair, and Overhaul (MRO) of aircraft

This covers the MRO of all types of aircraft.

‘Subject to the criteria on the qualification for registration of projects to be defined and clarified by the
Board in the implementing guidelines.

The 2020 Investment Priorities Plan

d. Charging/Refueling Stations for Alternative Energy Vehicles

This covers the establishment of charging/refueling stations for alternative
energy vehicles except LPG-run vehicles.

e. Industrial Waste Treatment

This covers the establishment of treatment facilities for toxic and
hazardous wastes (THW) from an industrial operation.

f. Telecommunications

This covers the establishment of connectivity facilities for fixed and
mobile broadband services.

Only new players may qualify for registration.
g. State-of-the-art Engineering, Procurement, and Construction

This covers engineering design, procurement, and construction for
industrial plants and infrastructure.

6. Healthcare and Disaster Risk Reduction Management Services?
This covers the establishment and operation of general and specialty
hospitals, and other medical/healthcare facilities including drug
rehabilitation, quarantine and evacuation centers.

7. Mass Housing

This covers the development of mass housing units based on a price ceiling
of Php2.0 Million.

This also covers in-city low-cost dwelling projects for lease/rent.

For Metro Manila, only in-city low-cost dwelling for lease/rent may qualify
for registration.

8. Infrastructure and Logistics including LGU-PPPs

This covers the establishment and operation of physical infrastructures vital
to the country’s economic development and prosperity such as, but not
limited to: airports, seaports, (air, land and water) transport, LNG storage and
regasification facilities, pipeline projects for oil and gas, bulk water treatment

 

Subject to positive list of location as endorsed by the DOH.

10.

11.

The 2020 Investment Priorities Plan

and supply, training facilities, testing laboratories, and domestic industrial
zones.

This also covers PPP projects including those initiated and/or implemented
by Local Government Units (LGUs).

. Innovation Drivers

This covers research and development (R&D) activities, conduct of clinical
trials (including drug trials), establishment of Centers of Excellence,
innovation centers, business incubation hubs, smart cities and fabrication
laboratories (fablabs)/co-working spaces, and development of mobility
solutions and digital trade.

This also covers commercialization of new and emerging technologies,
uncommercialized patents on products and services, and products of locally-
undertaken R&D, such as, but not limited to:

* Agricultural biotechnology tools

* Disaster mitigation/prevention hardware or software

* Hardware or software for increasing agricultural productivity

* Mechanized means for natural resources conservation

* Portable technologies — innovation on existing bulky or heavy device
to make it portable, or a new device or service that can be brought
virtually anywhere

* Hardware or software for the prevention of disease outbreaks

* Remote monitoring devices or systems

* Professional services for remote sensing

* Hardware or software for the upgrading of local industries

* Photonics and Nanotechnology

* Natural health products

This includes startup and startup enablers under Republic Act 11337 or the
Innovative Startup Act.

Inclusive Business (IB) Models
This covers business activities of medium and large enterprises (MLEs) in
the agribusiness and tourism sectors that provide business opportunities to

micro and small enterprises (MSEs) as part of their value chains.

IB proj ects may qualify for Pioneer status.

Environment or Climate Change-Related Projects

This covers manufacture/assembly of goods and the establishment of energy
efficiency-related facilities, except those covered under Republic Act (RA)

4

The 2020 Investment Priorities Plan

No. 11285 or Energy Efficiency and Conservation Act, where either
utilization of which would significantly lead to either the efficient use of
energy, natural resources or raw materials, minimize/prevent pollution, or
reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

This also covers green ship recycling based on international standards, and
the establishment of privately-owned materials recovery facility.

12. Energy

This covers power generation projects utilizing conventional fuels (i.e., coal,
diesel, bunker, and natural gas), waste heat and other wastes, and the
establishment of battery energy storage systems.

B. Export Activities

1. Production and manufacture of export products
2. Services Exports?
3. Activities in support of exporters

C. Special Laws

This covers activities where inclusion in the IPP is mandated for purposes of
incentives, as follows:

. Industrial Tree Plantation (P.D. 705);

- Mining (R.A. 7942) (limited to capital equipment incentive);

. Publication or Printing of Books/Textbooks (R.A. 8047);

. Refining, Storage, Marketing and Distribution of Petroleum Products (R.A.
8479);

5. Rehabilitation, SelfDevelopment and Self-Reliance of Persons with
Disability (R.A. 7277);

. Renewable Energy (R.A. 9513);

. Tourism (R.A. 9593); and

. Energy Efficiency and Conservation (R.A. 11285).

AhwWN Re

oom ON

 

3Contact centers and non-voice business processing activities that will be located in Metro Manila may
no longer qualify for incentives availment with the Board of Investments under Executive Order No. 226,
otherwise known as the Omnibus Investments Code of 1987, as amended, starting year 2023, unless an
earlier period is provided pursuant to the transition provisions under the 2" tax reform package on the
rationalization of incentives, which Congress may subsequently enact.

The 2020 Investment Priorities Plan

BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO
(BARMM) LIST

The 2020-2022BARMM Proposed Lists contain the following priority investment
areas:

A, EXPORT ACTIVITIES

1. Export Trader and Service Exporters
2. Support Activities for Exporters

B, AGRICULTURE, AGRIBUSINESS, AQUACULTURE and FISHERY
1. Agriculture and Agribusiness

This covers all types of agricultural production, farming, plantation, processing
or manufacturing, as long as, the land of the agricultural production, plantation,
processing or manufacturing is based in BARMM region. It includes value-
chain, value-adding, logistical and supply chain agribusiness activities based in
or involving BARMM agricultural products or the farmers of the region, such
as silo-storage and drying facilities.

2. Aquaculture and Fishery

This covers the aquamarine industry, inland water resources, seaweeds, fishing;
fishpond including other marine, inland and brackish water farming, such as
abalone farms, shrimp farming or crab fattening; the establishment of hatcheries
or breeding of fingerlings and processing of such marine and inland water
resources.

C. BASIC INDUSTRIES

This covers the production of pharmaceuticals such as antibiotics; traditional or
herbal medicines and related activities such as bio-prospecting; textile or
garments; water supply and treatment; ice plant of refrigeration; traditional craft

like boat building; production of organic and inorganic fertilizers; all types of
heavy breaking, ship repair and servicing; dredging for industrial purposes and
landfill; cement production and concrete aggregates.

D, INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES

This covers strategic infrastructure projects such as railways, bridges, toll ways,
flood control and support industries like sand and gravel, batching plant and pre-
mixing of cements; air, land and water transportation; telecommunications to
include the construction and creation of international gateway facilities both
satellite-linked or linked by terrestrial and submarine cables for internet
connectivity, so long as these are based in BARMM and are holding BARMM

The 2020 Investment Priorities Plan

franchise, or servicing BARMM areas including to and from BARMM in order
to increase inter-connectivity and support regional integration.

£, INDUSTRIAL SERVICE FACILITIES

This covers industrial centers or industrial estates to include testing and quality
control laboratories; manpower training and demonstration centers; vocational
and technical skills services and facilities; call centers and Information
Technology related enterprises such as business process outsourcing; tool and
dye shops and similar facilities; metal casting and metal working; furniture and
fixtures; ceramics and tile-making; petrochemical complex and industrial gases.

F, ENGINEERING INDUSTRIES

This covers engineering products, electronics and telecommunication products;
and fabrication of construction materials including pre-fabricated construction
materials using new technologies (e.g. 3D printing) or indigenously sourced
materials.

G, LOGISTICS

This covers the logistics, supply chain and logistics network industry; shipping,
hauling and trucking; cargo shippers and forwarders; bulk carrier; warehousing
and depots; storage; and other logistics facilities principally based in BARMM
including transshipment hubs and services using BARMM ports, airports or
located near its special economic zones. This also contemplates the ports
industry and allied industry in the BARMM and ancillary services, such as
arrastre and stevedoring because the BARMM needs to attract more port
industry players.

H, BIMP —- EAGA RELATED INVESTMENT ENTERPRISES

This covers enterprises using the BIMP-EAGA framework on trade and
investments and who are located or have their base of operations in the BIMP-
EAGA namely, Brunei; Sabah and Sarawak in Malaysia; Maluku, Sulawesi,
Kalimantan and Irian Jaya in Indonesia; and Mindanao and Palawan in the
Philippines, who shall invest and engage in economic activity in the BARMM
including traditional cross-border trade and the age-old barter trading to
encourage the formalization of peripheral shadow economies.

L. TOURISM

This covers the establishment of tourism-related facilities and attractions;
tourism-related services; hotel and restaurants catering to BARMM tourists;
Halal-based tourism; tourist accommodation facilities; tourist transport facilities
and development of retirement villages, which shall include health or medical
facilities and other amenities.

The 2020 Investment Priorities Plan

J. HEALTH AND EDUCATION SERVICES AND FACILITIES

The BARMM has some of the lowest indicators in the country regarding health
and education as reflected in the Human Development Index. For this purpose,
there is a need for incentives to be given to investors in the health and
educational sectors such as putting-up of private hospitals, medical clinics,
wellness centers, primary education, secondary education, tertiary education
(colleges, universities and vocational-technical schools) and ancillary or support
services such as teacher training center.

K. HALAL INDUSTRY

The 2020-2022 Bangsamoro Regional Development Plan (BRDP) envisioned
industry development in Bangsamoro will imbed in its process and system the
halal criteria. Halal principles will be integrated starting at the production level
to value-adding process. BARMM being the only Muslim region in the country
has a comparative advantage in the Halal industry since majority of Halal
consumers are in the region. Any Halal related business enterprise that obtain
the necessary Halal certification or is operating under the Islamic (Shariah) law
principles shall be covered. Halal refers to the permissible products and services
under Islamic Law.

L. INVESTMENT OPERATIONS UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11439 (An Act
Providing for the Regulation and Organization of Islamic Banks)

Investment operations carried out by Islamic Bank through Shari’ah-compliant
arrangements, contracts and structures [e.g., mudarabah partnership,
construction and manufacture (istisna’a) arrangements] in the priority areas
listed under the BARMM IPP, pursuant to Republic Act No. 11439.

M. ENERGY

More energy investments are needed in the BARMM considering that the
country household electrification rate in the BARMM is the most dismal in the
country with only 34% as compared with the national rate of 74%. This covers
energy investments in upstream and downstream industries such as power
generation, transmission and distribution. Off-grid and Small Power Utility
Groups (SPUG) areas shall be prioritized for investments and giving of
incentives considering that these are stranded markets for electricity. It covers
not only energy but also ancillary services and in the context of BARMM, this
means the construction of sub-stations and transmission and distribution towers
considering that there are also frequent power outages due to disruption of such
facilities from man-made and natural disaster causes.

---000---NOTHING FOLLOWS---00o---