Office of the President
of the Philippines

Plalacatiang
MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 62

DIRECTING THE ABOLITION OF THE FIRST CAVITE INDUSTRIAL
ESTATE, INC. AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the First Cavite Industrial Estate, Inc. (FCIEI) was registered
with the Securities Exchange Commission on 14 December 1990, and started as a
joint venture project of the National Development Company (NDC) and its partners to
acquire, own, lease, hold, subdivide, construct, develop, equip, operate, maintain
and generally deal in industrial estates;

WHEREAS, the FCIEI was primarily formed to develop the NDC’s property in
Dasmarifias, Cavite into an industrial estate and economic zone, and have sold all
saleable lots within such estate to locators in 1995;

WHEREAS, in 1999, the other joint venture partners sold their shares in
FCIEI to NDC, making the latter the parent company of the FCIEI;

WHEREAS, after completion of the development of the NDC’s property, which
served as the FCIEI’s sole industrial estate project, the Board of Directors of the
NDC deferred the dissolution of the FCIEI considering that it may be used to develop
another property of the NDC;

WHEREAS, given that the intention for the FCIEI to undertake another
development project did not materialize, the abolition of the company was
recommended, and was approved in principle in 2015, with the condition that the
FCIEI's liabilities, particularly to the Philippine Economic Zone Authority (PEZA), are
settled;

WHEREAS, through a Memorandum of Agreement dated 07 March 2016, the
FCIEI and PEZA agreed on the partial settlement of the former’s liabilities to the
latter;

WHEREAS, the respective Board of Directors of the NDC and the FCIEI
approved the proposed dissolution of the company, and the Governance
Commission for Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporations (GCG) En Banc,
pursuant to Republic Act (RA) No. 10149 or the “GOCC Governance Act of 2011,”
ordered the deactivation of the FCIEI on 21 December 2021, through Memorandum
Order No. 2021-14 (s. 2021); and

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 5(a) of RA No. 10149, the GCG has
recommended the abolition of the FCIEI after determining that: (i) its original purpose
is no longer relevant to the State; (ii) it is no longer achieving the objectives and
purposes for which it was originally designed and implemented; (iii) it is not cost
efficient; (iv) it is dormant and non-operational; and (iv) it is involved in an activity
best carried out by the private sector;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:
SECTION 1. Abolition of FCIEI. The FCIEI is hereby abolished.

SECTION 2. Liquidation of Assets and Settlement of Liabilities. The
assets of the FCIEI shall be liquidated to settle the outstanding liabilities of the
corporation, in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations. The
remaining assets and/or liabilities of the FCIEI shall be assumed by its parent
company, the NDC.

SECTION 3. Creation of a Technical Working Group. To implement the
provisions of this Order, a Technical Working Group (TWG) is hereby created to be
composed of representatives from the following:

a. GCG;
b. NDC; and
c. PEZA.

SECTION 4. Powers and Functions of the TWG. The TWG shall have the
following powers, duties, and functions:

a. Settle the liabilities of the FCIEI, undertake steps necessary in the
liquidation of its assets, and assist in the winding-up of its corporate affairs;

b. Oversee the transfer of the remaining government functions of the FCIEI
to concerned agencies;

c. Submit to the Office of the President a quarterly report on the disposition of
the assets of the FCIEI, and the implementation of its abolition; and

d. Perform such other functions as may be necessary to implement this
Order.

The TWG shall submit an initial status report within thirty (30) days from the
effectivity of this Order.

SECTION 5. Repeal. All other orders, issuances, rules and regulations, or
parts thereof, which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 6. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd dayof June , in the year of Our
Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Two.

By authority of the President:

‘
oy
_ SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA,

Executive Secretary

lm: Ppribentne
Sayer —