@ffice of the Wrestdent
of the {bhilippines
falacaiang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 26

DIRECTING THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND THE
DEPARTMENT OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY TO ADOPT MEASURES
TO REDUCE THE GAP BETWEEN FARMGATE PRICES AND
RETAIL PRICES OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 7581, or the “Price Act,” declares
the policy of the State to (i) ensure the availability of basic necessities and prime
commodities at reasonable prices at all times without denying legitimate business a fair
return on investment; (ii) provide effective and sufficient protection to consumers against
hoarding, profiteering and cartels with respect to the supply, distribution, marketing and
pricing of said goods, especially during periods of calamity, emergency, widespread
illegal price manipulation and other similar situations; (iii) develop, adopt and promulgate
measures to stabilize prices at reasonable levels; and (iv) establish a mechanism that will
readily protect consumers from inadequate supply and unreasonable price increase on
occasions of calamities, emergencies and like occurrences;

WHEREAS, under Executive Order (EO) No. 292, or the “Administrative Code of
1987,” the Department of Agriculture (DA) is mandated to improve farm income and
generate work opportunities for farmers, fisherfolk, and other rural workers, and to provide
integrated services to farmers, fishermen, and other food producers on production,
utilization, conservation and disposition of agricultural and fishery resources;

WHEREAS, under EO No. 292, the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) is
mandated to formulate and implement policies, plans and programs relative to the
development, expansion, promotion and regulation of trade, industry and investments,
and to protect consumers from trade malpractices and from substandard or hazardous

products;

WHEREAS, certain administrative constraints and fees unduly add to the costs of
importation of basic agricultural commodities, and contribute to price increases; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to promulgate measures to stabilize the prices of basic
agricultural commodities at reasonable levels, to maintain their sufficient supply in the
domestic market and to provide effective and sufficient protection to consumers against
hoarding, profiteering and cartels with respect to the supply, distribution, marketing and
pricing of said goods;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA, Executive Secretary, by
virtue of the powers vested in me by law, hereby direct the DA and the DTI to adopt
measures to reduce the gap between farmgate prices and retail prices of agricultural
products, including the setting up of public outlets and cold storages where producers of
agricultural commodities, as well as poultry producers, can sell directly to consumers.

The DA and the DTI shall submit to the Office of the Executive Secretary, within
one (1) month from effectivity of this Order, and every month thereafter, a progress report
on the status of implementation of this Order.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 21st day of September, in the year of Our Lord,
Two Thousand and Eighteen.

By authority of the President

Ami

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary /

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTJEVED COPY

   
   

ATTY. COMCEPCE N €. FERKOLINO-CWAD
Am mee Pl