MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 48

INCREASING THE ALLOWABLE AMOUNT OF ADVANCE
PAYMENT FOR PROCUREMENT ACTIVITIES UNDER REPUBLIC
ACT NO. 11469 OR THE “BAYANIHAN TO HEAL AS ONE ACT”

WHEREAS, Section 88(1) of Presidential Decree No. 1445 or the
“Government Auditing Code of the Philippines,” provides that except with the prior
approval of the President, the government shall not be obliged to make an advance
payment for services not yet rendered or for supplies and materials not yet delivered
under any contract therefor;

WHEREAS, Paragraph 4.3 in relation to Paragraph 4.1, Annex D of the 2016
Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (RIRR) of Republic Act (RA) No. 9184
or the “Government Procurement Reform Act,” provides that a single advance
payment not to exceed 50% of the contract amount shall be allowed for contracts
entered into by a procuring entity for hotel and restaurant services, use of
conference, seminar and exhibit areas, and lease of office spaces, where the
requirement of down payment is a standard industry practice, without need of prior
approval by the President;

WHEREAS, Paragraph 4.4 in relation to Paragraph 4.1, Annex D of the 2016
RIRR of RA No. 9184 provides that advance payment not to exceed 15% of the
contract amount, unless otherwise directed by the President, shall be allowed for
procurement of goods required to address contingencies arising from natural or man-
made calamities in areas where a State of Calamity has been declared by
appropriate authorities, without need of prior approval by the President;

WHEREAS, in light of the increasing number of COVID-19 cases,
Proclamation No. 929 (s. 2020) declared a State of Calamity throughout the country
for a period of six (6) months, imposed an Enhanced Community Quarantine over
the entire Luzon, and enjoined government agencies and local government units to
render full assistance to and cooperation with each other, and mobilize the
necessary resources to undertake critical, urgent and appropriate disaster response
aid and measures;

WHEREAS, Section 4(k) of RA No. 11469 or the “Bayanihan to Heal as One
Act,” vested the President with the temporary emergency authority to undertake the
procurement of certain goods, services and lease of property, as the need arises, in
the most expeditious manner, as exemptions from the provisions of RA No. 9184
and other relevant laws; ,

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, based on a recent market study conducted by the Procurement
Service of the Department of Budget and Management, suppliers of medical supplies
and personal protective equipment (PPEs) prioritize buyers who are willing to make
advance payment of at least 30% of the contract amount;

WHEREAS, the Government Procurement Policy Board, through Resolution
No. 06-2020, issued a circular providing the Guidelines for Emergency Procurement
under RA No. 11469, while recommending to the President the allowable rates of
advance payment for the procurement of certain goods and services, and lease of
property under the same law;

WHEREAS, it is imperative to undertake timely and adequate measures to
complement our healthcare facilities, support our health workers in containing the
further spread of the COVID-19 virus, and provide for the basic needs of our
countrymen during this public health emergency; and

WHEREAS, the COVID-19 outbreak is unlike any other calamity or
emergency that confronted our country in recent years, as it has already dealt an
incomparable blow to the overall health and security of the population and the
economy, and continues to threaten more lives and livelihoods;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Procurement of Goods and Services. An advance payment not
to exceed thirty percent (30%) of the contract amount shall be allowed for the
procurement of the following, in accordance with Section 4(k) of RA No. 11469,
provided that an advance payment is necessary to ensure that the requirements of
the procuring entity are prioritized by suppliers or contractors:

a. Goods such as PPEs, including gloves, gowns, masks, goggles, face shields;
surgical equipment and supplies; laboratory equipment and its reagents;
medical equipment and devices; support and maintenance for laboratory and
medical equipment, surgical equipment and supplies; medical supplies, tools,
and consumables such as alcohol, sanitizers, tissue, thermometers, hand
soap, detergent, sodium hydrochloride, cleaning materials, povidone iodine,
common medicines (e.g., paracetamol tablet and suspension, mefenamic
acid, vitamin tablets and suspension, hyoscine tablets and suspension, oral
rehydration solution, and cetirizine tablets and suspension); testing kits, and
such other supplies or equipment as may be determined by the Department of
Health and other relevant government agencies;

b. Goods and services for social amelioration measures in favor of affected
communities;

c. Establishment, construction and operation of temporary medical facilities;
d. Utilities, telecommunications and other critical services in relation to operation

of quarantine centers, medical relief and aid distribution centers and
temporary medical facilities; and

e. Ancillary services related to the foregoing.

Section 2. Lease of Real Property. A single advance payment, not to
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the contract amount, shall be allowed for the lease of
real properties under Section 4(k)(3) of RA No. 11469, to house health workers or
serve aS quarantine centers, medical relief and aid distribution locations, or
temporary medical facilities, provided that the requirement of a down payment is a
standard industry practice.

Section 3. Release of Advance Payment. All procuring entities are hereby
directed to release the advance payment to the supplier, contractor or lessor within
three (3) working days from the award of contract, in all cases covered by this Order.

Section 4. Separability. If any section or provision of this Order is held
invalid or unconstitutional, the other portions not otherwise affected shall remain in
full force and effect.

Section 5. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila this 20thday ofApri1 in the Year of Our Lord,
Two Thousand and Twenty.

 

By the President:

a
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 014452

  

  
 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

 

  

Pri-2a- tay DIRECTOR IV

 

ATTY. OORCEPCION ZEHY'E. FERROLINO-ERAD