Office of the President
of the Philippines
Malacatiang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 52

CREATING A TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP FOR THE COLONEL
ERNESTO RAVINA AIR BASE

To consolidate, study and comprehensively address all issues and concerns
pertaining to the utilization and administration of, as well as the policies and mutual
covenants among the stakeholders relative to, the Colonel Ernesto Ravina Air Base
(CERAB), and to ensure interagency coordination, a Technical Working Group (TWG)
is hereby created, composed of representatives from the following agencies:

Chair: Department of National Defense
Members: Department of the Interior and Local Government;
Department of Environment and Natural Resources;
National Housing Authority;
National Commission on Indigenous Peoples;
Philippine Air Force (PAF);
Municipal Government of Capas, Tarlac; and
The three (3) affected Barangays — Bueno, Marugulu and Santa
Juliana

The TWG shall have the following powers and functions, consistent with the
respective mandates of its member-agencies:

a. Discuss the issues and identify the applicable regulations relative to the repair,
rehabilitation and construction of houses, public school, evacuation center,
tourism building, materials recovery facility, and other public works;

b. Review existing and future agreements governing the rights and obligations of
the various stakeholders, as well as those involving any ongoing or proposed
construction or development within the CERAB, to ascertain their impact and
resolve any conflict that may arise between the civilian community and military
reservation;

c. Protect the weifare of the civilian community within the CERAB, including the
indigenous peoples residing in the area, and ensure peaceful co-existence and
harmonious relations between them and the military personnel;

d. Investigate allegations of abuse committed by the military, determine if any
violation of the law or rules has occurred, render full support and assistance to
any aggrieved individual, and, as may be necessary, recommend to the
appropriate agency the suitable course of action against the erring personnel;

e. Thresh out details and oversee the implementation of the payment of
disturbance compensation to the eligible farmers, who were constrained to
abandon their agricultural lands and crops to give way to the development of
the area by the PAF;

f. To regularly submit reports and recommendations to the Office of the President,
_through the Office of the Special Assistant to the President; and

g. Perform such other functions as the President or the Executive Secretary may
direct.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

a. a
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
~ Executive Secretary

Manila, 10 March 2021