@ffice of the President
of the 3bhilippines
Malacahang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 41

CREATING A TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP FOR THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF A MILITARY CAMP IN KAPANTARAN,
MARAWI CITY

To reinforce current efforts of the government to secure Marawi City and its

neighboring areas, the President has directed relevant government agencies to study
the establishment of a military camp therein. For this purpose, a Technical Working
Group (TWG) is hereby created, with representatives from the following agencies and
offices as members:

OY Gi 169

Department of National Defense;

Office of the Executive Secretary;

Department of Environment and Natural Resources;

Land Registration Authority;

Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development; and
Department of the Interior and Local Government.

The TWG shall have the following powers and functions, consistent with the

respective mandates of its member-agencies:

1.

To conduct a census for the identification of those who will be affected by the
establishment of the military camp in Kapantaran, Marawi City;

To consider the institution of three detachments composed of three battalions
dispersed at the boundaries between Marawi City and its contiguous
municipalities;

To conduct a resurvey of the area to reestablish the metes and bounds of the
proposed military camp;

To ascertain the status of ownership and possession of the lands proposed to
be included in the military camp in Brgy. Kapantaran;

To expedite the titling and registration of the affected parcels of land, without
prejudice to private rights, upon final determination that they will form part of
the military camp;

To assist in the resettlement of the individuals and families which may be
displaced from their residences and communities as a result of the acquisition
of lands for the military camp;

7. To provide administrative and technical support to all affected local government
units regarding matters arising from the establishment of the military camp;

8. To enlist the support of other government agencies and instrumentalities in the
performance of its functions under this Order; and

9. To submit periodic reports to the Office of the President relative to the
establishment of the military camp in Brgy. Kapantaran.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By Authority of the President:

i tH 4
SALVADOR C. MESIALDER

Executive Secretary

Manila, 15 November 2019