Office of the President
of the 3pbilippines

Malacaiiang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 57

DIRECTING THE SUBMISSION OF A CITIZEN’S CHARTER AND
COMPLIANCE WITH THE AUTOMATION OF BUSINESS
PERMITTING AND LICENSING SYSTEM

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 6 of Republic Act (RA) No. 9485 or the “Anti-
Red Tape Act of 2007,” as amended by RA No. 11032 or the “Ease of Doing Business
and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act of 2018,” all government agencies,
including departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities, government-owned or -
controlled corporations (GOCCs), government financial institutions (GFls), state
universities and colleges (SUCs), and local government units (LGUs) shall set up their
respective most current and updated service standards to be known as the Citizen’s
Charter;

WHEREAS, under Section 11(c) of RA No. 9485, as amended, all cities and
municipalities are mandated to automate their business permitting and licensing
system or set up an electronic Business One Stop Shop (BOSS) for a more efficient
business registration process within a period of three (3) years upon the effectivity of
the law or until 17 June 2021;

WHEREAS, Section 11(c) of RA No. 9485, as amended, also directs the
Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT) to make available
to all LGUs the software for the computerization of the business permit and licensing
system, and, in coordination with the Department of Trade and Industry and the
Department of the Interior and Local Government (DTI), to provide technical
assistance in the planning and implementation of a computerized or software-enabled
business permitting and licensing system;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order (AO) No. 23 (s. 2020) directs all covered
entities to eliminate overregulation by retaining only such steps, procedures and
requirements in their respective Citizen's Charters which are necessary to fulfill their
legal mandates and policy objectives;

WHEREAS, the Anti-Red Tape Authority (ARTA) issued Memorandum Circular
No. 2021-03 dated 31 March 2021, as a final notice to enjoin compliance of all covered
entities which have not submitted their Citizen’s Charter and the corresponding
Certificate of Compliance to the ARTA;

WHEREAS, the ARTA also issued Memorandum Circular No. 2021-05 dated
15 June 2021, which provides for the mechanism by which cities and municipalities
are to report their compliance with the permitting and licensing system automation
requirement under Section 11(c) of RA No. 9485, as amended; and

WHEREAS, the ARTA has reported that there are still a substantial number of
covered entities which have yet to submit their Citizen’s Charter and comply with the
permitting and licensing system automation requirement, in violation of the law, and
despite repeated notices issued by the ARTA;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

Section 1. Coverage. Executive departments, agencies and instrumentalities
of the national government, whether local or abroad, including GOCCs, GFIs, SUCs,
and LGUs covered under Section 3 of RA No. 9485, as amended (“covered entities”).

Section 2. Submission of Citizen’s Charter. All covered entities which have
not submitted their respective Citizen’s Charters since the enactment of RA No. 11032
are directed to submit the same with the corresponding Certificate of Compliance to
the ARTA within fifteen (15) working days from the effectivity of this Order. The
Citizen’s Charter should also be compliant with AO No. 23.

The DILG is hereby directed to assist the ARTA in strictly enforcing this
directive.

Section 3. Automation of Business Permitting and Licensing System. To
ensure compliance with Section 11(c) of RA No. 9485, as amended, the ARTA, in
coordination with the DTI, DICT and the DILG, shall assist local governments that have
yet to set-up their respective BOSS or automate their permitting and licensing system.
The Leagues of LGUs, pursuant to their mandate under RA No. 7160 or the “Local
Government Code of 1991,” to assist the National Government in implementing
policies, programs and projects affecting local governments, shall enjoin concerned
local governments to comply with this requirement.

All concerned local chief executives shall, until the completion of their system
automation, submit a progress report to the ARTA and the DILG regarding their
compliance with Section 11(c) of RA No. 9485, as amended. The ARTA shall submit
a report to the Office of the President on the compliance of the concerned LGUs.

Section 4. Sanctions. Non-compliance with the provisions of this Order by
national or LGU officials and personnel shall be proceeded against in accordance with
civil service laws, rules and regulations, and relevant provisions of RA No. 7160, as
amended. The ARTA and the DILG shall jointly report to the Office of the President all
such actions taken pursuant to this provision.

Section 5. Effectivity. This Order shall be effective immediately upon
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

manila, 22 November 2021.
By authority of the President:
J-_2 "ZN

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretarf{’

   

 

 

Office of the Present
MALACARIANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

2

————s

‘yosho Oe

J arly. OoRCECION INT