Office of the President of the Philippines

Executive Order No. 22

FIXING THE SALARIES OF THE OFFICERS AND ENLISTED MEN OF THE PHILIPPINE ARMY

Pursuant to the provisions of section 90 of the National Defense Act and of the Emergency Powers Law, I, SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Philippines, do hereby prescribe the following schedule of salary rates and quarters allowances for officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Army, effective on dates as indicated herein, and extending for the duration of the war and for six months thereafter unless sooner terminated by competent authority:

OFFICERS

ENLISTED MEN

The rates of pay and allowances prescribed herein shall become effective for officers and enlisted men of any unit upon the date on which the unit is returned to or constituted under organized military control, and for any individual officer or enlisted man upon the date on which he reports to a unit under organized military control after having been called or recalled  to active duty or after having been enlisted for such a unit. A unit shall be considered as being returned to our constituted under organized military control  on the date announcement thereof is made by the Commander-in-Chief, Southwest Pacific Area.

No increase of pay or allowances shall accrue because of foreign service.

During the period that the rates of pay herein prescribed are effective, there shall not be paid to any person an increase of pay or allowances by reason of length of service.

During the period that the rates of pay herein prescribed are effective, there shall not be paid to any person an increase of pay for duty requiring regular and frequent aerial flights.

Any provisions of existing Executive Orders in conflict herewith are hereby superseded.

Done at the seat of Government in the Field , this 28th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Forty-Four, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the Ninth.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ARTURO B. ROTOR Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1944). [Executive Order Nos. : 1W – 109]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.