MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 97

ORGANIZING CERTAIN BARRIOS AND SITIOS OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF SANTIAGO, PROVINCE OF ISABELA, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF SAN MATEO

Upon the recommendation Of the Provincial Board of Isabela, the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Finance, and pursuant to the provisions Of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the sixteen municipalities of the Province of Isabela, as established under section 38 of the Revised Administrative Code, are hereby increased to seventeen, by segregating from the municipality of Santiago, the barrios of Marasat Grande, Marasat Pequeño, Oscariz, Salinungan, and Sinamar, and the sitios of San Miguel, Nambacalan, Puroc ni Bulan, Bantug Petinez, Bantug Silverio, Cabicalan, Tao-tao, Macanuang, Bulusucan, Cadanglaan, Tandul, Gadanan, Baluno, San Mateo, Villa Fuerte, Villa Magat, Curag Sur, Daramuangan Norte, and Daramuangan Sur, and organizing the same into an independent municipality under the name of San Mateo, with the seat of government in the barrio of Marasat Grande.

The municipality of San Mateo as herein organized shall consist of the territory comprised in the barrios of Marasat Grande, Marasat Pequeño, Oscariz, Salinungan, and Sinamar, and the sitios of San Miguel, Nambacalan, Puroc ni Bulan, Bantug Petinez, Bantug Silverio, Cabicalan, Tao-tao-, Macanuang, Bulusucan, Cadanglaan, Tandul, Gadanan, Baluno, San Mateo, Villa Fuerte, Villa Magat, Curag Sur, Daramuangan Norte, and Daramuangan Sur, and shall have the following boundaries:

“A straight line from M. B. M. No. 1 passing, thru Kilometer Post No. 350 on the National Road as of 1945, to the boundary line between Isabela and Mountain Province as laid in Santiago Cadastral Survey No. 211, Case No. 11, thence it shall follow this line and prolonged until it meets the Tao-tao River, then it follows the course of Tao-tao River to the Magat River, follow the course of the Magat River until it shall intersect the north east boundary which is a straight line drawn from Point “A” (which is 3 kilometers on the prolongation of M.B.M. No. 29 and M.B.M. No. 28), thru Kilometer Post 370 on the National Road to the Magat River. The south-east Boundary shall be as laid in Santiago Cadastral Survey No. 211, Cases Nos. 6 and 10.”

The municipality of Santiago shall consist of its present territory minus the territory comprised in the municipality of San Mateo.

The organization herein made shall take effect on March 17, 1946 , subject to the condition that the municipality of San Mateo shall assume its proportionate share of the indebtedness of the municipality of Santiago to the loan fund under the administration of the Agricultural and Industrial Bank as may be outstanding on the aforesaid date.

Done at the City of Manila, this 7th day of March in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Executive Order Nos. : 1W – 109]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.