OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES WASHINGTON, D. C.

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 20-W

PRESCRIBING INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE CONDUCT OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS OF THE COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT IN THE UNITED STATES DURING THE ABSENCE OF THE PRESIDENT.

WHEREAS the exigencies of the present emergency require the presence of the President of the Philippines outside the continental United States, the temporary seat of the Commonwealth Government; and

WHEREAS it is necessary that during his absence and until the seat of the Commonwealth government is re-established in the Philippines and normal constitutional processes of government are fully restored, the functions of said Commonwealth Government in the United States should  continue to be performed with regularity and dispatch;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Sergio Osmeña, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and pursuant to the provisions of the Emergency Powers Law, do hereby prescribe and promulgate the following instructions for the conduct of public affairs of the Commonwealth Government in the United States during my absence from this country, any provisions of existing law to the contrary notwithstanding:

1. The Secretary of Finance shall be the representative of the President of the Philippines, and, as such, he shall be charged with the conduct of public affairs of the Commonwealth Government in the United States, with full authority to act on all matters which pertain to, or affect said Government. This authority shall include not only the general administrative supervision, direction and control of the departments and offices of said Government in the United States, but also the specific authority to appoint and remove any employee of the Commonwealth Government in the United States; to reduce, increase, redistribute or discontinue the activities of any department, office, or employee of said Government; and, where necessary for the proper discharge of authorized functions and activities, to employ technical, expert and other personnel by contract or otherwise and to fix their compensations.

2. The Secretary of Finance as representative of the President if the Philippines is hereby vested with full authority to confer with the proper officials of the federal, state and local governments, their various departments, offices, agencies and instrumentalities, on matters affecting the Commonwealth Government, and to decide and act upon such matters for and in behalf of the Commonwealth Government. On important matters where a change of established policy is deemed necessary or, where in his opinion, it is advisable to do so, the Secretary of Finance shall consult the President of the Philippines, through appropriate communication facilities, before taking action.

3. The Secretary of Finance is also hereby authorized to represent the Commonwealth of the Philippines in international organizations and conferences to which the Commonwealth may be invited, and to designate such delegates or members as may be necessary. He shall make a report to the President of the Philippines of the results of such conferences.

4. All papers which, in the usual course of business, are ordinarily signed by the President shall be signed by the Secretary of Finance, “By authority of the President.”

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, United States of America, this twenty-seventh day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-four and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1944). [Executive Order Nos. : 1W – 109]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.