MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 50

AMENDING SECTION 2466 OF THE REVISED ADMINISTRATIVE CODE BY CREATING TWO ADDITIONAL BRANCHES FOR THE MUNICIPAL COURT OF THE CITY OF MANILA

WHEREAS, by virtue of Executive Order No. 400 issued on January 1, 1942, the City of Greater Manila was created, comprising the City of Manila, Quezon City, and the municipalities of Caloocan. San Juan, Mandaluyong, Makati, Pasay, and Parañaque, thereby enlarging the territorial jurisdiction of the Municipal Court of Manila;

WHEREAS the number of cases cognizable by the Municipal Court of Manila has so increased that it becomes necessary to create additional branches of said court in order to cope with the volume of work;

NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, particularly Commonwealth Act No. 671, I , SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

1. That section 2466 of the Revised Administrative Code be amended so as to read as follows:

“SEC. 2466. Regular and acting judges of municipal courts . —There shall be a municipal court for the City of Manila, for which six judges shall be appointed, to be known, respectively, as judge of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth branch. Whenever the public interest so requires, the Secretary of Justice may designate any of the judges to hold session at night.

“The municipal court shall have the same jurisdiction in civil and criminal cases and the same incidental powers as at present conferred by law upon the municipal court and justice of the peace court of the City of Manila, and such additional jurisdiction and powers as may hereafter be conferred upon them by law. The cases pertaining to the municipal court shall be distributed in accordance with rules to be prescribed by the Secretary of Justice.

“In case of absence, sickness or incapacity of any of the judges of the municipal court and in case of any vacancy in said offices, the Secretary of Justice may designate any solicitor of the Bureau of Justice or provincial fiscal to act as judge of the municipal court of the City of Manila, with all the powers of a regular judge of said court; but such acting judge shall not receive any additional compensation during the time he is acting as judge.”

2. That all Acts or parts of Acts which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed.

Done at the City of Manila, this 7th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1945). [Executive Order Nos. : 1W – 109]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.