MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 91

FIXING NEW CEILING PRICES OF ALL COMMODITIES AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, it has become necessary to revise and issue a new schedule of ceiling prices during the present emergency in view of changed conditions in trade and commerce; and

WHEREAS , the public interest requires that a reasonable schedule of ceiling prices be established and fixed for all articles, commodities and services;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The following essential commodities shall not be sold at more than the maximum retail prices set opposite each:

FOODSTUFFS – IMPORTED

Canned Milk

Flour and Flour Products:

Coffee

Canned Fish or Meat

Salted Fish

Baking Powder

Sugar

Other Foods

CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS

Galvanized Sheets: Corrugated

Reinforced Steel Bars – 30 to 40 ft. (Plain Rounds, Round Corrugated, Square Corrugated and Square Deformed)

Common Wire Nails – 100-1b. keg

Galvanized Plain Wire – 100-1b. Rolls

Galvanized Pines

Roofing Nails – 100-lb. keg

PAPER AND PAPER PRODUCTS

Bond Paper:

Bond Paper: T.W.

Book Paper

White Newsprint

Wrapping: Kraft or Manila Paper

Toilet Paper

Graded Pads – 100 leaves to pad

Writing Intermediate Pads – 72 leaves to pad

Composition Note Books – 48 leaves to book

LIQUOR, IMPORTED

IMPORTED CIGARETTES

FOODSTUFFS – LOCAL

Cereals, Dried Beans and their products

Meat – fresh

a) Beef:

b) Pork:

Poultry and Eggs

a) Chicken

b) Eggs

Shortening, Spices, Sauces and others

F I S H

Fresh Fish

All other fresh fish

Dried, smoked or preserved fish

BUILDING MATERIALS

Nipa Shingles

Bamboo

Rattan, Split

FUEL AND ILLUMINATION

Charcoal

Firewood

CIGARS AND CIGARETTES

Cigars – each

Second Class

Third – Class

Cigarettes – per package

Local:

SEC. 2. For articles or commodities not specified above and whose prices have not been specifically determined, following maximum retailer’s mark-ups over landed cost a hereby prescribed and promulgated:

Retail sales as specified in this section shall be construed to mean sales made to ultimate consumers.

SEC. 3. The maximum ceiling prices for retailers of articles, commodities and merchandise, imported, into the Philippines under the provisions of the preceding section, shall be computed on the basis of the landed cost of any specific commodity plus a margin of profit not exceeding the mark-up prescribed in Section 2 hereof. The term “landed cost” shall consist of the CIF valued at Manila or any other port of landing, plus expenses for arrastre, brokerage, handling, discharge, banking and cable charges, insurance against theft and pilferage and delivery expenses

SEC. 4. The Philippine Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, through its agents in the Price Control Division, shall have the power to examine and investigate invoices, bocks, records, and accounts of any importer, wholesaler or retailer for the purpose of computing or determining the ceil­ing prices of any imported article, commodity or merchandises.

SEC. 5. For all places outside the City of Manila or outside the territorial jurisdiction of the port of landing, the ceiling prices of articles or commodities specified in Section 1 hereof, or all articles the maximum retailers’ price of which are to be computed in accordance with Section 3 hereof, shall be increased by a reasonable amount per unit representing actual transportation and handling expenses and, other necessary and unavoidable expenses incurred or to be incurred by the retailer in taking the goods to the place of resale.

No article or commodity which is raised, produced or manufactured in the Philippines shall be sold in the City of Manila at a price in excess of the maximum fixed for the same or similar imported article or commodity. In the center of production or manufacture are of locally made products or articles, or in various places or areas where products of the Philippines are raised, grown, produced or manufactured, the maximum selling price shall be ten per centum (10%) less than the maximum selling price fixed for the same or similar articles in the City of Manila. In areas or places where articles or commodities of the Philippines are not raised, grown or produced, the maximum selling price shall be the maximum selling price for the same or similar article or commodity in the City of Manila, plus ten per centum (10%) thereof, plus actual expenses for transportation, handling, and other expenses to the place where the said article is to be sold or consumed which, in no case, shall not exceed per centum (10%) of the maximum selling price thus fixed for the same or similar article in the City of Manila.

SEC. 6. There is hereby created a Price Fixing Committee to be composed of the Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce as Chairman, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Health and Public Welfare, and two representatives of the duly organize chambers of commerce in the City of Manila, as members. The Price Fixing Committee shall have the power to increase or decrease the price ceiling herein specified, or provide a higher or lower mark-up for wholesalers or retailers, depending upon changes in the cost of production, manufacture, transportation, and other factors affecting prices, provided that the retailer shall have a margin of profit of not less than 10% nor more than 15% over the operating expenses.

SEC. 7. Any person who shall refuse to sell any article, commodity or merchandise displayed in his store or place of business, where a maximum selling price is fixed, shall be punished, in accordance with the provisions of Section 3 of Commonwealth Act No. 600, as amended.

SEC. 8. All retailers or vendors of articles, commodities or merchandise, inside or outside of the public markets, are hereby required to post in a conspicuous place, at the entrance of their stores, or within said premises, a list of all the articles being sold by them with their respective retail selling prices. In addition, all such retailers or vendors are hereby ordered to place within plain view of the buying public price tags on all articles or commodities offered for sale or displayed on sale.

SEC. 9. All Executive Orders and all Emergency Control Administration Orders or any of the provisions thereof which are in conflict or inconsistent with this Order or any of its provisions are hereby repealed.

SEC. 10. This Executive Order shall take effect two days after the date of its promulgation.

Done at the City of Manila, this 5th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Executive Order Nos. : 1W – 109]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.