REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7165

AN ACT CREATING THE LITERACY COORDINATING COUNCIL, DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS, APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

SECTION 1. It is the policy of the State to give the highest priority to the adoption of measures for the total eradication of illiteracy. For this purpose, it shall encourage and rationalize the formulation of policies and the implementation of programs on non-formal, informal, and indigenous learning systems, as well as self-learning, independent, and out-of-school study programs particularly those that respond to community needs.

SECTION 2. To carry out the declared national policy, there is hereby created a Literacy Coordinating Council, hereinafter referred to as the Council, which shall be an inter-agency body administratively attached to the Department of Education, Culture and Sports.

SECTION 3. The Council shall be composed of eight (8) members as follows: the Undersecretary for Non-Formal Education of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports; the Undersecretary of the Department of Interior and Local Government in charge of Local Governments; the Director of the Philippine Information Agency; the President of the Philippine Normal College; a representative from the National Economic and Development Authority designated by the Director-General: a representative of the Committee on Education, Arts and Culture of the Senate to be designated by the President of the Senate; a representative of the Committee on Education and Culture of the House of Representatives to be designated by the Speaker; and the representative of non-government organizations involved in literacy education who shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines for a period of three (3) years.

The members of the Council shall annually elect a Chairman from among themselves except the two (2) representatives of Congress.

The Council shall meet regularly once a month and may hold special meetings to consider urgent matters upon the call of the Chairman or any three Council members.

SECTION 4. The Council shall have the following functions:

1) To help act as the overall advisory and coordinating body, providing policy and program directions for all literacy endeavors in the country;

2) To recommend strategies on the development of a mass movement for the total eradication of illiteracy in the country by the year 2000;

3) To formulate measures on the establishment and maintenance of a national data bank and information exchange and dissemination system to support literacy efforts at the national and local levels;

4) To assist in identifying and adopting successful management schemes of literacy programs, and adopt measures to boost research and development work in literacy, by government agencies and non-governmental organizations involved in literacy work;

5) To recommend ways and means of raising funds in order to support the literacy programs, projects, and activities;

6) To recommend measures on how to organize and strengthen support structures for literacy at the regional and local levels; and

7) To perform such other functions as may be necessary in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.

SECTION 5. The administrative and research staff shall be detailed from the existing personnel of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports without prejudice to the designation by the Council of such additional staff members as it may deem necessary for the proper discharge of its functions and responsibilities.

SECTION 6. The Council may, in the performance of its functions, request the cooperation, assistance, and support of appropriate government agencies and non-governmental organizations involved in literacy.

SECTION 7. The sum of Ten million pesos (P10,000,000.00) is hereby authorized to be appropriated, out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, to carry out the functions of the Council under this Act. Thereafter, the sum needed for the operation and maintenance of the Council shall be included in the annual Budget of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports.

The Council shall submit to Congress an annual report which shall include, among other things, policy recommendations which require legislative action towards the total eradication of illiteracy.

SECTION 8. All laws, executive orders, presidential decrees, and other issuances, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed.

SECTION 9. If any section or part of this Act shall be declared unconstitutional, such declaration shall not invalidate other provisions thereof.

SECTION 10.  This Act shall take effect upon its publication in two (2) national newspapers of general circulation.

Approved: November 25, 1991