H. No. 22190

REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7173

AN ACT CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF ASIPULO IN THE PROVINCE OF IFUGAO

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. The barangays of Amduntog, Antipolo, Camandag, Cawayan, Pula, Hallap, Panubtuban, Namal and Nungawa in the Municipality of Kiangan, Province of Ifugao, are hereby separated from said municipality and constituted into a new municipality to be known as the Municipality of Asipulo.

SEC. 2. The seat of the government of the new municipality shall be in a suitable government center site located between the barangays of Amduntog and Antipolo.

SEC. 3. The technical description and relative boundaries of the proposed municipality are as follows: starting at a point at Nunhipok River between barangays Panopdopan, Lamut, Ifugao and Haliap, Kiangan, Ifugao, following the river upstream towards the West between barangays Haliap and Duit of Kiangan, Ifugao; then following the creek between barangays Duit and Nungawa of Kiangan, Ifugao, to the ridge of the mountain between barangays Julongan and Nungawa, Kiangan, Ifugao. Then tracing an imaginary line along the boundary of the Municipalities of Kiangan and Tinoc, both of the Province of Ifugao; then to the provincial boundary of Nueva Vizcaya and Ifugao. From this point, following the river between the Municipality of Ambagio, Nueva Vizcaya, and Sitio Ammoeg, Camandag, of the proposed municipality, following the ridge of the mountain between Villaverde, Municipality of Nueva Vizcaya and the proposed municipality; following the boundary of the Municipality of Lamut, Ifugao, and the proposed municipality, then back to the starting point.

SEC. 4. After ratification by a majority of the votes cast in a plebiscite to be conducted in the areas affected within a period of one hundred eighty (180) days from the approval of this Act, the first mayor, vice-mayor, and members of the sangguniang bayan of the new municipality shall be elected in the next regular election of local officials. The new municipality shall be considered duly organized upon the assumption of office of the first set of elected local officials.

SEC. 5. The Commission on Elections shall conduct and supervise the plebiscite. The expenses in holding the plebiscite shall be taken out of the Contingent Fund under the current fiscal year appropriations.

SEC. 6. This Act shall take effect upon its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Approved, January 13, 1992

Source: Supreme Court Library