MALACAÑANG

RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 480

DECLARING FEBRUARY 1 TO MARCH 1, 1958, AS PHILIPPINE TOURIST PROMOTION MONTH

WHEREAS, the main objection of Republic Act No. 1478 in creating-the Boardof Travel and Tourist Industry is the development of a prosperous Philippine tourist industry;

WHEREAS, after one year of careful assessment of our natural assets and potentials and intensive survey of the world travel market, the Board of Travel and Tourist Industry is fully convinced of the bright prospects of developing a profitable tourist industry;

WHEREAS, it is essential and urgent that, together with the government and its branches and agencies, private enterprise and the public as a whole should be aroused to the need of assisting in the immediate, consistent, arid fullest possible exploitation of our unlimited wealth of tourist sights and resorts.

WHEREAS, both the government and the public need to be enlightened and educated on methods of developing a prosperous local travel trade and a national tourist industry so as to successfully enlist intelligent and widespread support for the tourist promotion program and assure its success, and

WHEREAS, it is most desirable that public attention should be effectively focused on the beautiful and historic spots of our land as a means of promoting true love of country among our people and of enabling them to enjoy the lavish gifts of Nature to them and to value more the monuments and landmarks of the nation’s glorious past;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, do hereby proclaim the period from February 1 to March 1, 1958, as Philippine Tourist Promotion Month, during which our people should organize themselves in civic groups within their respective communities for the location, conservation, and further beautification or development of all scenic, historical, cultural, and other attractions throughout the land, with a view to making them more useful and effective in the promotion of their own local as well as the nation’s tourist industry. I call particularly upon organized business, civic, service, labor, and cultural bodies, educational institutions, both public and private, women’s organizations, and all residents of the country to support the tourist promotion movement and to assist in rendering the tourist industry prosperous.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library