MALACAÑANG

RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 786

PROCLAIMING THE EXISTENCE OF A STATE OF PUBLIC CALAMITY IN ALL THE CITIES AND PROVINCES THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY

WHEREAS, the occurrence of seventeen (17) successive typhoons which visited the Philippines during the months of August and September and the early part of the. month of October, 1960, and thereafter, caused widespread inundation, desolation and tremendous destruction to life and property among the people as well as great damage to agricultural crops, particularly rice and/or palay, corn, and sugar, in most of the central producing sectors of the country;

WHEREAS, as a result of the above-mentioned calamities Proclamation Nos. 713 and 716, series of 1960, were promulgated declaring different cities and provinces under state of public calamity, in view of the scarcity of commodities of prime necessity in the daily life of the people and to prevent excessive increase in their prices due to profiteering and hoarding by those who control the still existing supply of these commodities, threatening the people with famine and other disorders;

WHEREAS, the previous diversion of rice and sugar to the specified calamity areas to supply the needs of the inhabitants thereof has created a national vacuum and shortage, causing a continued excessive increase in their prices, notwithstanding the rice importation made by the NAMARCO, which is aggravated by hoarding and profiteering, thereby making it imperative that Immediate action be taken to cope effectively with the national crisis so as to avert panic and disorder in the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the powers vested in me by Act No. 4164 of the Philippine Legislature, entitled “An Act to prevent excessive increase in the price of certain prime necessities of life on the occasion of a public calamity, penalizing the violation thereof, and for other purposes,” and by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby proclaim and certify the existence of a state of public calamity throughout the remaining cities and provinces of the Philippines not covered by Proclamation Nos. 713 and 716, series of 1960, and during its existence, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation in all places within the Philippines to sell or offer for sale rice and/or palay, corn, and sugar at prices higher by twenty-five per centum (25%) or more over and above the average current prices of such commodities one month previous to the occurrence of such public calamity as may be determined by the Director of Commerce; and to aggravate the crisis by refusing for the purpose of profiteering to sell at the legal price or by hiding, concealing, or hoarding the goods or commodities for the same purpose;

The public order so requiring, I hereby order the Secretary of National Defense to seize all stocks of rice and/or palay, corn, and sugar and designate, for the City of Manila and suburbs, the National Rice and Corn Corporation in cooperation with the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and in the provinces and other chartered cities, the provincial, city, and municipal district treasurers, also in cooperation with the Armed Forces of the Philippines, to sell said commodities to the public. For this purpose, the Armed Forces of the Philippines is hereby authorized to call upon all law enforcing agencies of the government for such assistance as it may need in carrying out the provisions of this proclamation.

I hereby enjoin the Secretary of National Defense to see to it that the ceiling prices herein fixed are duly observed and that each deserving family head is afforded the chance to purchase rice and/or palay, corn, and sugar at said prices for the absolute needs of his family. Persons violating this proclamation shall incur the corresponding liability and shall be dealt with according to law.

This proclamation shall take effect immediately upon promulgation and shall not in any way affect the ceiling prices of other commodities covered by Proclamation Nos. 713 and 716, series of 1960.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the Municipality of Tabaco, Province of Albay, for the City of Manila, this 12th day of September, 1961, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

[Note: Price List follows together with the reproduction of this Proclamation in the “Supplement to the Official Gazette, Vol. 57, No. 37, September 11,” issue which will be off the Press soon.]

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library