MALACAÑANG

RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 396

TO THE PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINES:

It is with the deepest sorrow that I proclaim a state of mourning for the Nation on the death of our beloved leader, President RAMON MAGSAYSAY.

The tragic loss which we have suffered is as sudden as it is most untimely. President Magsaysay, in the few years that God gave him to serve our people, made himself a true brother and earnest defender of the common man. He had dedicated himself to his official tasks with an exemplary zeal, earning for himself the love and adulation of his countrymen whose welfare he had been destined to promote to his last breath.

It is the measure of a man’s greatness that he leaves a void that is hard to fill upon his passing. We realize now the magnitude of our loss in the all-too-real emptiness that seemed to have descended upon our Nation when the news of his death spread throughout the Islands, on native soil which still freshly bears the marks of his footprints and in every Filipino’s heart which has yielded to his intense nationalism.

We must face the future with courage. The President’s life had been consummated in his tireless devotionto the welfare and future glory of the Philippine Republic. To that ideal, we should now endeavor to dedicate our every effort. He will be with us in spirit as he once inspired us with his presence.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, do hereby appoint Friday, March twenty-second, the day of the funeral service for the dead Leader, and as a day of prayer throughout the Philippines. I enjoin our people who cannot personally attend the burial ceremonies in the City of Manila to assemble in their respective places of worship, there to bow their heads in submission to the will of Almighty God, and to pay their tribute of love, reverence, and respect to the memory of our great and good President whose, passing we all mourn.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eleventh.

CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library