MALACAÑANG MANILA

GENERAL ORDER NO. 48

REVIVING STAGGERED SCHEDULE OF OFFICE HOURS FOR INDUSTRIES, FACTORIES, PLANTS, PRIVATE AND PUBLIC OFFICES AND COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS IN THE METROPOLITAN MANILA AREA PRESCRIBED IN GENERAL ORDER NO. 30 DATED JUNE 30, 1973.

WHEREAS, in order to effect the speedy and smooth movement of people, goods and services on the streets, roads and highways of Metropolitan Manila the need for better traffic management practices has become imperative;

WHEREAS, sound traffic management practices demand the regulation, direction, and control of the movement of people, goods and services during any given period of time at any given point of any road network;

WHEREAS, restrictions on the public use of highway facilities call for corresponding revisions in the working time schedules to be observed in all socio-economic levels in the area;

WHEREAS, staggered schedules of schools, offices, facilities, and other places of employment would mean the active and full utilization of constricted highway facilities within the 24-hour day period thereby eliminating the build-up of traffic congestion, formation of choke points and insure the smooth flow of traffic;

WHEREAS, re-structuring of work schedules in industries, factories, schools, offices, shops and other places of employment would effectively distribute and spread out the scarce national capabilities to meet not only the requirements for public transport, but also the simultaneous competing demands for water, power and other and other resources as well;

WHEREAS, the need for order and system as means of maximizing the utilization of time, space, facilities and resources in enhancing economic development and growth with the least inconvenience on the general population has become desirable;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order the strict observance of the following staggered schedule or working hours for and in the Metropolitan Manila area:

1. Industries, Factories, Plants

a) With one work shift 5:00/6:00 A.M. – 2:00/3:00 P.M.

b) With two work shifts:

c) With three work shifts:

2. Public and Private Offices:

3. Public and Private Schools at all Levels:

4. Commercial Establishments – 10:00 A.M. – 10:00 P.M

Heads of government instrumentalities and private agencies affected shall immediately prescribe such regulations as they may deem necessary for the effective implementation of this Order, including their work schedules revised in accordance herewith and shall furnish the authorities charged with the enforcement hereof with copies of the same. With respect to the Public and Private Offices, the shifts shall be so established with half of the workforce on the first shift and the other half in the next shift. This order shall not apply to the following:

1. military and other government emergency or relief and rehabilitation operations;

2. public and private markets, food terminals, supermarkets, groceries, food stalls, restaurants, and other eating places, slaughterhouses;

3. hospitals, medical and dental clinics and drug stores;

4. banking institutions covered by Presidential Decree No. 71;

5. public transport utilities, media communications and security agencies;

6. fire departments and all law enforcement agencies;

7. amusement places; and

8. churches, cemeteries, funeral parlors and related establishments.

The revised schedule of working hours shall take effect June 10, 1974, except on Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays and shall remain enforced in the Cities of Pasay, Manila, Quezon and Caloocan, in the Municipalities of Las Piñas, Parañaque, Makati, San Juan, Mandaluyong, Pasig, Marikina, Malabon and Navotas in the province of Rizal and in the Municipality of Valenzuela in the province of Bulacan, and will continue for the duration of the national emergency or until otherwise ordered by me or by duly designated representative.

The Secretary of Labor shall enforce the provisions of this Order insofar as the private sector is concerned, while the Executive Secretary shall take charge of enforcing the provisions thereof for government offices. Both officials shall submit periodic reports on the implementation hereof.

All laws, executive orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this General Order are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.

DONE in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 8th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1974). [General Order Nos.: 1 – 67]. Manila: Presidential Management Staff.