MALACAÑANG Manila

GENERAL ORDER NO. 15

WHEREAS, one of the objectives for the issuance of Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, placing the entire country under martial law, is to effect social, economic and political reforms, and thus bring about the transformation of a new society in our country, one infused with a profound sense of discipline, and social conscience;

WHEREAS, every citizen and resident of the Philippines should participate in bringing about a new and reformed society in our country;

WHEREAS, every effort to save and economize on the nation’s already scarce resources should be exerted;

WHEREAS, among others, Article 25 of the Civil Code of the Philippines (Rep. Act No. 386) enjoins against thoughtless extravagance in expenses for pleasure or display during a period of emergency;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 and General Order No. 1 both dated September 22, 1972, do hereby call upon every resident and citizen of the Philippines, including all elective local officials from provincial governors and city mayors down to barrio captains and councilmen, to avoid and prevent, as the case may be, ostentatious display of wealth and extravagance, including lavish town fiestas or social gatherings. To this end, they are directed to limit town fiestas and other local festivities to one day, which should be as simple and economical as possible.

All concerned, particularly the local executives aforementioned, are enjoined to comply with and to enforce this Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives