TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

GENERAL ORDER NO. 25

WHEREAS, pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972; Presidential Decree No. 9, dated October 2, 1972; General Order No. 6, dated September 22, 1972; General Order No. 7-A, dated September 30, 1972 and General Order No. 22, dated January 17, 1973, were promulgated as necessary measures to restore peace and order throughout the country;

WHEREAS, in the course of the performance of their official duties while in the active service of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, officers and enlisted personnel thereof who are now in the retired list, as well as reserve officers in the inactive status might have made enemies of the lawless and criminal elements in our society;

WHEREAS, some of these retired officers and enlisted personnel and inactive reserve officers have been using their privately owned .45 caliber pistols while in the active service of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and have continued to possess the same under license up to the present;

WHEREAS, in order that the said retired officers and enlisted personnel and inactive reserve officers will have available and effective means to defend themselves and their families in their homes, it is necessary that they retain possession of their duly licensed caliber .45 pistols;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, by virtue of the powers vested in me as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines by the Constitution, and the laws and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972 and Proclamation No. 110, dated January 17, 1973, do hereby order that paragraph 2 of General Order No. 22, dated January 17, 1973, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“2. Officers and enlisted personnel in the active service and in the retired list of the Armed Forces of the Philippines may hold under license a maximum number of only one (1) low-powered rifle caliber .22 or shotgun not heavier than 12 gauge and one (1) sidearm of any type and caliber: Provided : That commissioned officers in good standing of the Reserve Force, Armed Forces of the Philippines who are on inactive status may, in addition to the rifle or shotgun herein authorized, likewise hold under license one (1) sidearm not higher than caliber .45 pistol, except caliber .22 centerfire magnum and caliber .357 millimeter magnum and those which are or may later be classified by the Chief of Constabulary as high-powered regardless of type or caliber.”

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives