MALACAÑANG Manila

GENERAL ORDER NO. 27

WHEREAS, the Bureau of Public Highways and other Bureaus and Offices under the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications are engaged in the prosecution of the infrastructure program of the Government;

WHEREAS, it has been observed that private contractors undertaking by virtue of a contract, the construction of these infrastructure projects have used and adopted the orange color in painting their private vehicles and equipment, which color is the same or identical with the paint used on vehicles and/or equipment of the Bureau of Public Highways;

WHEREAS, the use by the contractors of identical or similar color of orange in painting their privately owned vehicles and/or equipment causes confusion and difficulty in identifying immediately Government-owned vehicles and/or equipment used in the projects, and thus in many instances, because of such similarity, complaints from the public of illegal use of Government property are made tarnishing the ideal image sought to be attained by our New Society.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, do hereby order that, henceforth and until otherwise ordered by me or by my duly designated representative, no private contractor or person shall use, adopt or cause to be used or adopted on any vehicle or equipment, the orange color used to identify vehicles and equipment of the Bureau of Public Works, Transportation and Communications/engaged in the prosecution of the infrastructure program of the Government and this color shall be reserved for the exclusive use of the Government in the painting of its vehicles and equipment utilized in the prosecution of the infrastructure projects. Neither shall any person or persons use or cause to be used, any vehicle or equipment unlawfully bearing such color. Any violation of this Order shall be punished with a fine of TWO THOUSAND PESOS (P2,000.00) and/or the vehicles or equipment so painted in violation of this Order shall be impounded by the Government until such time that the owner undertakes the repainting of the same.

The Secretary of Public Works, Transportation and Communications shall prescribe the regulations for the implementation of this Order

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President:

(SDG.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Legislative Library, House of Representatives

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1973). [General Order Nos.: 1 – 67]. Quezon City: Legislative Library, House of Representatives.