MALACAÑANG RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES Manila

GENERAL ORDER NO. 42

ENJOINING SUPPORT OF WORLD POPULATION YEAR

WHEREAS, the United Nations General Assembly has declared and designated 1974 as World Population Year;

WHEREAS, such declaration is envisaged as an important milestone in a continuing global effort to generate awareness, understanding and concern about the problem of a rapidly growing population and the need to apply and direct a concerted action to achieve a rational balance between population and resources and improve the quality and dignity of human existence;

WHEREAS, the Republic of the Philippines, in a policy pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 79, as amended, otherwise known as “The Revised Population Act of the Philippines,” recognizes population as a principal element in long range national planning and development; and

WHEREAS, the Philippines, as a member of the United Nations and an active participant in the affairs of the World Community, takes cognizance of population problem as a serious concern of individual countries as well as of nations collectively;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and Proclamation No. 1104, dated January 17, 1973, do hereby:

1. Enjoin ail citizens of the Philippines, all universities and colleges and schools, government offices, mass media, civic and voluntary organizations, religious organizations of all creeds, and business and industrial enterprises to partake in this historic and relevant global effort of 1974;

2. Constitute the Board of Commissioners of the Commission on Population as the National Committee for the World Population Year which will take any steps necessary for the observance of World Population Year in the Philippines including the designation of a National Secretariat to provide full-time support in planning and implementing activites for 1974;

3. Order all departments, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government to assist the National Committee for World Population Year in carrying out the programme and objectives of the observance of World Population Year in 1974.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives