MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 315

ESTABLISHING THE NAVOTAS FISH LANDING AND MARKET AT NAVOTAS, RIZAL, AND CREATING THE NAVOTAS FISH LANDING AUTHORITY

Upon recommendation of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources and pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby establish the Navotas Fish Landing and Market, hereafter referred to as Market, located at Navotas, Rizal, under the administration of the Philippine Fisheries Commission.

The management and operation of the Market shall be vested in the Navotas Fish Landing Authority, hereinafter referred to as Authority, composed of the Commissioner of Fisheries as Chairman, and two members appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources for a term of four (4) years.

The Authority shall have the following powers and functions:

1. Supervise and manage the operation of the Market;

2. Implement the policies of and the rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources for the operation of said Market;

3. Install, maintain and repair such facilities as may be necessary for the efficient operation of the Market;

4. Lease through public bidding or negotiation any or all of the market facilities under terms and conditions approved by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources;

5. Conduct studies of efficient and effective fish marketing practices and methods;

6. Render technical assistance and advisory services to fish wholesalers on proper sales methods;

7. Acquire, purchase or lease such equipment and facilities as will contribute to efficient marketing transactions; and

8. Perform such other functions as may be deemed necessary in order to carry into effect the objectives of this Order.

The Authority shall be under the control and supervision of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources who shall promulgate rules and regulations for the efficient operation of the market.

The Market shall be initially funded by savings of the Philippine Fisheries Commission.

Executive Order No. 198 dated October 27, 1969, and all other orders and proclamations inconsistent herewith are hereby revoked or amended accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29 day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FLORES BAYOT Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 315, April 29, 1971