MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 674

ESTABLISHING THE RESEARCH INSTITUTE FOR TROPICAL MEDICINE

WHEREAS, communicable diseases constitute most of the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the Philippines;

WHEREAS, the control of communicable diseases is one of the government’s priorities for national development in the field of health;

WHEREAS, a strong biomedical research component with full cooperation between academic institutions and field agencies is necessary for the effective pursuit of programs for the control of communicable diseases;

WHEREAS, for the foregoing consideration, the Philippine Government has agreed to cooperate with the Government of Japan in the development of a research program for tropical medicine in the Philippines;

WHEREAS, in fulfillment of the terms of an exchange of notes between the Philippine Government and the Japanese Government, the Government of Japan has constructed and equipped a research facility for tropical medicine at Alabang, Muntinlupa, Metro Manila;

WHEREAS, there is a need to provide for the maintenance and operation of the above facility as the venue for continuing technical cooperation between the two governments in the field of tropical medicine;

WHEREAS, the maintenance and operation of a Research Institute for Tropical Medicine will provide the biomedical research support for communicable disease control program in the Philippines; and

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree. No. 1416, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. Creation of a Research Institute for Tropical Medicine . – There is hereby created a Research Institute for Tropical Medicine, hereinafter referred to as the Institute.

SEC. 2. Scope and Coverage of Tropical Medicine . – For purposes of this Executive Order, the scope and coverage of tropical medicine shall pertain to diseases that are specific to the tropics, which is the geographical area between the tropic of Cancer and the tropic of Capricorn, and for diseases that present differently in this geographical region as compared to other regions, to wit: gastrointestinal infections, viral hepatitis, bacterial and non-bacterial respiratory infections, amoebiasis, schistosomiasis, filariasis, malaria, pertussis, diphtheria, tetanus, meningitis, meningismus, measles, mumps, herpes, chicken pox, rocky mountain spotted fever, encephalitis, echo-viral diseases, coxa-chie-viral diseases, and Philippine hemorrhagic fever: Provided , That the Minister of Health may include such other pertinent diseases in consultation with the Advisory Board herein created.

SEC. 3. Authority and Responsibility . –

a. The Institute shall be operated as a special project in the Office of the Minister of Health. The Minister of Health shall promulgate policies for and exercise supervision and control over the Institute.

b. The Institute shall be headed by a Director who shall be assisted by an Assistant Director, both of whom shall be appointed by the Minister of Health. The Director shall be responsible for the implementation of policies and the immediate management of the programs and operations of the Institute.

SEC. 4. Powers and Functions . – The Institute shall have the following powers and functions:

a. Undertake research activities in the diagnosis, control, and prevention of tropical diseases that are major causes of mortality and morbidity in the Philippines.

b. Conduct clinical trials aimed at better understanding and control of tropical diseases.

c. Conduct regular training courses for medical and paramedical personnel in the control of common tropical diseases in the country.

d. Provide high quality tertiary care to both inpatients and out-patients suffering from tropical diseases included within the scope of the Institute’s research activities.

e. Participate in the technical cooperation program with the Japan International Cooperation Agency in research activities in the diagnosis, control and prevention of tropical diseases.

f. Arrange for the participation of the National Science Development Board and the U.P. System Health Sciences Center in the planning and implementation of the programs of the Institute.

g. Apply for, receive, and accept bequests, grants, and donation of funds, equipment, materials and services needed for the attainment of its objectives.

h. Perform such other related activities as may be assigned by the Minister of Health.

SEC. 5. Organization and Personnel . – The Institute shall also have its technical and administrative support staff as well as consultants as may be necessary. Such consultants may be drawn from the public and private sectors on consultancy or contractual basis and shall be granted honoraria or allowances at such amounts as may be determined in accordance with existing rules and regulations.

SEC. 6. Advisory Board . – The Institute shall have an Advisory Board composed of the following officials or their representatives:

a. The Minister of Health, Chairman b. The Chairman, National Science Development Board c. The Chancellor, U.P. System Health Sciences Center

SEC. 7. Transfer of Biomedical Research Functions . – All functions of the following units in the Ministry of Health involving biomedical research in tropical medicine shall be transferred to the Institute together with applicable appropriations, records, equipment, property and such personnel as may be necessary; Bureau of Research and Laboratories, Schistosomiasis Control and Research Service, Dermatology Research and Training Center, and Malaria Eradication Service.

SEC. 8. Funding . – Such amounts as may be necessary for the operating expenses of the Institute for the current calendar year is hereby authorized to be appropriated out of any unappropriated funds in the National Treasury, subsequently, the appropriations for the Institute shall be included in the general appropriations act.

SEC. 9. Repealing Clause . – All laws, decrees, charters, executive orders, administrative orders, proclamations rules and regulations or parts thereof that are in conflict with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 10. Effectivity . – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-One.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.