MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 670

IMPLEMENTING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1726 ON AN INTEGRATED COMPENSATION SCHEME FOR LAWYERS IN THE MINISTRY OF JUSTICE

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 1726 provides for a new schedule of salary rates for certain positions in the Ministry of Justice and the bureaus and offices; and

WHEREAS, the same Degree provided that pending the provision of adequate funds for the full implementation of such rates, the positions mentioned in the Decree may be upgraded on a gradual basis depending on the sufficiency of available funds;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct:

Section 1. The salary rates provided for in P.D. No. 1726 and Letter of Implementation No. 127 for all lawyer positions with titles peculiar to the Ministry of Justice in the National Prosecution Service, Legal Staff, Technical Staff and the Office of the Minister of the Ministry of Justice and shall be implemented to the extent of funds available as provided in Section 5 hereof: Provided, however, That for positions falling within the Career Executive Service, the implementation of the salary increases authorized under P.D. No. 1726 and Letter of Implementation No. 127 shall be subject to the following conditions:

A. The positions in the Career Executive Service and their equivalents in the Ministry of Justice shall not exceed the maximum of their respective ranks as provided by law.

b. The salary of a position shall not be increased beyond one salary step below that of the position immediately above it in the organizational hierarchy.

Section 2. All lawyer positions in the commissions, boards, bureaus, and offices under the Ministry of Justice covered by said Decree and Letter of Implementation and positions of NBI agents shall be extended a twenty percent (20%) increase of the actual basic salary as of December 31, 1980, subject to funds available: PROVIDED , HOWEVER, That in no case shall the salary increase exceed the salary rates provided in the aforementioned Decree or one step below the adjusted salary of the position immediately above it in the organizational hierarchy.

Section 3. The designations, titles and salary rates of positions covered by P.D. No. 1726 shall be further examined and reviewed by the Ministry of the Budget under the provisions of P.D. No. 985, as amended, to ensure uniformity in the use of titles and designations, and in case involving relationships between superior and subordinates positions, and nothing in P.D. No. 1726 or in this Executive Order shall be construed as depriving the Ministry of the Budget of its inherent powers under P.D. No. 985, as amended, to classify positions and fix compensation of positions in the National Government.

Section 4. The procedures, rules and regulations needed to carry out this Executive Order shall be formulated and issued by the Ministry of the Budget.

Section 5. The amounts necessary to cover the salary increases as herein provided shall be charged against salary lapses and other personal services, maintenance and other operating expenses, savings in the respective appropriations of commissions, bureaus, offices and boards under the Ministry of Justice, and the excess income of the Land Registration Commission.

Section 6. The salary increases above provided shall be effective January 1, 1981.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.