MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 895

CREATING EMPLOYEE-MANAGEMENT COMMITTEES IN ALL GOVERNMENT-OWNED AND CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS AND AN EMPLOYEE-MANAGEMENT CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL IN THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION

WHEREAS, labor relations in the government-owned or controlled corporations are governed within the framework established by the Civil Service Law, rules and regulations;

WHEREAS, there is a need to improve the existing framework to make it more responsive in expeditious settlement of the grievances and in providing for a forum for regular and meaningful dialogue between employees and management in government-owned or controlled corporations.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the creation of Employee-Management Committees in every government-owned or controlled corporation, and an Employee-Management Consultative Council in the Civil Service Commission.

Section 1. Composition

a. The Employee-Management Committee shall be composed of as many representatives of management and of the employees as may be deemed adequate for the furtherance of the purposes of this Order, provided that both parties shall have equal representation in the said Committee.

b. The Employee-Management Consultative Council shall be composed of permanent representatives from the Civil Service Commission and the Ministry of Labor and Employment, representatives from the Employee-Management Committee which has elevated a grievance to the Council, and a representative from the Ministry/Agency to which the corporation involved is attached. The Civil Service Commission in coordination with the Ministry of Labor and Employment may provide, through the implementing rules the system of representation in the Council for the Committees and for the Ministries/Agencies concerned where more than one corporation or Ministry/Agency may be involved in the matter brought before the Council.

Section 2. General Guidelines for the Operation of the Committee and the Council

a. Grievances shall refer to physical working conditions, placement of employees, work distribution, performance appraisal, arbitrary actions, lay-offs and transfers, selection and promotion, and other matter that gives rise to employee dissatisfaction.

b. All grievable matters shall be decided at the lowest possible level in accordance with Civil Service Law, rules and regulations and shall, before the elevation to the Civil Service Commission or to the Council, be taken up before the Employee-Management Committee.

c. Subject to the above requirement, existing procedures for the filing and disposition of cases involving administrative, disciplinary or personnel action shall be maintained. Grievances which are not settled at the Committee level and which do not fall under the foregoing enumeration, shall be endorsed by the Committee to the Employee-Management Council for settlement and/or recommendatory action.

d. Every Employee-Management Committee shall provide for its respective rules of procedure which shall be kept non-adversarial and as simple as possible.

e. The Civil Service Commission in coordination with the Ministry of Labor and Employment shall promulgate the rules of procedure governing the operations of the Employee-Management Consultative Council.

f. Employees airing their grievances shall be assured freedom from coercion, discrimination or reprisal and shall be accorded speedy and impartial adjustment of their grievances.

Section 3. The Civil Service Commission shall undertake the coordination and direction of the operations of the Employee-Management Consultative Council.

Section 4. The Civil Service Commission and the Ministry of Labor and Employment shall jointly draw up the guidelines to implement this Executive Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of May in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1983). [Executive Order Nos. : 858 – 927]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.