MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 647

GRANTING OF SALARY ADJUSTMENT TO OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE BUREAU OF CUSTOMS

WHEREAS, having expected that the year 1980 would be a lean year in so far as collection sources are concerned, due to worldwide economic instability, the Bureau of Customs has redoubled its collection efforts through intensifying the heightening its search for untapped collection sources thus making the collection machinery more efficient and effective;

WHEREAS, in view of this collective effort, the Bureau has overshot its target by P532 , 534,511.59 or 4.72 percent and has even exceeded the collection level in 1979 by P899 , 749,824.59 or 8.26 percent;

WHEREAS, in order to give the Bureau’s personnel commensurate incentives after having exerted their optimum efficiency to bring out a commendable output, there is a need to grant salary increase in pursuance of the constitutional mandate calling for the adoption of measures to promote morale and the highest degree of responsibility, integrity, loyalty, efficiency and professionalism;

WHEREAS, the Bureau’s contribution to the economic development and social progress of the country can never be underrated as a major revenue-collecting agency performing a function which is sensitive in nature, thus duly recognized as a special entity by the government sector itself through P.D. Nos. 689 and 985 and in pursuance thereto, the Bureau’s salary gap with other government agencies must be maintained;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Executive Order No. 594 adopting the policy of using the prevailing level of consumption in private industry in the country as the basis of compensation of government personnel, a further upward revision of the Bureau’s salary rates is needed to make them at par with their counterparts in the private industry and with other government agencies of the same category which have been granted special salary adjustments recently;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President and Prime Minister of the Philippines by virtue of the power vested in me by law do hereby order the implementation of a ten per cent (10%) salary adjustment effective January 1, 1981 to officers and employees of the Bureau of Customs. The salary adjustment covered by this Executive Order shall be drawn from the savings of the said Bureau and/or Salary Adjustment Fund in CY 1981 General Appropriation Act.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of February, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-One.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.