MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 310

CREATING THE INTER-DEPARTMENTAL COMMITTEE ON CHILDREN AND YOUTH

WHEREAS, as recommended by the National Seminar on Children and Youth in National Planning and Development held on August 17-21, 1970, there should be a continuous assessment and modification of government programs for children and youth in order to meet changing needs and conditions;

WHEREAS, the Government needs an appropriate coordinating committee to assess and recommend the modification of plans for the development of children and youth, and for stimulating all efforts at the sectoral, regional and local levels that would contribute to it; and

WHEREAS, there is a need for a clearing house for the dissemination of information of inter-sectoral concern to the agencies of the government and to private organizations taking part in the national development plan;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Inter-Departmental Committee on Children and Youth. The membership shall be as follows:

The Chairman and members of the Committee may designate qualified and competent representatives to act in their stead.

The Inter-Departmental Committee shall have the following functions:

1. To organize and sponsor periodic national conferences to insure that programs for the development of children and youth are continuously relevant to the times. Each conference shall be known as the President’s Conference on Children and Youth; and

2. To assist national agencies that have programs for children and youth to plan and work cooperatively in an integrated manner so as to reinforce each other in meeting the responsibility of the government toward the young generation.

The Secretariat of the Inter-Departmental Committee shall be in the National Economic Council, which shall render the necessary staff support and technical assistance.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FLORES A. BAYOT Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 310, April 16, 1971