MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 878

REORGANIZING THE OFFICE OF THE GOVERNMENT CORPORATE COUNSEL

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1415, the Government Corporate Counsel is given the rank, emoluments and privileges of an Associate Justice of the Court of Appeals, and the Assistant Government Corporate Counsels are each given the rank, emoluments and privileges of a Judge of the Court of First Instance;

WHEREAS, Batas Pambansa Blg. 129 abolished the Court of Appeals and the Courts of First Instance, among others, and created in substitution thereof the Intermediate Appellate Court and the Regional Trial Courts;

WHEREAS, it becomes necessary to adjust the status and rank of the Government Corporate Counsel and the Assistant Government Corporate Counsels, conformably with the pertinent provisions of Batas Pambansa Blg. 129;

WHEREAS, the Government Corporate Counsel is in a better position to select and supervise the members of the legal and administrative staffs of his office, such that there is a need to authorize him to directly appoint the subordinate officers and employees of his office;

WHEREAS, considering the important role of the Office of the Government Corporate Counsel in safeguarding the legal interests of government-owned or controlled corporations, including their subsidiaries, there is a need to maintain the effectiveness of the Office of the Government Corporate Counsel as the principal legal counsel of all government-owned or controlled corporations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, and pursuant to the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended by Presidential Decree No. 1772, granting the President of the Philippines continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the National Government, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Office of the Government Corporate Counsel shall be headed by the Government Corporate Counsel whose rank, qualifications for appointment, emoluments and privileges, without prejudice to special orders of the President relative thereto, shall be the same as those of the Presiding Appellate Justice of the Intermediate Appellate Court. He shall be assisted by a Deputy Government Corporate Counsel whose rank, qualifications for appointment, emoluments and privileges shall be the same as those of an Associate Appellate Justice of the Intermediate Appellate Court, and Ten (10) Assistant Government Corporate Counsels whose rank, qualifications for appointment, emoluments and privileges shall be the same as those of a Regional Trial Judge of the Regional Trial Courts.

The incumbent Government Corporate Counsel and the two incumbent Assistant Government Corporate Counsels shall be entitled to the rights, emoluments and privileges herein vested upon them effective as of January 17, 1983, without need of new appointments.

SEC. 2. The other incumbent members of the Legal Staff of the Government Corporate Counsel shall receive in full the rates of compensation provided for by Presidential Decree No. 1726, effective January 1, 1981.

SEC. 3. Except the Government Corporate Counsel, the Deputy Government Corporate Counsel, and the Assistant Government Corporate Counsels who shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines, all other members of the legal and administrative staffs of the Office of the Government Corporate Counsel shall be appointed by the Government Corporate Counsel.

SEC. 4. The number, rank, qualifications for appointment, emoluments and privileges of the other members of the legal staff of the OGCC shall be as follows:

(a) A first bracket of ten (10) State Corporate Attorneys who shall have the rank, qualifications for appointment, emoluments and privileges of Metropolitan Trial Judges;

(b) A second bracket of seven (7) State Corporate Attorneys whose annual compensation shall be as provided in Presidential Decree No. 1726 and who must be members of the Philippine Bar and have at least three (3) years experience in the practice of law;

(c) A third and a fourth bracket of seven (7) State Corporate Attorneys each whose annual compensation shall be as provided in Presidential Decree No. 1726 and who must be members of the Philippine Bar and have at least two (2) years experience in the practice of law;

(d) Ten (10) Trial Attorneys whose annual compensation each shall be as provided in Presidential Decree No. 1726 and who must be members of the Philippine Bar and have at least one (1) year experience in the practice of law;

(e) A Senior Research Attorney and five (5) Research Attorneys whose annual compensation shall be as provided in Presidential Decree No. 1726 and who must be members of the Philippine Bar.

The number and salaries/compensation of the members of the Administrative and support staff of the OGCC shall be those indicated in the Staffing Pattern and salary schedule attached hereto as Annex “A”.

SEC. 5. The Government Corporate Counsel is hereby authorized to reorganize his legal and administrative/support staff within three months in such manner as he may deem proper to promote the efficiency of the service. Any member of the staff not otherwise selected/appointed by the Government Corporate Counsel as a result of the reorganization herein authorized, or who refuses such appointment, shall be paid the money value of his accumulated vacation and sick leave, and such retirement gratuity as may be due him under existing retirement laws. Anyone not appointed who does not qualify under any existing retirement law may be paid one month salary for every year of service, payable in lump sum, from out of the salary lapses in the Office of the Government Corporate Counsel.

SEC. 6. When the exigency of the service so require, any member of the legal staff of the OGCC may be assigned or designated in a concurrent capacity to act as corporate officer of the government-owned or controlled corporations being serviced by the OGCC, provided that the GCC approves the assignment or designation. Whenever any member of the legal staff of the OGCC is assigned/designated to perform additional or special task in any of the client corporations, he is allowed to receive such additional compensation and privileges as may be granted them by the government corporations concerned.

Likewise, any member of the legal staff of the OGCC may be assigned temporarily to act as summer Judge of the Metropolitan Trial Court of Manila when any incumbent thereof is on vacation.

SEC. 7. In addition to the appropriation for the Office of the Government Corporate Counsel, the savings of the said office, if any, may be used to carry out this Executive Order.

SEC. 8. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of March in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Reference : Annex A

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1983). [Executive Order Nos. : 858 – 927]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.