MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 575

EXTENDING THE TERM OF THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON REORGANIZATION CREATED UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 281, SERIES OF 1970

WHEREAS, the changing requirements for development administration as are envisioned to be brought about by shifts in policy and program thrusts will require that corresponding changes be effected in the administrative system for governance;

WHEREAS, it may be necessary to effect major changes in the organization of the national government in order to attune it to the new requirements for effective administration during the process of further political development;

WHEREAS, it is desirable to provide the President with adequate staff support in the continuing assessment and determination of needed changes; and

WHEREAS, it is desirable for the Presidential Commission on Reorganization to continue providing staff assistance and consultative advice to the President, Civil Service Commission, Career Executive Service Board, and other agencies of the government on development administration relative to, among others, reorganization matters, decentralization and regionalization, career executive service, and rationalization of government corporation management;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby extend the term of the Presidential Commission on Reorganization beginning January 1, 1980, which extension shall be continuing unless otherwise or until such time as shall be determined by me.

The Presidential Executive Assistant shall issue the necessary directives for the detail or the extension of the detail of such technical personnel as may be needed by the Commission under the same conditions as prescribed in Executive Order No. 281, as amended.

The Commission is authorized to disburse and defray expenses for its operations from January 1 to December 31, 1980 from funds as may be made available from the budgetary outlay of P800,000 for the operating expenses of the Presidential Commission on Reorganization included in the General Appropriations Act for 1980 (Batas Pambansa Blg. 40), and from such additional sources as may be subsequently necessary. Thereafter, the appropriations for the continued operations of the Commission shall be included in subsequent general appropriations acts for the duration of its existence as may be determined by the President.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Executive Order Nos. : 531-605]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.