MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 40

PROMULGATING RULES AND REGULATIONS ON THE DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, PAINTING AND SPEED OF WATERCRAFT OR VESSELS

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby promulgate these rules and regulations on the design, construction, speed and painting of watercrafts/vessels, and to require the placing of identification marks thereon so as to ensure the effective control of vessels/watercrafts

Every vessel used in Philippine waters, not being a transient of foreign registry nor otherwise exempted from registration, shall be registered, duly licensed and/or charged a proper fee in accordance with implementing regulations as maybe fixed by the Bureau of Customs, the Philippine Fisheries Commission and such maritime authority as maybe provided for by law. Such rules must provide among others:

1. That all plans and specifications for the construction and/or alteration of the vessels or watercrafts herein above-mentioned shall be submitted for approval to the afore-mentioned appropriate maritime authority before construction or alteration starts.

2. That no such vessel shall henceforth be built or painted to simulate or duplicate the built or painting of any Philippine Navy vessels. For this purpose, the official painting of a Navy vessel is as follows:

Hull, Gray; Mast: White

3. Any such vessel/watercraft shall be required to bear identification marks in a conspicuous place on the hull or superstructure and bow to be thereon engraved or carved in accordance with existing regulations.

4. The speed or horsepower of kumpits , basnigs, motorboats or other similar types of watercrafts shall be duly regulated.

The appropriate maritime authority shall inspect all vessels/watercrafts presently operating with or without license and shall require the master, owner and/or agent thereof to comply with the provisions of this Executive Order within a reasonable period of time.

Violation of this executive order and its implementing regulations shall be penalized with the maximum administrative penalty as provided for by law or regulations including forfeiture of the vessel or watercraft.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.