MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 49

EXTENDING THE AREA OF THE CUSTOMS ZONE IN MANILA

Executive Order No. 232, series of 1939, as amended, is hereby further amended to extend the area of the Customs Zone in the South Port Area, Manila, to include the area described below.

WHEREAS, it appears desirable that the premises adjoining the piers and wharves of the National Government, in the South Port Area, Manila, be placed under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Customs, for the purpose of more effective administration and control of the customs service in the Port of Manila;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Section 606 of Republic Act No. 1937, do hereby extend the territory of the Customs Zone in Manila in order to include that part of the South Port Area hereunder described as follows:

Beginning at point 1, the intersection of the bulk heads fronting the Manila Hotel and the Public Service Commission Building; thence, across 25th Street along the prolongation of the bulkhead fronting the Manila Hotel to point 2, on the north boundary of 25th Street; thence along 25th Street to point 3 at the intersection of 25th Street and the west boundary of Chicago Street; thence along the west boundary of Chicago Street to point 4, at the north boundary of 11th Street; thence along the north boundary of 11th Street to point 5 at the Southeast corner of Block Nos. 129, 136, 137; thence along the east boundary of Block Nos. 129, 136, 137 to point 6 on the south boundary of 8th Street; thence along the south boundary of 8th Street to point 7 on the west boundary of Chicago Street, near Gate No. 6; thence along the west boundary of Chicago Street to point 8 on the west boundary of Tacoma Street, opposite Gate No. 7; thence along the west boundary of Tacoma Street to point 9 on the existing south river wall of the Pasig River; thence westward along the existing south river wall of the Pasig River to point 10 on the northwestern tip of Engineering Island; thence southward following the existing bulkhead on the western side of Engineering Island; thence along the west boundary of the existing southbreakwater to point 11, at the intersection of the west boundary of the existing south breakwater and the prolongation of the south boundary of the existing Engineering Island basin breakwater which is more or less perpendicular to the existing south breakwater; thence eastward along the prolongation of the south boundary of the existing Engineering Island basin breakwater which is more or less perpendicular to the existing south breakwater, to point 12, at the end of the existing Engineering Island breakwater; thence eastward across Engineering Island basin to point 13 at the northwest corner of Muelle San Francisco; thence following the bulkhead line fronting Muelle San Francisco and 25th Street to point 14 at the west boundary of the Public Service Commission Building; thence southward across the Presidential Landing Basin perpendicular to the bulkhead fronting the Public Service Commission Building to point 15, at the bulkhead along Presidential Landing; thence eastward along the Presidential Landing Bulkhead to point 16, at the intersection of the Presidential Landing Bulkhead fronting the Manila Hotel; thence along the existing bulkhead fronting the Manila Hotel to point 1, the point of beginning. All existing and proposed piers and berthing spaces on the Manila South Harbor and the south bank of the Pasig River adjacent to the herein described area, as well as the whole waterfront of the Manila South Harbor up to the south and west breakwaters, shall also be included in the herein expanded Customs Zone.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of October in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Sixty-Six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.