MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 338

CREATING THE PERMANENT COMMITTEE FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PHILIPPINE-INDONESIAN AGREEMENTS ON ECONOMIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION, AND DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, upon recommendation of the Philippine Panel which participated in the Philippine-Indonesian Joint Commission on Economic and Technical Cooperation held in Manila from July 27-29, 1971, do hereby create an inter-agency committee, to be as the Permanent Committee for the Implementation of the Philippine-Indonesian Agreements on Economic and Technical Cooperation, composed of the following:

The Committee shall have the following functions:

(a) To implement the Basic Agreement on Economic and Technical Cooperation between the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the Government of the Republic of Indonesia signed on May 30, 1969, as well as the specific agreements and arrangements entered into between the two countries on July 29, 1971;

(b) To formulate specific policies and/or action programs to facilitate and expedite the implementation of the Agreements with Indonesia and on all matters affecting Indonesia requiring government action as well as to recommend, whenever necessary, on matters requiring policy decision by the President or requiring legislative action by Congress;

(c) To synchronize, coordinate, and make more effective the exchange of technical information, feasibility studies and commercial intelligence needed by both countries on the specific subjects treated in the agreements;

(d) To review the implementation of, and to prepare possible amendments to, the aforementioned agreements;

(e) To discuss and formulate proposals and guidelines for future agreements and joint measures to expand trade and promote closer economic cooperation between the Philippines and Indonesia;

(f) To study and explore the feasibility of establishing a free trade area between the Philippines and Indonesia in consonance with the Border Trade Agreement of July 29, 1971; and

(g) To recommend the holding of regular and/or special Joint Commission meetings with Indonesia as circumstances warrant.

In order to carry out its functions, the Committee is hereby granted the authority to constitute technical committees whenever it may deem necessary. It is also authorized to call directly upon any Department, bureau, or office in the executive branch of the government or upon any government-owned or controlled entity or agency for such assistance as the Committee may need and to request for, utilize and make use of, the services their personnel. It may also request the services of members of the private sector for advice and consultation.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.