MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 951-A

GRANTING SALARY INCREASES FOR NATIONAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES

WHEREAS, existing national policy mandates that compensation of government personnel shall be adjusted/standardized taking into consideration the prevailing level of compensation in the private industry;

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the government to help augment government personnel income in times of economic difficulties;

WHEREAS, increased cost of living due to inflation makes it necessary that adjustments in the pay scale of government employees be effected;

WHEREAS, the results of the recent Salary Surveys conducted in private industry by the National Government indicate and justify a further increase in the salaries of government personnel;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Consititution and Section 2 (e) of P. D. No, 1416 do hereby order and direct:

1. The increase in salaries of all officials and employees of the national government by ten percent (10%) or equivalent to two (2) salary steps in the National Salary Schedule.

2. Positions in national government agencies with approved special pay plans and those not covered by the National pay plan including members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Integrated National Police shall likewise be given the same percentage salary increase.

3. Incumbents of positions in offices/agencies that do not apply the National Position Classification and Compensation Plans or do not observe any formalized approved classification and compensation plans may be given this salary adjustment subject to the classification of the positions by the Office of Compensation and Position Classification (OCPC) of the Office of Budget and Management (OBM).

4. Local government units shall likewise be granted the same percentage salary increase provided herein, chargeable against their respective local government funds, subject to availability of funds and to the rules, guidelines, procedures and conditions to be determined by the Joint Commission on Local Government and Personnel Administration.

5. Salary increase for employees of government-owned and controlled corporations may be granted subject to recommendation of the Government Corporation Compensation Committee but in no case shall it be more than ten per cent and, Provided that funds are available for the purpose strictly out of corporate internal funds.

6. Funds needed to implement this Order with respect to national government agencies shall be charged to a) salary lapses and other personal services savings of the ministry/bureau/office/agency/state university/college concerned as a first priority .funding source, and b) to the lump-sum appropriation for salary increases incorporated in the budgets of national government agencies/ offices. Any remaining deficiency shall be covered by the Salary Adjustment Fund authorized in the CY 1984 General Appropriations Act.

7. Agencies that have already drawn from the Salary Adjustment Fund shall not be authorized to reprogram savings from other components to 01.

8. The rules and regulations needed to comply with this Order shall be formulated and issued by the Office of Budget and Management.

9. This Executive Order shall take effect on May 1, 1984.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of May in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Executive Order Nos. : 928-1029]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.