MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 76

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY METROPOLITAN COMMAND.

WHEREAS, the incidence of criminality in the Greater Manila area requires a more vigorous law enforcement, over and above the capabilities of local police forces; and

WHEREAS, there is imperative need for coordinated and sustained effort to counteract criminality and to insure maximum employment of all available resources and power of the Government;

WOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1. That the Philippine Constabulary organize a special striking force .to be known as “The PC Metropolitan Command” with a Command headquarters at Camp Crane, Quezon City, and other or subordinate headquarters to be located at such places as the Commanding Officer thereof may require. The Chief of Constabulary shall provide all the necessary officers, personnel and equipment of this Command.

2. The PC Metropolitan Command shall operate in the Cities of Manila, Quezon, Caloocan, and Pasay, and in the Municipalities of Marikina, Pasig, Makati, Mandaluyong, San Juan, Paranaque, Las Piñas, Navotas and Malabon, all in Rizal Province; and in such other suburban municipalities as the Chief of Constabulary may direct under this authority until normalcy in the law and order situation shall have been restored.

3. As the situation requires, the PC Metropolitan Command is hereby authorized to complement and/ or supplement local police action to repress and prevent the commission of crimes and to effect their prompt solution.

4. The PC Metropolitan Command shall organize a special mobile force to be known as the METROCOM-Rizal Police Highway Patrol, to be composed of such PC vehicles and other police cars contributed by the cities and municipalities mentioned above as well as by the Province of Rizal, as agreed upon with the Provincial Governor of Rizal and the City and Municipal Mayors thereof at the conference held with them on July 4, 1967, the same to be manned by such PC officers and men as may be assigned thereto and the regular crew men of such vehicles. This special mobile force shall operate within the entire Greater Manila area without regard to city or municipal boundaries.

5. City Mayors and Municipal Mayors of the cities and municipalities mentioned above shall extend their full support and assistance to the PC Metropolitan Command and shall take immediate steps to carry out the purposes of this Order.

6. The police Commission shall require all Chiefs of Police concerned to exert maximum effort in the maintenance of law and order and to render every assistance to the PC Metropolitan Command in the campaign against criminality in their respective jurisdiction.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.