MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 699

WHEREAS, the Government recognizes the importance of domestically producing soybeans to boost its food self-sufficiency program and to service the requirements of the animal feedmilling industry, and has thereby called for the formulation of a National Soybean Development Program (NSDP) under LOI 747-A;

WHEREAS, the supervision, direction, administration, and control of the Soybean Seed Bank Project, which is a vital component of the NSDP, has been transferred to the National Development Company by virtue of Executive Order No. 617;

WHEREAS, the Soybean Seed Bank Project is only one part of a broader range of activities which include technology assistance, extension work, training, an intensive information campaign, appropriate credit/financing schemes, marketing, and storage and distribution facilities, all of which are essential for the successful implementation of a soybean development program;

WHEREAS, in order to ensure speedy and effective implementation of the NSDP, there is a need for a central coordination to formulate policies, guidelines, and implementing regulations for the administration and control of the soybean development program;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order that:

SECTION 1. The responsibility and authority for formulating and implementing the National Soybean Development Program (NSDP) is hereby transferred to the National Development Company.

SEC. 2. All government agencies concerned are hereby directed to extend their full assistance and support to NDC for the formulation and implementation of the program.

SEC. 3. The National Development Company shall, in coordination with ministries and agencies concerned, formulate and restructure the program and shall develop the necessary policies, guidelines, and implementing regulations for the administration and control of the NSDP. The program, which shall include the funding requirements, shall be submitted for the approval of the President within ninety (90) days after the effectivity of this Executive Order.

SEC. 4. The Ministry of Budget is hereby directed to allot and disburse funds required for the program’s implementation in accordance with the approval of the President referred to in Section 3 hereof.

SEC. 5. NDC is authorized, subject to the approval of the President, to contract phases of the development program to other agencies of government or the private sector.

SEC. 6. All Decrees, Letters of Instruction or Implementation, Circulars, Orders, Rules and Regulations or parts thereof that are inconsistent herewith are hereby revoked or modified accordingly.

DONE IN THE CITY OF MANILA, this 26th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty One.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.