MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 53

CREATING THE MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL

WHEREAS, the proper development and wise utilization of critical manpower are essential to economic development in general and the attainment of the goals of the Four-Year Economic Development Program in particular;

WHEREAS, various institutions, public and private, are involved in planning, programming and executing activities related to manpower development;

WHEREAS, the integration and coordination of such activities are essential to establish an effective system of producing the manpower required for accelerated economic growth; and

WHEREAS, integration and coordination can best be achieved by centralizing responsibility and authority over manpower planning at the highest level;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Manpower Development Council in the Office of the President.

1. The Council shall be composed of the following:

2. The Council shall be assisted by a technical staff to be composed of such personnel as may be assigned or detailed to it from the Department of Labor.

3. The Council shall have the following duties and functions:

a. Develop an integrated long-term manpower plan as a component of the overall social and economic development plan. The targets established by such manpower plan shall be used by the Department of Education and the Budget Commission in programming public in­vestments in education and out-of-school training schemes;

b. Promote and coordinate manpower planning activities in the agencies represented in the Council, in other related agencies and in private industry;

c. Determine priorities in the implementation of manpower development and utilization program and maintain a continuing assessment of such priorities as the plan progresses;

d. Determine priorities for research projects essential to the formulation, implementation and evaluation of manpower development plans and programs, and coordinate the operation of such projects;

e. Review and evaluate periodically all activities related to human resources development assigned to various agencies of the government;

f. Evaluate and recommend approval of requests for external and technical assistance involving manpower training and development;

g. Submit an annual report and an annual manpower budget to the President of the Philippines;

h. Recommend the allocation of manpower resources in case of national emergency;

i. Promulgate such rules and procedures as may be necessary to execute the purposes of this Order; and

j. Advise the President of the Philippines on matters pertaining to human resource utilization and development.

k. The Council is hereby authorized to draw from available budgetary appropriation of any department, bureau, agency or instrumentality of the Government, and the entity concerned shall make available to the Council, such funds and other assistance as the latter may require to carry out and implement related programs approved by the President.

5. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.