MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1018

ADDING A NEW SPECIFIC TAX BRACKET

WHEREAS, there is a need to encourage the maximum utilization of local virginia tobacco by cigarette manufacturers thru the introduction of an intermediate specific tax bracket between the existing tax brackets for the highest priced native cigarettes and the lowest priced local virginia cigarettes;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic Philippines, pursuant to the powers vested in me by law and under Section 290-B of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1977, as amended, do hereby direct and order that:

SECTION 1. Sub-paragraph (b), Section 149 of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“(b) Cigarettes-

“(1) On the cigarettes packed in thirties , the retail price of which per pack does not exceed two pesos, on each thousand, three pesos and fifty centavos;

“(2) On cigarettes packed in thirties , the retail price of which per pack exceeds two pesos but does not exceed two pesos and forty centavos, on each thousand, six pesos;

“(3) On cigarettes packed in thirties , the retail price of which per pack exceeds two pesos and forty centavos, on each thousand, nine pesos;

“(4) On cigarettes packed in twenties , the retail price of which per pack does not exceed three pesos and fifty centavos, on each thousand, twelve pesos;

“(5) On cigarettes packed in twenties , the retail price of which per pack exceeds three pesos and fifty centavos, but does not exceed four pesos and fifty centavos, on each thousand, twenty-five pesos;

“(6) On cigarettes packed in twenties , the retail price of which exceeds four pesos and fifty centavos, but does not exceed five pesos and sixty centavos, on each thousand, thirty five pesos;

“(7) On cigarettes packed in twenties , the retail price of which exceeds five pesos and sixty centavos, but does not exceed six pesos and eighty centavos, on each thousand, forty pesos;

“(8) On cigarettes packed in twenties , the retail price of which exceeds six pesos and eighty centavos, but does not exceed seven pesos and fifty centavos, on each thousand, fifty seven pesos and fifty centavos;

“(9) On cigarettes packed in twenties , the retail price of which exceeds seven pesos and fifty centavos, but does not exceed eight pesos, on each thousand, eighty pesos;

“(10) On cigarettes packed in twenties, the retail price of which exceeds eight pesos, but does not exceed nine pesos, on each thousand, one hundred fourteen pesos;

“(11) On cigarettes packed in twenties , the retail price of which exceeds nine pesos, on each thousand, one hundred fifty-one pesos;

“(12) If the cigarettes are of foreign manufacture regardless of the retail price or contents per pack, on each thousand, one hundred fifty-one pesos ;

SEC. 2. The Minister of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to effectively implement the provisions of this Order.

SEC. 3. All laws, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 4. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of April, in the Year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.