MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 841

CREATING THE KABATAANG BARANGAY NATIONAL SECRETARIAT, DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS, PROVIDING FOR ITS ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the Government recognizes the vital role of the youth in the socio-economic, cultural and political development of the country;

WHEREAS, the Pambansang Katipunan ng Kabataang Barangay ng Pilipinas was created under Presidential Decree No. 684 and constituted under the Presidential Decree No. 1191 to serve as the premier youth organization and to implement projects/activities aimed at enhancing the potentials of its members; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to establish a support staff for the Pambansang Katipunan ng Kabataang Barangay so as to ensure a more efficient and effective implementation and delivery of its programs and projects.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and by Presidential Decree No. 830 and Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Kabataang Barangay National Secretariat . – There is hereby created the Kabataang Barangay National Secretariat to serve as the staff support for the Pambansang Katipunan ng Kabataang Barangay (PKKB) hereinafter referred to as the KB National Secretariat.

SEC. 2. Powers and Functions of the KB National Secretariat . – The KB National Secretariat shall have the following objectives and functions:

1. To ensure the effective and efficient implementation of the wide-ranging programs and projects of the PKKB covering the socio-economic, sports, cultural and political aspects.

2. To plan and promote development programs and projects aimed at preparing and training the youth for future leadership and for gainful employment as productive members of the Philippine society.

3. To supervise the different KB organizations with the end in view of coordinating the efforts of these various organizations in accordance with the goals of the PKKB.

SEC. 3. Administration of the KB National Secretariat. – The KB National Secretariat shall be headed by an Executive Director who shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines upon the recommendation of the KB National Executive Committee. The Executive Director shall exercise executive powers and shall administer the internal operations of the National Secretariat as well as the implementation of the various programs/projects of the PKKB.

SEC. 4. Organization of the KB National Secretariat . – The KB National Secretariat shall comprise of the following offices:

1. The Program Development Office which shall formulate and monitor plans, projects and activities geared at enchanting the productivity of the youth sector of the country thereby enabling them to contribute more fruitfully to the country’s economic, educational, socio-cultural and sports development.

2. The Operations Office which shall be responsible for the efficient and effective implementation of projects and activities initiated by the various offices as well as the continuous and periodic evaluation thereof.

3. The Special Projects Office which shall plan, initiate and supervise the undertaking of special projects solely or in coordination with concerned private and government agencies.

4. The Administrative/Finance Office which shall provide personnel, legal, budgetary and other services supportive of the functions and activities of the various offices of the secretariat.

5. The Office of the Executive Director which shall consist of the following:

5.1 The International Relations Staff which shall initiate, promote and develop plans and programs as well as support foreign sponsored programs in order to enhance and strengthen relations of the youth in the Philippines with their foreign counterparts.

5.2 The Political Affairs Staff which shall be responsible for the conceptualizations, supervision and evaluation of leadership training programs for potential youths.

5.3 The Information and Publication Staff which shall plan, undertake and supervise information, publication and public relations programs for nationwide dissemination of information regarding the programs/projects of the Kabataang Barangay, thus drawing more participation in such activities.

6. The thirteen (13) Regional Offices which shall serve as the implementing arm of the KB National Secretariat at the regional level. Each of these Regional Offices shall be headed by a KB Regional Coordinator.

The necessary staffing pattern of the KB National Secretariat shall be in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1177.

SEC. 5. Additional Appropriations for the Pambansang Katipunan ng Kabataang Barangay ng Pilipinas . – In addition to the amount already appropriated for the PKKB, the amount of million pesos is hereby set aside from the Special Activities Fund for CY 1982 to support the personnel complement of the KB National Secretariat and its development programs. Thereafter all the amounts needed for the operations and programs of the PKKB shall be included in the General Appropriation Act.

SECTION 6. Repealing Clause . – All provisions of decrees, orders and other rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity . This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of October in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 781-857]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.