MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 981

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF FISHERY AND ALLIED INDUSTRIES AS A COMPONENT OF THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM FOR THE MUNICIPALITY OF MORONG, PROVINCE OF BATAAN

WHEREAS, the socio-economic development of the Filipino community contiguous to the Philippine Refugee Processing Center (PRPC) is one of the objectives of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines in the establishment of that Center;

WHEREAS, the PRPC is located in the Municipality of Morong and the Filipino community in that municipality should be the beneficiary of the development brought about by the establishment of the Center;

WHEREAS, the Government of Japan as one of the participants in the programs of the PRPC, has expressed its desire to assist in the socio-economic development program for the Municipality of Morong;

WHEREAS, on 3 April 1984, in an Exchange of Notes with the Government of the Republic of the Philippines, the Government of Japan, extended a grant of up to Two Hundred Thirty Million Yen (¥230,000,000) hereinafter referred to as “the Grant”, for the purchase of fishing vessels, other equipment and machineries and such services as may be necessary for the Project, as its contribution to the Socio-Economic Development Program of Morong;

WHEREAS, the grant being extended by the Government of Japan provides the opportunity to develop the fishing industry of Morong;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that the Fishery Project in Morong be implemented successfully to benefit the greatest number of people in that municipality and to fulfill the commitment of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines under the Exchange of Notes with the Government of Japan;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order as follows:

SECTION I. An Inter-Agency Committee on the Development of Fishery and Allied Industries in the Municipality of Morong, is hereby created to be composed of the following:

–

–

–

–

–

The member-agencies may designate alternate representatives provided that such representatives can decide for or commit the respective agencies on matters taken up by the Committee.

SECTION II. The Inter-Agency Committee shall have the following functions:

a. The Chairman of the Committee or his designated representative who is a member thereof, shall be authorized to execute payments, sign documents as may be necessary for or on behalf of the Committee to carry out the proper implementation of the project.

b. Receive for and in behalf of the Republic of the Philippines the grant extended by the Government of Japan.

c. Conduct biddings and enter into contract with the winning bidder(s) and execute all actions required of the Republic of the Philippines under the Exchange of Notes with the Government of Japan dated 3 April 1984, to effect the procurement and delivery of the fishing vessels, equipment, accessories and services as necessary, in the manner agreed upon under the Exchange of Notes with the Government of Japan.

d. Transfer, dispose of or donate to a fishing cooperative to be organized to implement the Project, under terms and conditions it shall determine the vessels, equipment, supplies and accessories comprising the Grant extended by the Government of Japan.

e. Hire personnel and employ consultants as necessary on a contractual basis to perform its functions, notwithstanding previous directives and issuances.

f. Formulate policies and guidelines on the implementation of the Fishery Project.

g. Provide technical and advisory assistance to the fishing cooperative to be organized in the Municipality of Morong and monitor and supervise its management and operations.

SECTION III. The Committee, through the Bureau of Cooperative Development, shall organize a fishing cooperative in the Municipality of Morong which shall have the largest possible membership among families engaged in fishing and allied industries in the said municipality. The Municipal Mayor and Treasurer of Morong shall be ex-officio members of the Board of Directors of the said Cooperative.

SECTION IV. Upon certification by the Bureau of Cooperative Development, that the Cooperative referred to in Section III is operational and able to conduct the businesses for which it has been so organized, the Committee shall transfer to the said Cooperative the fishing vessels, equipment, accessories and funds the Committee has acquired by virtue of the Exchange of Notes dated 3 April 1984 with the Government of Japan.

SECTION V. The Committee shall exercise regulatory power, supervise and monitor the implementation of the Project by the Cooperative even after the PRPC operations cease by may turn over such functions to its member agencies. The Cooperative shall submit its annual program to the Committee for review and approval. It shall submit periodic reports on the status of its operations.

SECTION VI. The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources shall provide technical facilities and manpower for the training and development of skills and techniques among members of the Cooperative and its employees to ensure the proper, maximum and profitable utilization of all fishing vessels, equipment and accessories that the Cooperative shall acquire under the Grant.

SECTION VII. The member-agencies of the Committee shall provide technical assistance and support to the Committee and to the Cooperative referred to above on matter falling under their respective functional responsibility.

SECTION VIII. The amount of P2.6 Million from the ECONOMIC SUPPORT FUND of the Office of the President is hereby allocated to support the operations of the Inter-Agency Committee. The Minister of the Budget and Management is hereby directed to immediately release to the Committee the said amount for the implementation of this Order as a special fund which shall be exempt from the operation and coverage of Presidential orders, directives and issuances governing economy measures.

SECTION IX. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.