MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 612

CREATING MARITIME ATTACHE POSTS IN THE FOREIGN SERVICE

WHEREAS, it is the declared policy of the Philippine government to promote, expand and modernize the Philippine merchant fleet;

WHEREAS, in the overseas shipping sector, the competitiveness of the national fleet as well as the training and welfare of Filipino seamen abroad dictate the need for readily accessible and available government assistance.

WHEREAS, creation of maritime posts in the principal shipping centers of the world would greatly provide such needed assistance; and

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. Creation of Maritime Attache Posts . – There is hereby created under the Maritime Industry Authority Maritime Attache Positions which will serve in diplomatic missions or consular offices abroad. They shall be appointed by the President in accordance with the applicable provisions of Republic Act No. 708, as amended, upon the recommendation of the Administrator of the Maritime Industry Authority.

SEC. 2. Functions . – The Maritime Attache shall have the following functions:

a. Provide advice and assistance to the Maritime Industry Authority and other relevant government agencies regarding vital shipping policies, development and legislations in other countries.

b. Represent the Maritime Industry Authority and other government agencies which may request to be so represented in international conventions and/or conferences concerning maritime matters, and assist appropriate higher authorities in the formulation of Philippine positions in such conventions or conferences.

c. Advise and assist the Maritime Industry Authority and other relevant government agencies in the negotiation of bilateral maritime agreements.

d. Coordinate, evaluate and recommend to the Maritime Industry Authority technical assistance on maritime training.

e. Advise and assist the Maritime Industry Authority in the determination of reasonable price and charter hire levels and other technical information for the evaluation of ship acquisitions and/or chartering.

f. Act as the implementing arm of the Freight Booking and Cargo Consolidation Center of the Philippine Shippers Council in the issuance of waivers for the sea transport of exports and imports covered under P.D. No. 1466 by Philippine Flag vessels when such vessels are not available and/or on the basis of other exempting conditions provided in said decree.

g. Act as the designated agent of the Philippine Coast Guard in the endorsement and registration of preferred ship mortgages under and pursuant to P.D. No. 1521.

h. Act as the deputized agent of the Philippine Coast Guard in the performance of vessel registration, licensing and documentation of ocean-going vessels and collection of the necessary fees therefor. For this purpose, he shall coordinate with the Philippine Coast Guard-nominated international classification societies in the issuance of the necessary SOLAS Certificate.

i. Advise and assist, whenever requested and in coordination with the labor attache, the National Seamen Board in the provision of seamen welfare services abroad.

j. Advise and assist, in coordination with and upon request by the Professional Regulation Commission in the holding of professional examinations for marine officers abroad.

k. Advise and assist, in coordination with and upon request by the Central Bank, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Board of Investments, the Bureau of Customs, and other relevant government agencies in the valuation of vessel acquisition.

l. Submit monthly reports of activities undertaken by him to the Maritime Industry Authority.

m. Perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and interest of this Executive Order.

SEC. 3. Organization and Funding . – The Administrator of the Maritime Industry shall coordinate with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Transportation and Communications, Ministry of Trade, the Board of Investments, the Central Bank of the Philippines, the Bureau of Customs, the Philippine Coast Guard, and the National Seamen Board, and other relevant government agencies in the formulation of implementing guidelines of this Order. He shall propose the staffing pattern and compensation for the various maritime attache positions, which shall be considered pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1285 and other pertinent organization and compensation laws. The Minister of the Budget is hereby directed to provide funds for the purpose during Calendar Year 1980 and 1981. For the succeeding fiscal year and every year thereafter said positions shall be included in the regular annual appropriations.

SEC. 4. Authority to Designate Maritime Attaches from Other Pertinent Government Entities . – In the interest of the service and upon proper arrangement, the Authority may recommend the designation of maritime attaches from personnel of other pertinent government entities such as the Philippine Coast Guard under such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

SEC. 5. Repealing Clause . – All laws, decrees, executive orders, administrative orders, proclamations, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are in conflict with this Executive Order are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.

SEC. 6. Effectivity . – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 15th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Presidential Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Executive Order Nos. : 606 – 630 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.