MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 357

FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 8 DATED FEBRUARY 1, 1966, ENTITLED “CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL ECONOMIC STAFF.”

WHEREAS, the Presidential Economic Staff (PES) intends to vigorously pursue the proposed regional planning and monitoring and integrated development planning; and

WHEREAS, to carry out this purpose there is a need to expand and redefined the functions and responsibilities of the PES.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby further amend Executive Order No. 8 dated February 1, 1966, by assigning the following additional functions and responsibilities to the PES;

(a) Formulate plans and recommend policies and guidelines on regional and local development;

(b) Coordinate, integrate and monitor development plans and programs of national government with those of regional and local levels insofar as regional and local development projects are concerned;

(c) Maintain and update economic data and statistics for each region province, city and municipality for use of different planning bodies;

(d) Undertake research and studies including training programs and pilot projects to improve the present approaches to local economic development efforts.

(e) Duly inform the local governments concerned through the Assistant Executive Secretary for Local Government Affairs, Office of President, of all changes in policy guidelines and updating of development plans, and provide them as well with the updated data and statistics, and the results of researches and studies pertaining to the said local governments.

For purposes of carrying out the foregoing additional functions, the Presidential Economic Staff (PES) is hereby directed to establish a Regional Development Monitoring and Planning unit to be attached to the Office of the Director for Administration and Economic Operations.

Furthermore the Presidential Advisory Council Public Works and Community Development (PACPWCD), the Local Government Center and the Institute of Planning of the University of the Philippines are hereby directed to coordinate with the Presidential Economic Staff (PES) on all matters relating to regional and local development and planning, and to lend its resources and facilities to the PES in its regional development and planning efforts.

All executive orders, administrative orders and rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby amended and/or revoked accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281-365]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.