MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO 78

DIRECTING THE STRICT IMPOSITION OF PENALTIES ON TELEVISION STATIONS THAT SHOW ANY TELEVISION PICTURE NOT APPROVED BY THE BOARD OF CENSORS FOR MOTION PICTURES.

WHEREAS, under the provisions of Section 7 of Republic Act No. 3060 it is declared unlawful, among other things, for any person or entity to exhibit or cause to be exhibited by television within the Philippines any motion picture, including; trailers, stills, and other pictorial advertisements in connection with notion pictures, not duly passed by the Board of Censors for Motion Pictures; or to print or cause to be printed or any motion picture to be exhibited by television, a label or notice showing the same to have been officially passed by the said Board when the same has not been previously authorized, except motion pictures imprinted or exhibited by the Philippine Government and/or its Departments and agencies, and newsreels;

WHEREAS, any violation of the aforesaid Section 7 of the Act is made punishable in Section 11 thereof by imprisonment of not less than six months but not more than two years, or by a fine of not less than six hundred nor more than two thousand pesos, or both at the discretion of the court. If the offender is an alien, he shall be deported immediately. The license to operate the television shall also be revoked. In case the violation is committed by a corporation, partnership or association, the criminal liability shall devolve upon the president, manager, administrator, or any official thereof responsible for the violation;

WHEREAS, in the face of the sad breakdown of morality and rising criminality, it is imperative that all motion pictures, including trailers, stills and other pictorial advertisements in connection with motion pictures, to be shown or exhibited by television be first passed upon by the Board of Censors for Motion Pictures as required by Republic Act No. 3060 to insure that only those found to be harmless and not objectionable or offensive to morals and to the peace and order of society arc so exhibited or shown;

WHEREAS, in order to better achieve and carry out the above objective, it is necessary to impose and enforce strictly the corresponding penalties provided in Republic Act No. 3060.

NOW THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby direct the vigorous enforcement of the provisions of and the strict imposition of the penalties prescribed in Section XI of Republic Act No. 3060 for violators of the provisions of Section 7 thereof valuing it unlawful, among other things, for any person or entity to exhibit or cause to be exhibited by television within the Philippines any motion picture, including trailers, stills and ether pictorial advertisements in connection with motion pictures, not duly parsed by the Board of Censors for Motion Pictures; or to print or cause to be printed on any motion picture to be exhibited by television, a label or notice showing the sane to have been officially passed by the said Board when the same has not been previously authorized, except notion pictures imprinted or exhibited by the Philippine Government and/or its departments and agencies, and newsreels.

All offices, officers and employees of the government concerned with this particular matter are hereby urged, called upon and directed to exert all possible efforts to effectively and vigorously implement and enforce the provisions of this order in conjunction with those of Republic Act No. 3060.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.