MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 896

DECLARING BASIC POLICIES AND GUIDELINES FOR THE PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT OF DOMESTIC TOURISM

WHEREAS, knowledge and awareness on the part of our citizens of our country’s various natural, historical and cultural heritage can make a significant contribution to the nation’s goals of national integration and overall socio-economic, cultural, and educational development;

WHEREAS, such knowledge and awareness can be achieved through an intensive and sustained promotion and development of national or domestic tourism by which the country’s diverse inhabitants can get to know more one another thru direct contact and realize that dissimilarities in their customs and traditions form part of a whole which is the nation, with common aspirations and goals.

WHEREAS, this interaction will enhance the rediscovery of our country’s cultural and sociological heritage and strengthen our people’s sense of oneness and patriotism.

WHEREAS, it is important that workers of all levels, both public and private, be made realize the value of enjoying their vacation in accordance with the universally and scientifically accepted principle that a periodic respite from work and change in environment, is essential for one’s physical and mental health, and promotes his efficiency as well;

WHEREAS, tourism also serves to stimulate the continuance and development of local crafts or industries as they create employment and additional sources of income for our people;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy . – (1) It is a policy of the State to encourage and promote domestic tourism. Towards this end it shall:

(a) Encourage travels by the citizenry to cultural, historical, educational and/or vacation spots and resorts;

(b) Institutionalize conservation and protection of heritage monuments;

(c) Ensure the safety of the vacationers, excursionists and sightseers and afford the best possible conditions of comfort and common services;

(d) Encourage hotels, resorts, and similar establishments to give incentive packages to tour and vacation groups;

(e) Encourage local associations and corporations to conduct their meetings and conventions in places other than their place of business or usual activity.

(f) Promote awareness of the respective rights, duties and responsibilities of the visitor and the host in tourist destinations;

For this purpose, the Government shall adopt measures which shall assure every citizen of the Philippines, young and old, the elderly and handicapped, the right to enjoy leisure, travel and holiday.

SECTION 2. Information Regarding Tourist Destinations . – It shall be the concern of each local government unit to identify, develop and preserve scenic, historical, or cultural spots that may be found in its territory and adopt way of disseminating information about the same.

The Ministry of Tourism shall, on the basis of the information furnished by the local government prepare an inventory of all tourist destinations and shall adopt and implement on a continuing basis a system of information dissemination.

SECTION 3. Promotion of Domestic Tourism by Heads of Office or Agencies . – Heads of offices or enterprises, both public and private, shall adopt measures as part of their employment policies to promote domestic tourism and encourage their employees to avail to their right to vacation and leisure and to this end, public financing institutions, shall, under such terms and conditions convenient for the employees, make available loans specifically for domestic leisure travel.

SECTION 4. Encouragement and Promotion of Youth Travel . – The young, under the auspices of their respective educational institutions, shall organize travel groups for educational, cultural or historical purposes. The Ministry of Tourism and the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports shall jointly adopt implementing rules and regulations on the organization of youth travel groups and a system of granting academic credit for the domestic travels undertaken.

SECTION 5. Travels for the Aged, Orphans and the Underprivileged . – (1) The Ministry and its agencies, jointly with welfare agencies and the private sector in the tourism industry are encouraged to develop special programs for the aged, the orphans and the underprivileged.

SECTION 6. Implementing Guidelines . – The Ministry of Tourism shall, in collaboration with other Government agencies adopt or promulgate rules and regulations implementing the objectives set forth in this Executive Order.  cd i

SECTION 7. Effectivity . – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1983). [Executive Order Nos. : 858 – 927]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.