MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1000

GRANTING SALARY INCREASES FOR GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES

WHEREAS, to enable government employees to cope with recent price increases, it is necessary that further adjustments in the salaries of government employees be effected in addition to those granted under Executive Order No. 951-A;

WHEREAS, in the light of the recently approved minimum wage increases in the private sector, there is need to increase salaries of government officials and employees;

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the government to help augment government personnel income in times of economic difficulties;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and Section 2 ( e) of P.D. No. 1416 do hereby Order and Direct:

1. The increase in salaries of all officials and employees of the national government by two (2) salary steps in the National Salary Schedule or approximately equivalent to ten percent (10%).

2. Positions in national government agencies with approved special pay plans and those not covered by the National Pay Plan including the members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Integrated National Police shall likewise be given the same percentage salary increase.

3. Incumbents of positions in offices/agencies that do not apply the National Position Classification and Compensation Plans or do not observe any formalized approved classification and compensation plans may be given this salary adjustment subject to the classification of the positions by the Office of Compensation and Position Classification (OCPC) of the Office of Budget and Management (OBM).

4. Local government units shall likewise be granted the same percentage salary increase provided herein, chargeable against their respective local government funds, subject to availability of funds and to the rules, guidelines, procedures and conditions to be determined by the Joint Commission on Local Government and Personnel Administration.

5. Government-owned and controlled corporations may grant salary adjustments at no more than the percentage prescribed herein as may be recommend by their respective Boards of Director and approved by their respective Compensation Committees, and subject to availability of funds.

6. Funds needed to implement this Order with respect to national government agencies shall be charged to a) salary lapses and other personal services savings of the ministry/bureau/office/agency/state university/college concerned as a first priority funding source, and b) to the lump-sum appropriation for salary increases incorporated in the budgets of national government agencies/offices. Any remaining deficiency shall be covered by the Salary Adjustment Fund authorized in the CY 1985 General Appropriations Act.

7. Agencies that have already drawn from the Salary Adjustment Funs shall not be authorized to reprogram savings from other components to 01.

8. The rules and regulations needed to comply with this Order shall be formulated and issued by the Office of Budget and Management.

9. This Executive Order shall take effect on January 1, 1985.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th day of January in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty- five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.