MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 371

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE COMMITTEE ON UNCTAD MATTERS

WHEREAS, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) is an international body established to provide, by means of international cooperation, appropriate solutions to the problems of world trade and development in the interest of all peoples and particularly to the urgent problems of the developing countries including the Philippines;

WHEREAS, the Philippines is an active member of the UNCTAD and has participated in various UNCTAD conferences;

WHEREAS, Philippine participation in UNCTAD conferences should be made more effective;

WHEREAS, the amount of work relative to UNCTAD matters has grown by leaps and bounds and has regularly involved various agencies of the government and the private sector; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to create a national committee to attend to all UNCTAD matters;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the PHILIPPINE COMMITTEE ON UNCTAD MATTERS.

1. The Committee shall be composed of the Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs, as chairman, and a representative each of the Department of Commerce and Industry, the Department of Finance, the National Economic Council, the Central Bank of the Philippines, the Presidential Economic Staff and the Board of Investments, as members, all to be designated by their respective heads of Offices.

2. The Committee shall have the following functions:

(a) To coordinate and make more effective Philippine participation in UNCTAD conferences;

(b) To prepare position papers on Philippine participation in UNCTAD conferences;

(c) To recommend to the President, through the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, the composition of the Philippine representation in UNCTAD conferences;

(d) To receive, compile, collate and disseminate all data, documents and other information and materials pertaining to UNCTAD; and

(e) To do all other activities which will increase effective participation of the Philippines in UNCTAD conferences.

3. In order to carry out its functions, the Committee is hereby granted the authority to constitute technical committees whenever it may deem necessary. It is also authorized to call directly upon any department, bureau, or office in the executive branch of the government or upon any government-owned or controlled entity or agency for such assistance as the Committee may need and to request, utilize, and make use of the services of their personnel. It may also request the services of members of the private sector for advice and consultation.

4. To assist the Committee in the performance of their functions, a Secretariat shall be established in the Department of Foreign Affairs.

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1972). [Executive Order Nos. : 366-435]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.