MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 941

IMPLEMENTING THE ILOCOS NORTE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM, PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, it is the established policy of the Government to promote economic growth, social justice, and equitable distribution of income within regions and provinces of the country;

WHEREAS, under a Tripartite Agreement entered into by and between the Office of the Governor, Province of Ilocos Norte; the National Economic and Development Authority; and the Ministry of Public Works and Highways, a development planning project, of Ilocos Norte was started and has completed a Comprehensive Framework Plan for the Province;

WHEREAS, the Plan has identified the critical development needs and requirements as well as the concrete sets of project packages and programs to be systematically developed and implemented to update the quality of life of the people in the area;

WHEREAS, in order to satisfy the requirements of both local and foreign financing, it is necessary to prepare detailed investments studies and engineering designs of projects eligible for funding;

WHEREAS, in order to realize the provincial development objectives consistent with national and regional development goals, there is an urgent need to create on organization to undertake, oversee, manage, coordinate and monitor all development initiatives and investments in the area including those requiring detailed project preparation and subsequent implementation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, and pursuant to the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1416 as amended, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy . There is hereby created the Ilocos Norte Development Program, hereinafter referred to as the Program which shall be directly, under the Office of the President. The Program shall implement the comprehensive provincial development plan and for this purpose oversee and coordinate all programs and projects of government agencies, offices, authorities and instrumentalities in the Province. It shall also undertake the detailed preparation and development of projects for financing by national and international aid and financing institutions including but not limited to the undertaking of investment studies, engineering and design of projects identified in the Provincial Investments Development Folio.

SEC. 2. Creation of the Program Office . There is hereby created a Program Office which shall have the following powers and functions:

a. Oversee and coordinate the entire development program, including projects and activities of national government agencies, offices, authorities and instrumentalities in the area;

b. Conduct detailed project preparation and investment studies including engineering and program design of projects identified in the Provincial Investments Development Folio in accordance with acceptable guidelines at levels and standards acceptable to external financing institutions and national funding agencies;

c. Review the plans, budgets, and work-programs, as well as proposed projects of national agencies within the context of the Provincial Investments Development Folio and the Comprehensive Development Framework Plan;

d. Review and endorse the requests of implementing agencies, offices, authorities, and instrumentalities to budget release in accordance with the approved projects and programs for the area;

e. Apply for, receive and accept grants and donations of funds, equipment, materials, and services needed by the Office from sources within and outside the country in accordance with accounting and auditing requirements;

f. Arrange and/or negotiate with local and foreign financing institutions for the implementation of programs and projects either through loan or technical assistance/grant financing, subject to the approval of the President;

g. Call on any ministry, office, agency, authority or any instrumentality or the private sector for purpose of enlisting support for the implementation of its programs and projects;

h. Avail of the expertise of any government agency or instrumentality or of any private individual or firm whose services are deemed indispensable for the attainment of the goals and objectives of its programs and projects;

i. Create such inter-agency sectoral committee or task forces and project offices as may be necessary to undertake its programs and projects;

j. Draw up the appropriate administrative and management mechanism and organizational structure including administrative systems procedure to ensure the efficient and effective implementation of its programs and projects; and

k. Undertake such other related functions as may be necessary for effective implementation of the entire Program.

SEC. 3. The Policy Coordinating Council . To provide overall policy guidance in Program implementation and facilitate inter-agency complementation, a Policy Coordinating Council is hereby created with the Governor of Ilocos Norte as Chairman and the representatives of the following agencies/offices as members:

The National Economic and Development Authority The Ministry of Public Works and Highways The Ministry of Budget The Ministry of Natural Resources The Ministry of Human Settlements The Ministry of Trade and Industry The Ministry of Energy The Ministry of Local Government The Ministry of Agriculture The Ministry of Finance

SEC. 4. The Program Management Office . To undertake proper implementation and provide overall management and supervision of day-to-day operations, a Program Management Office is hereby created with the following functions and responsibilities:

a. Execute and administer the policies, guidelines and decisions of the Policy Coordinating Council;

b. Directly coordinate the activities of concerned agencies offices, authorities, and instrumentalities with respect to implementation, programming, and planning;

c. Direct and supervise the preparation of investment studies and projects, detailed engineering, designs, and operational systems and procedures of projects included in the Provincial Investments and Development Folio;

d. Consolidate and recommend for approval of the Chairman the budgetary requests of agencies for the implementation and programming of projects;

e. Submit periodic work accomplishment and financial reports on the implementation of the projects and programs;

f. Perform such other functions as may be assigned or delegated by the Chairman, Policy Coordinating Council.

The Program Management Office shall be headed by an Executive Director to be assisted by a Managing Director. The Executive Director and the Managing Director shall be appointed by the President upon recommendation by the Chairman, Policy Coordination Council. They shall receive such salaries and allowances as may be set by the Chairman.

SEC. 5. Creation of Committees . The Chairman is authorized to create such inter-agency committees as well as advisory bodies as may be necessary to facilitate the preparation of investment studies; the completion of detailed engineering and/or program designs; and the management, supervision, and administration to programs, projects and activities being implemented in the area.

SEC. 6. Assistance from Government Agencies, Offices, Authorities, and Instrumentalities . The Office is hereby authorized to call upon any Ministry, government-owned or controlled corporation, authority, or instrumentalities and private sector agency/entity for any assistance that may be required to ensure the accomplishment of its task and objectives.

SEC. 7. Contracts for Consultancy, Engineering and Related Services . To fully carry out and achieve its objectives and whenever necessary for reasons of urgency, effectiveness, efficiency, and to the advantage of the Government, the Program may enter into contracts for consultancy, engineering and related services in connection with its functions and in accordance with existing government accounting and auditing procedures, subject to the approval of the President.

SEC. 8. Appointment, Promotion and Detail of Personnel . The Program Office and its officers and employees shall not be covered by Civil Service Law, rules and regulations and the Office of Compensation and Position Classification. The officers and employees of the Program Office shall be appointed, promoted and compensated pursuant to such management policies and merit system as may be adopted by the Policy Council. The Program may also with the concurrence of the head of the agency concerned, call on the services of technical experts and professionals from any branch of the government as it may need in the conduct of its activities and the achievement of its objectives.

SEC. 9. Appropriation . To carry out the provisions of this Order, the amount of SEVEN MILLION PESOS (P7,000.000.00) is hereby authorized to be released out of the Special Activities Fund and the Project Feasibility Fund for the operations of the Office for Fiscal Year 1984. Thereafter, such funds sufficient to fully carry out the objectives of the Program shall be appropriated and provided for in the annual General Appropriation Act of the Government.

SEC. 10. Repealing Clause . All orders, instructions and circulars contrary to or inconsistent with this Order are hereby revoked or modified accordingly.

SEC. 11. Effectivity . This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Executive Order Nos. : 928-1029]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.