MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 154

CREATING A NATIONAL COORDINATING COMMITTEE ON REFORESTATION AND TREE-PLANTING

WHEREAS, illegal and indiscriminate logging and cutting of trees have caused widespread denudation of forests and destructive floods that have wrought tremendous economic losses in terms of farm lands, products, crops, roads, bridges and other public works damaged or destroyed;

WHEREAS, it is imperative for the economic and physical well-being of the country that denuded forests should be immediately reforested and shade and fruit trees be planted to enhance the aesthetic aspect of the urban and rural environment as well as provide food;

WHEREAS, it is also essential that in order to be effective and assured of a maximum opportunity for success all activities of the private and the public sector related to reforestation and tree-planting should be coordinated and integrated;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create and establish a National Coordinating Committee on Reforestation and Tree-Planting to be composed of the following:

The Committee shall have the function and responsibility of integrating and coordinating all projects and activities, whether they be of the public or private sector, relating to reforestation and tree-planting for beautification or food purposes. The Committee shall maintain continuous liaison and dialogue with the private sector with the end in view of harmonizing the latter’s reforestation and tree-planting activities with the objectives of the Committee.

The Committee shall also initiate, encourage, propose and/or assist reforestation or tree-planting projects, and shall conduct a nationwide campaign to inculcate into the national consciousness the urgent need for reforestation and tree-planting as a vital factor in economic development and national survival.

All departments, bureaus, offices, and agencies, including government-owned or controlled corporations are directed to give assistance to the Committee whenever such assistance is sought.

There shall be a Secretariat headed by the Executive Officer, which shall be composed of personnel detailed to the Committee from the different government agencies represented in the Committee and from such other agencies as may be needed, who may be entitled to the grant of allowances as an exception to Memorandum Order No. 103, current series.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE J. LEIDO, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1968). Executive Order No. 154 : Creating a National Coordinating Committee on Reforestation and Tree-Planting. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 64 (47), 11993-11994.