MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 243

CREATING A NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR MINERAL EXPLORATIONS AND SURVEY OPERATIONS

WHEREAS, the continuing search for hydrocarbons and solid minerals in the land and offshore areas of the Philippines requires the concerned effort of both public and private organizations;

WHEREAS, the resources of public and private organizations can be pooled together to conduct a systematic compilation of geologic data for coordinated exploration and exploitation of mineral resources of the country;

WHEREAS, the proliferation of mining and oil concessions necessitates efficient use of public funds and venture capital for exploration and exploitation of mineral resources;

WHEREAS, the resolution of legal, financial, technical, and operational problems relative to the exploration and exploitation of minerals in the land and offshore areas of the country needs a comprehensive study in depth;

WHEREAS, the creation of a task force composed of representatives from the public and private sectors to formulate ways and means to carry out exploration and survey operations can contribute much to the development of mineral resources;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby create the National Committee for Mineral Explorations and Survey Operations under the Office of the President composed of the following officials or their authorized representatives who shall attend the meetings and deliberations of the said body:

The Committee shall have the following general functions:

1. Undertake comprehensive studies of the legal, financial, technical, scientific and operational aspects of mineral exploration and exploitation of the land and offshore areas of the Philippines.

2. Coordinate all public and private programs and activities for mineral exploration and exploitation.

3. Oversee the organization of local agencies, public or private, for exploration and survey work in coordination with appropriate agencies concerned.

4. Assist all agencies concerned with scientific research dealing with exploration, evaluation and exploitation of mineral resources.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon all government departments, bureaus, offices or agencies for such assistance as it may deem necessary in discharging its functions.

The financial requirement for the operations of the Committee shall be provided first by the above-mentioned agencies and second, by other entities if the former cannot raise the necessary funds.

The facilities of the above-named agencies shall be made available to the Committee in performing its functions as well as in undertaking actual exploration and survey operations.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Executive Order Nos. : 141-280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.