MALACAÑANG RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 689

INSTITUTING A NATIONAL RESOURCE EXPERT WITHIN THE MINISTRY OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS, PROVIDING FOR THE INTEGRATIVE DELIVERY OF BASIC NEEDS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the Ministry of Human Settlements has been mandated to undertake the development of urban and rural settlements in the manner that assures the adequate fulfillment of basic needs and the self-reliance and interdependence of human communities;

WHEREAS, the Bagong Lipunan Sites and Services Program implemented by the Ministry of Human Settlements in pursuit of this mandate has innovatively adopted the shelter-cum-livelihood approach as a basic needs strategy to development;

WHEREAS, the full pursuit of this national development strategy increasingly demands the cooperation of sectoral agencies of government and the coordination of their sectoral developmental programs toward the integrative delivery of basic services to the individual and community;

NOW, THEREFORE. I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby direct and order the following:

1. There is hereby constituted in the Ministry of Human Settlements a National Resource Expert System to undertake the integrative and coordinative delivery of the basic need sectoral development programs primarily, but not exclusively within the context and framework of the Bagong Lipunan Sites and Services Program.

2. The sectoral developmental programs to be coordinated by the National Resource Expert System shall cover the following basic needs: food, water, clothing, shelter, power, livelihood (economic base), medical services, education, culture and technology, mobility and sports and recreation and ecological balance.

3. As a matter of developmental policy, the National Resource Expert System shall adopt the implementing strategy of bringing basic services directly to his community rather than for the individual to seek basic services in the central offices of government. For this purpose, the National Resource Expert System shall utilize mobile service delivery terminal-including Development Caravans, in this task.

4. In implementing this Order, the Ministry of Human Settlements shall:

a. designate from among the pertinent sectoral agency offices National Resource Experts in each of the above basic

b. determine from among the basic need sectoral programs of government those activities that will be coordinated by the System

c. design the modes and instruments for the delivery of such services by the System

d. direct such integrated delivery of service and report the same to the President.

5. In order to effectively monitor and evaluate the delivery of basic services to specific communities as implemented by the System, the Ministry of Human Settlements shall install and activate the Maharlika Center in the Office of the President as the information center of the System. The Center shall operate within a communications and information-processing network and facility to be accordingly established, and for this purpose, the Ministry of Human Settlements shall be authorized to call on any officer and agency of government to furnish relevant information and reports for monitoring and evaluation purposes.

6. Agencies constituting, participating and cooperating in the System shall indicate in their budget appropriations, such program/project/activity items and their corresponding amounts are involved by their participation. Such incremental budgetary support as may be required by the participation of sectoral agencies in the System shall be submitted to the Ministry of Budget for funding support in accordance with existing budgetary rules and regulations of the government.

Done in Metropolitan Manila, this 11th day of the month of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.