MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 34

PROVIDING FOR THE IMPLEMENTING DETAILS FOR REPUBLIC ACT NO. 3814, CREATING THE BUREAU OF DENTAL HEALTH SERVICES

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by Republic Act No. 3814, and upon recommendation of the Secretary of health, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby promulgate the following implementing details to govern the organization, powers, duties and functions of the Bureau of Dental Health Services:

Section 1 . The organization, functions and operation of the Bureau of Dental Health Services shall be in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 3814 and these implementing details.

Section 2 . The Bureau of Dental health Services shall consist of the following offices and divisions:

(a) Office of the Director (b) Administrative Division (c) Research, Standards and Statistics Division (d) Rural Dental Health division (e) Industrial Dental health Division (f) Hospital, Puericulture, Charity Health Center Dental Health Division (g) Such other Divisions as may be deemed necessary in the interest of the public dental health.

Section 3 . The functions of the Director of Dental Health Services shall, among other things, consist of the following:

a. Develop, direct, coordinate and evaluate ail dental public health progress in the Philippines except those mentioned in Section 2 (a) of Republic Act No. 3814.

b. Formulate and execute policies, standards, regulations and schedules for the operation of the Bureau.

c. Coordinate and maintain liaison with other government, private, civic and professional agencies to insure adequate standard of dental services.

d. Prepare and recommend to the Secretary of Health the annual budget proposal for the Bureau of Dental Health Services.

e. Submit annual report on dental health program and activities of the Secretary of Health.

f. Assist in the administration of a continuous career development program for all personnel of the Bureau.

Section 4 . The functions of the Administrative Division of the Bureau of Dental Health Services shall, among other things, consist of the following:

a. Plan, supervise and coordinate general clerical functions, personnel administration, budget preparation and control, and general services activities.

b. Implement administrative policies and decisions on routine employee relations, problems and conflicts.

c. Issue office orders, circulars and memorandum for the guidance of employees on office practice, procedures and regulations.

d. Institute administrative investigations against erring employees and make appropriate recommendations for disciplinary action against them.

Section 5 . The functions of the Research, Standard and Statistics Division of the Bureau of Dental Health Services shall, among other things, consist of the following:

a. Formulate policies and plans pertaining to all types of dental research activities and studies on the prevention and control of dental diseases; setting up of professional standards; and the collection and analysis of dental statistical information.

b. Plan, develop, recommend and/or implement dental research studies; professional standards pertaining to type and quality of staff, facilities, equipment and supplies requirements; a systematic procedure for the collection, analysis and reporting of required dental statistical information; evaluation procedures; and technical training programs.

c. Make available results of research activities and dental statistical data.

d. Maintain liaison with other pertinent units and agencies relating to research, standard and statistics.

Section 6 . The functions of the Rural Dental Health Division of the Bureau of Dental Health Services shall, among other things, consist of the following:

a. In coordination with allied health agencies, to plan, direct, supervise and evaluate the rural dental health program.

b. To initiate the rural pilot projects and scientific activities for a more effective rural dental health service.

c. To assist in the preparation of the budget.

d. To maintain the highest standards of staff and field personnel supplies, machines and equipment.

e. To perform such other functions as nay be squired from time to time.

Section 7 . The functions of the Industrial Dental Health Division of the Bureau of Dental Health Services shall, among other things, consist of the following:

a. Provide consultative and advisory services to dental units in industrial, commercial and private educational institutions in the field of dentistry, dental health and related subject matters.

b. Assist dental health units under the Division in complying with the policy, guidelines and standards on dental health, including industrial and occupational hazards of personnel in the establishments.

c. Assist in the preparation of guiding principles for the systematic dental health examination of industrial employees and the prevention and treatment of dental diseases.

d. Promote dental public health consciousness and stimulate management interest in the value of dental health services in the industrial, commercial and private educational institutions.

e. Analyze reports on dental health services and conduct periodic visits on typical establishments for the purpose of determining the degree of dental personnel performance and assist in the establishment’s compliance with established guides, rules and regulations set forth by the Bureau in accordance with Republic Act No. 1054.

f. Collaborate with the Division of Research, Standards and Statistics in the collection of data, conduct of research and formulation of guides and standards on the prevention and treatment of dental diseases, including dental health education.

g. Exercise technical supervision of all dental units in the private industrial, commercial and educational institutions.

h. Perform such other related functions as may be required from time to time.

Section 8 . The functions of the Hospital, Sanitaria, Puericulture and Charity Health Centers Dental Division of the Bureau of Dental Health Services shall, among other things, consist of the following:

a. Exercise general administration, control of activities of the Division.

b. Exercise technical supervision on all field units under the hospitals, etc.

c. Implement standards for field services and staff development.

d. Provide consultative services in hospital dental administration and management.

e. Conduct survey, inspection and assess field unit and make recommendations.

f. Assist in the compilation and evaluation of reports.

Section 9 . The Bureau of Dental Health Services is charged with the protection of the dental health of the people of the Philippines and the maintenance of adequate standards of dental health services and the improvement of such standards. In pursuant of its functions, the following services are hereby placed under the supervision, integration, control and coordination of the said Bureau: (a) The Private School Dental Health Division, (b) The Hospital, Maternity and Health Center Dental Health Division, (c) The Industrial Dental Health Division, and (d) The Rural Dental Health Divisions, together with the salary items and personnel, equipment and appropriations.

Section 10 . All dental health activities of the Regional Health Offices of the Department of Health, including all hospitals, sanitaria, provincial health offices, city health offices, municipal health offices, and other health agencies and units under them, together with all dental health personnel, their salary items, equipment and appropriations, are hereby placed under the supervision, integration, control and coordination of the Bureau of Dental Health Services.

Section 11 . All Executive Orders, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 12 . This Executive Order takes effect on July 1, 1966.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.