MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 754

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDERS NO. 183 CREATING THE NATIONAL FOOD AND AGRICULTURE COUNCIL (NFAC), AS AMENDED BY EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 596

WHEREAS, the National Food and Agriculture Council (NFAC) was created by virtue of Executive Order No. 183, dated May 6, 1969, vested with the sole authority and responsibility to coordinate, supervise and integrate all programs of all agencies of the national government concerning the production, stabilization, distribution, and marketing of rice, corn, and other prime food commodities;

WHEREAS, NFAC has proven to be an effective machinery for mobilizing the resources of the government and private sector towards achieving rice self-sufficiency and establishing coordination in food and agricultural development;

WHEREAS, in the light of the tight world food situation and increased oil prices, there is an urgent need for NFAC to intensify and expand and pursue other food and agricultural thrusts and strategies;

WHEREAS, there is a need to expand the scope, jurisdiction and authority of NFAC to further empower it to administer the expanded functions and activities and strengthen its coordinating capabilities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, and pursuant to Executive Order No. 183, which is hereby amended, do hereby strengthen the NFAC.

SECTION 1 – The NFAC which shall be charged with coordinating, supervising, and integrating programs in food production shall have the following functions and powers:

a. Define the goals and scope of the country’s food policies, programs and plans on a continuing basis;

b. Develop long and short range food development programs based on a multi-disciplinary, inter-agency, and systems approach for the various food commodities;

c. Establish system of priorities for food production having linkages with the research, nutrition, marketing, processing, and financing sectors;

d. Provide for a systematic program for the transfer of technology and the development of agricultural extension workers as charge agents;

e. Provide a mechanism for assessment of progress and adjustments in the implementation of food programs;

f. Provide for the appropriate incentives/grants to encourage its highly qualified employees to continue serving their respective areas of responsibilities;

g. Draw from and negotiate for funds, not otherwise specifically allocated in the National Budget, and all other possible fund sources, for the establishment of sufficient fund resources to support the food self-sufficiency programs;

h. Supervise, coordinate and evaluate the activities and accomplishments of all agencies of the government charged with the prosecution of the different aspects of the food self-sufficiency program. Accordingly, it shall coordinate the release of public funds in accordance with approved programs and projects in food;

i. It shall have the power and authority to call on any ministry, bureau, office, agency and other instrumentalities of the government for assistance in the form of personnel, facilities and other resources as the need arises, during the discharge of its functions;

j. It shall perform other functions as may be necessary to attain the objectives of the national food self-sufficiency program and shall discharge such other duties as the President may direct;

k. It shall have the authority to create National Management Committees that shall supervise, coordinate and manage national food programs.

SECTION 2 – The Council shall be composed of the following officials or duly-accredited representatives:

1. The Minister, Ministry of Agriculture-Chairman-Coordinator

2. The Minister, Ministry of Agrarian Reform

3. The Ministry, Ministry of Local Government and Community Development

4. The Administrator, National Food Authority

5. The Minister, Ministry of the Budget

6. The Minister, Office of Media Affairs

7. The Minister, Ministry of Natural Resources

8. The Governor, Central Bank of the Philippines

9. The Chancellor, University of the Philippines at Los Baños

10. The Director-General, Philippine Council for Agriculture and Resources Research

11. The President, Philippine National Bank

12. The President, Land Bank of the Philippines

13. The Chairman, Development Bank of the Philippines

14. The Administrator, National Irrigation Administration

15. The Administrator, Agricultural Credit Administration

16. The Administrator, Farm Systems Development Corporation

17. The Administrator, Fertilizer and Pesticide Authority

18. The Executive Director, National Nutrition Council

19. The President, Philippine Crop Insurance Corporation

20. The President, Agrarian Reform Beneficiaries Association

21. The President, Federation of Agrarian and Industrial Toiling Hands, Inc./HUKBALAHAP Veterans Association

22. The President, Federation of Farmers Associations of the Philippines

23. The President, Federation of Free Farmers

24. The President, Federation of Land Reform Farmers

25. The President, Katipunan ng mga Magsasaka sa Pilipinas

26. The President, Pambansang Katipunan ng mga Samahang Nayon ng Pilipinas

SECTION 3 – Officers of the Council. —

The Chairman-Coordinator shall have the power and responsibility of administering, directing and managing the implementation of the policies and programs of the Council.

An Executive Director and Deputy Executive Director shall be appointed by the Council. They shall implement the policies, programs, projects and decisions of the Council as well as prepare an organizational plan and plantilla of personnel subject to the approval of the Council.

One or more Assistant Executive Directors may be appointed by the Council and shall assist the Executive Director/Deputy Executive Director in the performance of his duties or take charge of special projects assigned to them.

The Council shall hire such other personnel as may be necessary for the performance of its basic functions. The salaries and other prerequisites of technical and professional staff and such other positions as the Council may declare to be highly technical, policy determining or primarily confidential shall be determined and fixed by the Council. All other positions shall be subject to Civil Service rules and regulations and the Wages and Position Classifications Office: Provided , That all personnel shall be entitled to the benefits and privileges normally accorded to government employees, such as retirement, GSIS insurance, leave and similar privileges; PROVIDED further , That in appointment and promotion of employees, merit and efficiency shall serve as basis, and no political test or qualification shall be prescribed and considered for such appointments and promotions.

All laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-One.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 706 – 780 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.