MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 542

CREATING THE TASK FORCE PAWIKAN AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREOF

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need for the conservation of the economically important marine turtles now in the verge of total depletion;

WHEREAS, a greater national involvement is necessary to ensure the survival and development of industries related to specific marine resources;

WHEREAS, the factors related to the causes of over exploitation situation is not met with a concerted effort of concerned agencies it is inevitable that these valuable marine resources will be lost as a major source of livelihood of Filipinos, especially the seafaring tribes and Muslims;

WHEREAS, in order to initiate and generate an aggressive conservation movement, to create substitute avocations for seafaring tribes, so as to attain a balance necessary to perpetuate the existence and sustained yield of marine turtle resources to contribute their optimum share in the economy of the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. A TASK FORCE PAWIKAN is hereby created under the Office of the President to (a) enforce existing rules and regulations pertaining to marine turtles, (b) conduct field investigations relevant to formulation of updated policies for the economic utilization of the species, (c) conduct Information and Extension Work aimed at making people responsive to and participative in the marine turtle conservation movement, (d) conduct socio-economic surveys to be used as basis in the formulation of substitute avocations which people currently utilizing marine turtles can engage in so as to ease up the pressure on marine turtle population, and (e) coordinate with international agencies concerned with the conservation of marine turtles.

SEC. 2. A Task Force Pawikan Council is created and shall be chaired by the Deputy Minister of Natural Resources. The Council upon recommendation of the Chairman shall appoint the Executive Officer who shall be responsible for the actual conduct of activities of the Council in pursuit of the objectives stated in Section 1 and 4 hereof. The Council shall be composed of representatives of the following:

Ministry of Natural Resources National Economic Development Authority Office of the Regional Coordinator, Southwestern Mindanao Region Ministry of Local Government and Community Development Ministry of Trade Ministry of Cultural Minorities Ministry of Education and Culture Ministry of Agriculture Ministry of Public Information National Media Production Center University of the Philippines Philippine Council for Agriculture Resources Research Ministry of Human Settlements Forest Research Institute

SEC. 3. Task Force Pawikan shall select, establish and manage marine turtle sanctuaries exclusively for the propagation and absolute protection of marine turtles.

SEC. 4. There is hereby set aside for the current year and annually thereafter for a period of six years, out of the Special Activities Fund the amount of P2,000,000.00 for the Task Force and Council.

SEC. 5. After six years from approval hereof, the Council shall turn-over the project including all its activities and resources to the Government agency it deems appropriate.

SEC. 6. All laws, rules and regulations inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 7. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1979). [Executive Order Nos. : 531 – 605]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.