MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 905

ENTITLING OFFICERS AND MEN OF THE INTEGRATED NATIONAL POLICE TO ACCUMULATE AND COMMUTE, SUBJECT TO CERTAIN CONDITIONS, LEAVE CREDITS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, pursuant to Presidential Decree Number 1184, dated August 26, 1977, the Director General, Integrated National Police is tasked to develop health and welfare programs and to take proper steps to improve personnel morale in the Integrated National Police;

WHEREAS, in line with this objective and as a further measure to accelerate the upgrading and professionalization of the Integrated National Police service, it is desirable that the leave privileges enjoyed by personnel of the Philippine Constabulary and the other services of the Armed Forces of the Philippines be enjoyed by the members of the INP;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct the following:

SECTION 1. Vacation and sick leave shall be cumulative and any member of the Integrated National Police can accumulate vacation and sick leave in excess of ten (10) months.

SECTION 2. Whenever any member of the Integrated National Police shall voluntarily resign or be retired or separated from the service through no fault of his own, he shall be entitled to the commutation of all accumulated vacation and sick leave to his credit, subject to the availability of funds: Provided, that the total vacation leave and sick leave that can be commuted shall, in no case, exceed ten (10) months.

SECTION 3. Any member of the Integrated National Police who, due to the exigencies of the service, is prevented from going on leave shall be entitled to commute whatever leave credits he has earned, and receive the cash value thereof while still in the active service, subject to availability of funds: Provided, that he has at least five (5) months leave credits which he cannot commute: Provided, further, that he can commute and receive the money value of not more than two (2) months leave credits per year: and Provided, finally, that such excess leave credits shall be without prejudice to his option to continue rendering work and be entitled to receive his corresponding pay and allowances or to enjoy leave by utilizing leave credits not otherwise commuted.

SECTION 4. Subject to the approval of the Minister of National Defense, the Director General of the Integrated National Police shall prescribe such rules and regulations necessary to insure a systematic and equitable program on leaves for members of the Integrated National Police geared primarily towards the actual enjoyment thereof in consonance with  existing laws or, in the alternative, the entitlement to commutation of unused leaves as forfeited.

SECTION 5. The Director General of the Integrated National Police is hereby authorized to use the savings of the Integrated National Police for this purpose.

SECTION 6. This Order shall take effect upon approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of August, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1983). [Executive Order Nos. : 858 – 927]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.