MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 397

EXTENDING THE TERM OF THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON REORGANIZATION CREATED UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 281, S. 1970.

WHEREAS, the Integrated Reorganization Plan has already been submitted to Congress last March 4, 1972, pursuant to Section 4 of Republic Act No. 5435, as amended;

WHEREAS, it is desirable to maintain the active involvement of the members of the Presidential Commission on Reorganization in the consideration of the Integrated Reorganization Plan by Congress and in its eventual approval; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary that the Commission undertake such informational activities as may be necessary to ensure wider understanding and support of the reorganization proposals;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby extend the term of the Presidential Commission on Reorganization and the necessary technical staff thereof, from July 1, 1972 to September 30, 1972, to perform the following:

1. Participate and render such technical assistance as may be required by Congress in its consideration of the Integrated Reorganization Plan;

2. Act as liaison and render such services for the Office of the President as may be necessary to ensure the approval of the reorganization plan by Congress;

3. Undertake such informational activities as may be necessary to ensure wider understanding and support of the reorganization proposals; and

4. Perform such other functions as may be necessary to accomplish the foregoing objectives.

The Executive Secretary shall issue the necessary directives to the other government agencies with personnel detailed to the Commission for the extension of the detail of such personnel whose services may still be needed by the Commission.

The Commission is authorized to disburse and defray all expenses for its operations from July 1 to September 30, 1972 and avail of funds that shall be provided for it under a special budget in the Office of the President, including compensation of all the regular personnel. The Commission is also authorized to grant to the personnel of the technical staff whose detail are extended from other government offices as well as those who may be on consultancy basis from the private sector, including the members of the Commission honorarium and/or allowances in such reasonable amounts as it may determine.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1972). [Executive Order Nos. : 366-435]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.