MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 169

CREATING A YOUTH AND STUDENT AFFAIRS BOARD

WHEREAS, there is now a widespread clamor among the youth and students for greater participation in public affairs;

WHEREAS, there is now the growing demand among them for the betterment of their condition in society, particularly vis-a-vis their school and their government;

WHEREAS, in response to this contemporary development and in order to provide the same the proper direction, full meaning and substance, it is imperative to establish an agency which shall be responsible for advising and assisting the officials of the government with regard to the problems affecting the youth and students, and shall serve as an open channel of communication between the students and youth and the officials of the land, and as a forum through which they may maintain a continuous dialogue on matters of common concern in an atmosphere of mutual understanding and freedom;

WHEREAS, it is only proper that this agency shall be composed of the youth and students themselves and/or their organizations since they are in a better position to ventilate, discuss and understand their own problems, needs, demands, grievances and sentiments, and provide solutions thereto;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create and constitute, the Youth and Student Affairs Board which shall be composed of a representative each of the following youth and student organizations:

The representative from each of the aforementioned youth and/or student organizations shall be designated by the organization or association concerned; provided , however , that any youth or student organization not mentioned herein may, should it desire, send its duly authorized representative to attend meetings of the Board for purposes of presenting any complaints, grievances or proposed plans or programs of activity of his organization.

There shall be a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman of the Board who shall be elected by at least a majority vote of the members thereof. The Chairman or, in his absence, the Vice-Chairman, shall preside during the meetings of the Board.

The Board shall formulate and recommend policies relative to youth and/or student activities for consideration of the proper office, agency or instrumentality of the government.

The Board shall initiate and formulate projects and programs for the general well-being, benefit and welfare of the youth and students.

Complaints, grievances and other forms of demands of the youth and students, whether acting individually or through their respective organizations and/or associations may be presented to the Board in writing or in person, and it shall be the Board’s responsibility to act thereon, and make representations to the proper authorities or government offices or agencies concerned for the immediate redress or solution thereof.

The Board shall promulgate rules and regulations concerning its internal management and administration.

There shall be a Secretariat which shall provide clerical and administrative services to the Board to be composed of such personnel as may be deemed necessary.

The Board may call upon any department, bureau, office or agency of the government, including, government-owned or controlled corporations and local government entities for any assistance, and such department, bureau, office or agency and entities shall render such assistance upon request of the Board.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 169, February 8, 1969