MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 902

DECLARING THE NATIONAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY AUTHORITY AS CRITICAL AGENCY

WHEREAS, the National Science and Technology Authority (NSTA), has been mandated under Republic Act No. 2067 and Executive Order No. 784 dated 17 March 1982, to mobilize the scientific and technological resources of the country in order to effectively meet the demands of economic and social development;

WHEREAS, in the attainment of our national development priorities, the National Science and Technology Authority has been tasked specifically to develop a Comprehensive National Plan for Science and Technology responsive to the critical national requirements and to ensure that the results of research and development in science and technology are relevantly utilized to the processes of production to ultimately secure for the Filipino people the benefits of sustained economic growth and prosperity;

WHEREAS, in the performance of these development tasks, the National Science and Technology Authority carries out sensitive and strategic responsibilities requiring high level staff expertise and competence;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Batas Pambansa Blg. 230, the National Science and Technology Authority now operates as one of the major offices under the Office of the President;

Now, therefore, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct:

Section 1. The National Science and Technology Authority is hereby declared as a critical agency.

Section 2. Accordingly, the salary structure of the Office of the President shall be applicable, where appropriate, to all authorized regular positions allocated to the National Science and Technology Authority and those of its agencies.

Section 3. The implementing compensation circular to carry out this Order shall be prepared by the Office of the Budget and Management in coordination with NSTA.

Section 4. This Executive Order shall take effect on 1 January 1984.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of July in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1983). [Executive Order Nos. : 858 – 927]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.