MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1066

REORGANIZING THE FARM SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION

WHEREAS, the Farm Systems Development Corporation (FSDC), in its ten (10) years of operation, has successfully organized, supported, assisted and federated small farmer associations which have in turn played a vital role in hastening rural development and increasing food production in the country;

WHEREAS, there is a need to strengthen the FSDC and to expand its resources to enable it to effectively implement its goals and objectives;

WHEREAS, one way of revitalizing the FSDC is to place it under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested upon me by the Constitution and by law, particularly Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, do hereby order the reorganization of the Farm Systems Development Corporation as follows:

SECTION 1. The Farm Systems Development Corporation, hereinafter referred to as the Corporation, is hereby transferred from the Ministry of Public Works and Highways to the Ministry of Agriculture and Food, and shall act as the implementing corporate arm of the agricultural productivity program of the said Ministry.

SEC. 2. The Board of Administrators of the Corporation shall be composed of the Minister of Agriculture and Food as ex – officio Chairman, and the NIA Administrator, the NFA Administrator, the NEA Administrator, the DAP President, the NFAC Executive Director and the Administrator of the Corporation, as ex – officio members.

SEC. 3. Upon recommendation of the Administrator of the Corporation, the Board of Administrators shall redesign the organizational structure of the Corporation to improve efficiency and productivity, and to upgrade public service in accordance with the following guidelines:

a. Facilitation of planning, organization, direction, coordination, and control of the long, medium and short range policies of the Corporation;

b. Utilization of contemporary management concepts and use of the latest technologies available to modern organizations;

c. Streamlining of the systems and procedures and/or decentralization of functions with the end in view of rendering faster service without surrendering appropriate controls.

SEC. 4. For purposes of this reorganization, the Board of Administrators, upon recommendation of the Administrator, is hereby authorized and directed to:

a. Create/abolish positions;

b. Classify/re-classify positions;

c. Determine appropriate compensation rates and packages for the Corporation; and

d. Promulgate the necessary implementing guidelines to carry out the reorganization of the Corporation.

SEC. 5. Any officer or employee of the Corporation whose position is abolished, or who is not otherwise appointed as a result of the reorganization herein authorized, or who refuses any appointment in the reorganized Corporation, shall be paid the money value of his accumulated vacation and sick leaves and such retirement benefits as may be due him under existing laws. Any officer or employee who is not qualified for retirement benefits, shall be paid a gratuity of one month’s salary for every year of service, a fraction of more than six months being considered one full year, based on the highest monthly salary received, payable in lump sum out of the savings and salary lapses of the Corporation.

SEC. 6. Any provision of Presidential Decree No. 681, as amended, and of any other law, decree, executive or administrative order, rule or regulation, inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order, is hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SEC. 7. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23nd day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030 – 1093 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.