MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 399

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON REHABILITATION OPERATIONS.

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to determine the extent of damages wrought by the recent natural calamities on facilities and installations of the national and local governments, likewise to property, establishments and sources of livelihood of households and individuals in the private sector;

WHEREAS, there is an equally urgent need to determine the financial and physical requirements as well as the logistical and administrative support for speedy and effective rehabilitation, repair, replacement and restoration to operational productive capability of damaged and impaired facilities, services, establishments and occupations;

WHEREAS, there is a correspondingly urgent need to identify the sources of financing and to generate and effectively channel these financial resources so as to realize and effect restoration and rehabilitation immediately;

WHEREAS, the present circumstances demand monitoring, coordinated implementation, timely and reliable reporting of rehabilitation and restoration efforts of both the private and public sector agencies and institutions, at the highest levels of responsibility and authority.

WHEREAS, there is an immediate need to formulate a medium-and long-range program strategy for the rehabilitation and restoration effort;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the authority and powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Presidential Task Force on Rehabilitation Operations to be composed of the following:

Similarly, the corresponding provincial counterparts of the above officials compose the Provincial Task Force, as follows:

* There may be more than one.

The Presidential Task Force shall have as its technical and implementing staff personnel from the following agencies:

For the Provincial Task Force, the representatives from the Provincial Development Council together with the DBP area managers shall serve as the technical staff with the secretariat support to be provided for the Office of the Governor in the provinces affected.

The Development Management Staff of the Executive Office is hereby designated to serve as the coordinating center and clearing-house for the activities and operations of the technical and implementing staff of the Presidential Task Force.

The Presidential Task Force shall undertake the following activities and operations:

1. Determine and submit reports on the financial and physical requirements as well as the logistical and administrative support for speedy and effective rehabilitation, repair, replacement and restoration to operation of productive capacity of damaged and impaired facilities, services, establishments and occupations in both the public and private sectors.

2. Identify the sources of financing, from both domestic and foreign sources, and means of generating, and effectively channeling these financial resources so as to effect and complete immediate rehabilitation and restoration.

3. Formulate appropriate medium and long-range programs and strategies for speedy rehabilitation and restoration, including the relevant counterpart financial plan.

4. Formulate and put into operation effective, quick-response system for monitoring and coordinating the implementation of rehabilitation and restoration efforts and programs in both the public and private sectors, as well as for timely and reliable reporting of the status, progress and problems of the rehabilitation and restoration efforts and programs in both the public and private sectors.

The Presidential Task Force and its technical and implementing staff is hereby authorized and empowered to call upon all departments, bureaus, agencies or instrumentalities of the government, including government owned or controlled corporations as well as the private sector, to give the necessary cooperation and assistance for the successful prosecution and discharge of its functions.

The Presidential Task Force shall complete its assigned task, as specified herein, and submit its report within sixty (60) days from the date hereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1972). [Executive Order Nos. : 366-435]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.