MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 318

ESTABLISHMENT OF AN EDUCATION TASK FORCE

WHEREAS, without in any way pre-empting the prerogatives of the Board of National Education to examine the validity and merits of the proposals under the report of the Presidential Commission to Survey Philippine Education, there is need to create a Task Force that will choose and evaluate the specific projects proposed in the said report and prepare therefor the necessary project feasibility studies in accordance with the guidelines set forth in the Presidential memorandum to the Secretary of Education dated May 1, 1971;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create an Education Task Force (hereinafter referred to as “Task Force”) which shall undertake the foregoing responsibility.

The objectives of the Education Task Force are:

1. To formulate a program of action, in consultation with the government agencies concerned, particularly the Department of Education, for the purpose of implementing approved recommendations of the Presidential Commission;

2. To undertake feasibility studies in connection with approved project recommendations of said Commission;

3. To pursue in adequate detail some of the areas of concern recommended by the Commission for further study;

4. To specify the details of the development plan for education, subject to the approval of authorities concerned.

To attain the aforementioned objectives, the Task Force shall have authority to undertake the following:

1. To enter into contract with competent parties and to request detail of appropriate personnel from other government agencies in the performance of its functions;

2. To serve as liaison group with representatives of agencies and organizations here and abroad in the accomplishment of its functions; and

3. To prepare necessary documents needed in the implementations of any or all aspects of the program of action stipulated to be formulated, such as bills for legislative action, circulars, Executive Orders, Resolutions, Memoranda, and similar documents.

The Education Task Force shall mainly be constituted out of the staff of the survey group of the Presidential Commission and the Division of Educational Planning of the Department of Education.

The Head of the Task Force is hereby empowered:

1. To call upon all offices and meet with all persons involved in the work of the Task Force;

2. To request from the various government departments, bureaus and offices, as well as government-owned or controlled corporations, such administrative reports and services as may be required by the Task Force;

3. To tap public funds from existing appropriations, and whenever appropriate from private sources, for the purpose of carrying out its objectives;

4. To negotiate and establish contracts with appropriate persons and organizations in connection with provisions of staff personnel, consultants, and resource persons;

5. To manage all funds in the name of the Education Task Force; and

6. To perform such other functions as may be necessary and expedient for the completion of the work for which the Task Force is created.

The Head of the Education Task Force shall be appointed by and be responsible to the Secretary of Education for the proper functioning of the Task Force.

The Secretary of Education is hereby authorized to allocate within the available funds of the Department of Education such funds as are appropriate and necessary.

All government offices and instrumentalities thereof are hereby enjoined to extend all support and cooperation to the Education Task Force in the performance of its functions.

The Presidential Commission to Survey Philippine Education created by Executive Order No. 202 dated December 24, 1969, is hereby abolished.

This Order shall take effect immediately and shall be in full force until June 30, 1972.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 318, May 17, 1971