MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 139

CREATING A COMMITTEE ON ARSON AND PROMULGATING ITS FUNCTIONS

WHEREAS, incalculable losses in life end property caused by arson have wrought misery and desolation to countless homes, destroyed industries, paralyzed commerce and caused great loss to the economic resources of the country; and

WHEREAS, to forestall destructive and dangerous fires and to provide adequate protection to life and property, public interest requires the adoption of more effective measures to prevent arson and to prosecute arson cases;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Committee on Arson composed of the following:

The Committee shall study, recommend and work out ways and means, including the necessary legislative proposals, to effectively prevent arson. It may create sub-committees as the Chairman thereof may determine to prepare studies and proposals on specific problem areas.

The Committee is likewise empowered to create special Fire Investigation Teams to investigate the causes of fire and initiate the prosecution of offenders through the existing agencies, whenever warranted by the evidence, and to conduct training programs on fire investigation.

The Committee may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may need to carry out its tasks, and issue the necessary implementing rules and regulations.

The Committee shall submit its report to the President within two months from the date hereof, and annually thereafter.

All orders inconsistent herewith are hereby revoked or amended accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.