MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 737

CREATING THE KILUSANG KABUHAYAN AT KAUNLARAN (KKK) MARKETING COORDINATION CENTER, DEFINING ITS FUNCTIONS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the government has launched a nationwide movement, the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran to be the centerpiece of the development thrust of the New Republic which aims to establish viable productive enterprises in communities through self-help and self-reliance;

WHEREAS, it has been exercised that availability of marketing support is among the vital factors to the continued viability of livelihood enterprises;

WHEREAS, in order to provide these enterprises comprehensive marketing guidance and assistance, NFA has been tasked in coordination with other government ministries and agencies to provide the marketing component of the movement;

WHEREAS, in order to enhance effective marketing complementation, it is imperative to establish closer linkages among the various components, both the private and government sectors, so as to harmonize strategies in providing market conduits between the livelihood enterprises and markets;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran (KKK) Marketing Coordinating Center. The KKK Coordination Center is hereby established to institutionalize the linkage between livelihood enterprises and its buyers and to bring about coordinated marketing support to the national livelihood program. The center aims to:

1. Monitor livelihood production and evaluate its demand in both domestic and foreign markets;

2. To assist in providing timely and comprehensive marketing information to livelihood enterprises; and

3. Encourage the establishment of more private marketing facilities and services.

SECTION 2. The KKK Coordination Center, in addition shall have the following functions and powers:

1. To develop and adopt a national marketing strategy supportive to the livelihood program;

2. To assist in providing basic information that shall give guidance to livelihood enterprises, in the marketing of commodities or services, both domestic and foreign;

3. To give support services to the National Council on Livelihood, its secretariat as well as the regional, provincial and municipal development councils on matters pertaining to marketing;

4. To assist, through the mass media, market information to livelihood enterprises, the prospective buyers and the various institutional components of Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran;

5. To assist in showcasing livelihood produce in consumption centers in the country and at the Philippine centers abroad; and

6. To call upon other ministries and agencies of the government and other private persons, entities or organizations to provide support services to the Center.

The KKK Marketing Coordination Center shall be composed of the following:

The KKK National Marketing Coordination Center may create or organize regional, provincial and municipal coordination centers as the need arises to further implement this program.

SECTION 3. Repealing clause, all laws, decrees, executive orders, administrative orders, proclamations, rules and regulations or parts thereof that are in conflict with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 4. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of September in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 706 – 780]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.