MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1009

STRENGTHENING THE POLICY FORMULATING CAPABILITY OF THE CIVIL AERONAUTICS BOARD

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 776 (1952) creating the Civil Aeronautics Board was amended by Presidential Decree No. 1462 (1978) to give more authority and flexibility to the Civil Aeronautics Board to be able to meet the current and future demands on civil aviation development by Philippine trade, commerce and tourism;

WHEREAS, it is imperative to strengthen the policy formulating capability of the Civil Aeronautics Board to contribute effectively in the national economic recovery program of the government;

WHEREAS, it is imperative to integrate the foreign policy thrusts of economic diplomacy in the policies of the Civil Aeronautics Board as well as to involve the participation of the private sector in the formulation of such policies;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order:

Section 1. Section 5 of Republic Act No. 776 and Section 2 of Presidential Decree No. 1462, to read as follows:

“SEC. 5. Composition of the Board . The Civil Aeronautics Board shall be composed of the Minister of Tourism as Chairman, the Director of the Civil Aeronautics Administration  as Vice-Chairman, the Commanding General of the Philippines Air Force, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and three members to be appointed by the President of the Philippines one of whom shall come from the private sector. They shall hold office at the pleasure of the President. All members of the Board shall be entitled to a per diem of Five Hundred Pesos per member for each meeting actually attended by them, which shall in no case exceed Two Thousand Pesos a month. In case of absence or incapacity of the Minister of Tourism, the Director of the Civil Aeronautics Administration shall act as Chairman.

No member of the Board shall have any pecuniary interest in, or own any stock or bond of, in any civil aeronautics enterprise.”

Section 2. All provisions of existing orders, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.

Section 3. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 20th day of February, in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty -Five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.