MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1065

DECLARING THE BUREAU OF POSTS AS A CRITICAL SERVICE AGENCY OF THE GOVERNMENT AND RESTRUCTING THE SALARIES OF POSTAL OFFICIALS AND WORKERS

WHEREAS, the Bureau of Posts is a vital link of the government and the people to all sectors of society and the world through its domestic and international postal services;

WHEREAS, the postal service is the most widely used and economical means of communications essential for business, cultural, social and economic development of the country;

WHEREAS, the maintenance of a fast, safe, reliable and efficient postal system creates a favorable image for the country;

WHEREAS, the general public and the national leadership have acknowledged the significant improvement in the country’s postal services;

WHEREAS, the efficient operations of the postal system have been realized due to the dedication of the postal officials and employees despite inadequate budget to support the financial equipment for mail delivery and other postal services;

WHEREAS, the postal income of P372, 260, 000.00 for 1983 exceeded postal expenditures by P84, 575, 000.00 and the postal income of P420, 000, 000.00 for 1984 exceeded postal expenditures by P75, 476, 000.00;

WHEREAS , the Bureau of Posts is not considered a revenue – generating agency but a service agency and as such, its revenue should to the extent possible be plowed back to support and further enhance postal operation;

WHEREAS , the salaries of more than 95% of postal workers are way below the statutory minimum wage in the private sector;

WHEREAS , the upliftment of the socio-economic conditions of postal workers will bolster their morale, further improve their performance and reduce to the barest minimum the commission of irregularities within their ranks.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct:

SEC. 1. The Bureau of Posts is hereby declared a critical service agency of the government.

SEC. 2. The present basic salaries of all officials and employees of the Bureau, whether postal or non-postal, shall be adjusted as follows:

a) 25% for employees with annual salaries of P15, 000 and below;

b) 20% for employees with annual salaries above P15, 000 but not more than P40, 000;

c) 10% for officials receiving more than P40, 000.

SEC. 3. The salary increases resulting from such adjustment shall take effect September 1, 1985 and shall be paid from any or all of the following:

a) the savings of the Bureau of Posts for the current year;

b) the postal income realized for the current year in excess of actual and targeted income; and

c) the salary adjustment fund;

SEC. 4. The Director General, Office of the Budget and Management, shall include in the budget for the succeeding year the around needed for said increases. However, requirements for the calendar year 1986 shall be charged against salary lapses, savings from other personal services, and from the salary adjustment funs.

SEC. 5. Whenever a general increase in salary, allowances or benefits for government employees is granted, postal officers and employees shall likewise be automatically entitled to the same increase, notwithstanding the salary increases prescribed in this Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14 th day of November in the Year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

( Sgd .) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030-1093]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.