MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 478

EXTENDING THE TERM OF THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE TO STUDY GOVERNMENT CORPORATIONS CREATED UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 464, SERIES OF 1976

WHEREAS, it is desirable to subject the Presidential Committee to Study Government Corporation’s (PCSGC) preliminary findings and policy proposals concerning the administration of government corporations as a discrete variable in the developmental process to wider scrutiny by experts or relevant institutions in the government and private sector;

WHEREAS, the scope and volume of the study by the PCSGC has increased due to the inclusion of other entities which were heretofore excluded due to legal technicalities but which have subsequently been included since the government exercises effective control thereof, and that they therefore have to be taken into account for a proper and complete appraisal of the government corporate sector’s contribution to national development;

WHEREAS, there is a need to adjust the work schedule of the PCSGC to absorb the increased workload and to realign the terms of reference of the PCSGC to include general overseeing of the implementation of its recommendations as may be adopted; and

WHEREAS, it would therefore be desirable to extend the time frame for the study of government corporations pursuant to Executive Order No. 464 in order to allow a more exhaustive and comprehensive in-depth study of government corporate entities which have increasingly become a major and critical sector of governmental administration.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby extend the term of the Presidential Committee to Study Government Corporations up to December 31, 1977, subject to the following:

SECTION 1. The Committee is directed to submit its report and recommendations on or before June 30, 1977 and to oversee the installation and implementation of such of its recommendations as may be approved and adopted by the appropriate authorities for the period covering July 1, 1977 to December 31, 1977.

SECTION 2. An appropriation of P600,000 is authorized for the incurrence of operating and necessary expenditures in connection with its study of government corporations.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1976). [Executive Order Nos. : 436 – 530 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.