MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 235

CREATING AN IRRIGATION AND WATER RESOURCES COMMITTEE TO STUDY THE DEVELOPMENT AND UTILIZATION OF ALL NATIONAL WATER RESOURCES.

WHEREAS, there is need for an effective machinery to coordinate all activities in the study, development and proper utilization of all irrigation and water resources of the nation to ensure effective implementation of its development;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby establish an Irrigation and Water Resources Committee, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, to carry out the development of irrigation and water resources of the nation:

Section 1. Composition – The Committee shall have as members the following:

The Chairman is authorized to form sub-committees and a secretariat, the members of which may be designated from member agencies or from other government offices or agencies.

The Secretary of Public Works and Communications, may provide such advice, assistance and leadership as may be necessary in carrying out the functions and responsibilities of the Committee.

Section 2. Functions and Responsibilities of the Committee. – The functions, duties and responsibilities of the Committee shall be the following:

1. To conduct studies or researches and gather data on all water resources for irrigation and other purposes.

2. To formulate with areas of cooperation and coordination for the various agencies and instrumentalities of government in the implementation of water resources development to avoid duplication of efforts.

3. To develop guidelines for long-range plans on water resources utilization, conservation and development.

4. To coordinate data gathering to include collation and analysis of these data to serve as basis for the conception and generation of bankable water resource development projects.

5. To prepare a Master Plan for a nation-wide scheme of irrigation development.

6. To study the feasibility of establishing a Special Fund for water resources development similar to the Portworks and Highways Special Funds.

7. To perform such other tasks relative to the water resource development program as may be assigned by the Secretary of Public Works and Communications or the President of the Philippines.

Section 3. Authority to Request Assistance from Other Offices . – All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including Government-owned and controlled corporations, are hereby enjoined to cooperate with and assist the Committee in the performance of its duties and responsibilities.

Section 4. Effectivity of this Order . – This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Executive Order Nos. : 141-280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.