MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 383

CREATING THE CALIRAYA DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION

WHEREAS, there is a need to expand and develop our existing and potential tourist spots;

WHEREAS, pursuant to the commitment of the Philippine government to the Japanese government, an area in the Caliraya watershed was allotted for the Japanese Memorial Shrine and Garden to be developed by the Philippine-Japan Friendship Society to symbolize the amity and friendship that exist between the Philippines and Japan;

WHEREAS, the government is pledged to a policy of strengthening the cordial relations with the Japanese and has committed to develop and beautify the Caliraya watershed, including the Japanese Shrine therein, in accordance with the assurance given to Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan through former Prime Minister Nobusuke Kishi during the latter’s visit to the Philippines on January 18, 1972;

WHEREAS, the Caliraya watershed is one of the sources of power in this country and it has been declared a reserve watershed under Executive Order No. 33, dated July 26, 1904, to protect the area from illegal logging, encroachment of squatters and water pollution; and

WHEREAS, if developed, this area could be one of the most attractive and beautiful tourist spots, hence the need to rapidly develop and transform the same into a tourist attraction;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Caliraya Development Commission which shall be composed of the following:

To carry out its objectives, the Commission empowered:

a) To make proper representations with various government agencies with respect to:

1. Protection of watershed areas; 2. Propagation and preservation of wildlife; 3. Reforestation; 4. Seeding of the lake with fresh-water fishes; 5. Establishment of security measures;

b) To establish policies and guidelines in the proper use of the lake and its amenities;

c) To promote and encourage joint ventures with foreign governments or foreign or local investors in the development of the Lake and environs for tourist and recreational purposes;

d) To draft legislation to protect Caliraya Lake from water pollution, sedimentation and reduction of water elevation.

The Commission may ask any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its functions.

Executive Order No. 365 dated January 11, 1972, is hereby revoked.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1972). [Executive Order Nos. : 366-435]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.