MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 700

TRANSFERRING THE PHILIPPINE TEXTILE RESEARCH INSTITUTE FROM THE NATIONAL SCIENCE DEVELOPMENT BOARD TO THE MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY

WHEREAS, the Philippine Textile Research Institute was created under Resolution NSDB 246 R.3 in accordance with the objectives of R.A. 4086, to assist in the development of the textile industry;

WHEREAS, the Textile Industry Sector is considered a high priority area because of employment and export considerations, the systematic growth of which is considered vital to the development of the country;

WHEREAS, there is now the need to reorient the program thrust of the Philippine Textile Research Institute from the basic research and development to direct assistance to the textile industry specifically in the field of training for the textile industry personnel in line with the industry’s rationalization program;

WHEREAS, to enable the Philippine Textile Research Institute to fully and effectively provide such assistance, it must be organizationally located within the Ministry of Industry which is primarily responsible for the promotion and development of industries in the country;

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416 the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and development;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order.

SECTION 1. The Philippine Textile Research Institute, herein after referred to as the Institute, shall be transferred from the National Science Development Board and attached to the Ministry of Industry for policy and program coordination.

SEC. 2. The Advisory Committee of the Institute is hereby abolished.

SEC. 3. A Board of Trustees with seven (7) members is hereby created for the Institute and shall be composed of the Minister of Industry as Chairman, with a representative from the NSDB, Ministry of Trade, NEDA and three (3) from the textile industry, sector to be appointed by the Minister of Industry as members; provided that of the first three (3) members appointed, one shall serve for three (3) years, one for two (2) years, and one for one (1) year, respectively.

SEC. 4. The Chairman of the Board of Trustees shall appoint with the approval of the Board, the Executive Director of the Institute.

SEC. 5. The Board is hereby authorized to reorganize the internal structure of the Institute.

SEC. 6. All laws, decrees, administrative orders, proclamations and rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

SEC. 7. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-One.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.