MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1055

REORGANIZING THE MEMBERSHIP IN THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE PHILIPPINE COCONUT AUTHORITY, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, it is the declared policy of the State to promote the rapid and integrated development and growth of the coconut and other palm oils industry in all its aspects;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Coconut Authority (“Authority”) was created to implement and attain the above declared national policy;

WHEREAS, to strengthen the Authority’s collaborative linkages with sectors involved in industry affairs, there is need to reorganize the membership in the Authority’s Government Board so as to include representatives from agencies which could further assist in sustaining the accelerated development of the coconut industry;

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and by law, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. Sections 4 (paragraph 1), 5, 6 and 7, Article II of Presidential Decree No. 1468 are hereby amended so as to read as follows:

“Section 4. Governing Board . – The corporate powers and duties of the Authority shall be vested in and exercised by a Governing Board of seven (7) members to be appointed by the President as follows:

a) The Chairman, who, pursuant to Executive Order No. 945, has the rank and privileges of a Minister and is a Member of the Cabinet, and who shall henceforth be known as the Minister of Coconut Industries;

b) Two (2) members recommended by the Philippine Coconut Producers Federation;

c) One (1) member recommended by the United Coconut Association of the Philippines;

d) The Minister of Agriculture and Food, or his duly designated representative, as ex-officio member ; and

e) Two (2) other representatives of the Government, as members.

“Section 5. Meeting and Quorum . – The Board shall meet as often as the exigencies of the service may demand. The presence of at least four members shall constitute a quorum, and the vote of a majority of the members present constituting a quorum shall be necessary for the adoption of any rule, resolution, decision or any other act of the Board.

“Section 6. Compensation of the Members of the Board . – The compensation and allowance of the Chairman and Members of the Boards shall be determined by the Governing Board, subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines.

“Section 7. Officers and Personnel. – The Chairman of the Governing Board shall be the head and chief executive officer of the Authority. Upon recommendation of the Chairman, the Board shall elect an Administrator of the Authority who shall be the chief operating officer with the rank and privileges of a Deputy Minister. The Administrator shall have the responsibility of managing the day-to-day affairs and operations of the Authority, in accordance with policies established by the Board

The Administrator may be assisted by such Deputy Administrators as the Board may prescribe, who shall be appointed, or removed, by the Board. The Administrator and the Deputy Administrator/s may be delegated with such powers and duties as the Board may prescribe.

All officers and employees of the Authority shall be selected and appointed by the Board on the basis of merit and fitness.”

SECTION 2. Until otherwise so ordered by the President of the Philippines the incumbent Chairman and the incumbent Administrator of the Authority are hereby automatically appointed as such.

SECTION 3. All laws, decrees, orders, proclamations, rules, regulations, and issuances, or parts thereof which are inconsistent with any provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, the 3rd day day of October in the Year of our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Eighty Five.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

( Sgd .) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030-1093]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.