MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 143

RECONSTITUTING THE PEACE AND ORDER COMMISSION

WHEREAS, the alarming incidence of crimes and acts of violence require the concerted action of the Government and the nation at large;

WHEREAS, the task of maintaining peace and order, suppressing smuggling and other economically crippling law violations demands the cooperation and combined resources of the Government and the private sector; and

WHEREAS, responsible and civic-spirited and patriotic elements of the country have manifested their willingness to cooperate in this undertaking and to contribute in the campaign to raise funds;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Peace and Order Commission composed of Mr. Alfredo J. Montelibano as Chairman, Mr. Leonides Virata as Vice-Chairman and Treasurer, and not more than twelve members, to be chosen by the President of the Philippines, charged with the responsibility of raising funds from voluntary contributions to carry out the purposes of this order.

Said funds shall be utilized for:

1) The purchase of loose firearms and other arms and equipment in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 486;

2) Allowances, per diems and expense of additional members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines to be employed in the peace end order and anti-smuggling campaigns, as well as in the drive against dynamite fishing, illegal logging, destruction of public forests, cattle-rustling, squatting, illegal possession of firearms, crime syndicates and other illegal acts;

3) Indemnity to the heirs of those who may die or receive injuries in line of duty;

4) Relief and assistance to civilians who may be engaged in the aforesaid campaigns;

5) Aid to the civilian population during emergencies;

6) Payment of cash rewards to civilians or to members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and, subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines, to their immediate relatives, for information leading to the apprehension of smugglers and leaders of smuggling syndicates and others engaged in the aforesaid offenses, or for any assistance rendered directly in connection with the said campaigns and for intelligence, counter-intelligence and psychological warfare expenses of the Department of National Defense and other law-enforcement bodies;

7) Payment of expenses in connection with investigation of complaints filed with the Commission against the manner in which public officers or employees are performing the duties entrusted to them, or against any acts, conduct or behavior of such officers or employees; and

8) Payment of such other expenses or undertakings as may be in furtherance of, or incidental to, the prosecution of the peace and order drive.

The amounts collected shall be allotted by authority of the President of the Philippines, upon the recommendation of the Chairman and the Treasurer of the Commission and the Commissioner of the Budget. All contributions end disbursements of the Commission shall be audited by the Auditor General or his representative in accordance with law.

The Commission is hereby authorized to create local committees, to adopt rules and regulations, and to secure the services of officers and employees of any department, bureau, agency, board, commission office or instrumentality of the government as it may deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this Order.

This supersedes Executive Order No. 31 dated July 5, 1966.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.