MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 233

CREATING THE COMMISSION ON POPULATION

WHEREAS, it is generally accepted that “the population problem must be recognized as a principal element in long-range national planning if governments are to achieve their economic goals and fulfill the aspirations of their people”;

WHEREAS, a high growth rate of population can potentially benefit as well as adversely affect economic growth;

WHEREAS, it has been a long-felt need to ascertain the influence of rapidly increasing population on the capacity of the economy to provide the minimum of public services to the people; and

WHEREAS, it has been recognized that continuing study on this problem is necessary to provide policy-makers with adequate information for the formulation and implementation of policies and programs on population as it affects economic and social development;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Commission on Population with the following functions and duties:

1. Formulate program recommendation on population as it relates to economic and social development consistent with and implementing the population policy approved by this Office on 4 December 1969;

2. Coordinate and evaluate the implementation of approved program recommendations and project proposals;

3. Undertake such action projects as are necessary;

4. Undertake, promote, and public studies and investigations on the Philippine population in all its aspects;

5. Assemble and disseminate technical and scientific information relating to medical, social, economic and cultural phenomena as these affect or are affected by population;

6. Perform such other duties as proper authorities may from time to time direct the Commission to undertake.

The Commission on Population shall be composed of:

1. Secretary of Education 2. Secretary of Health 3. Secretary of Social Welfare 4. Chairman of the National Economic Council 5. Presidential Assistant on Community Development 6. Chairman of the National Manpower and Youth Council 7. Commissioner on National Integration 8. Director of the Bureau of Census and Statistics 9. Director of the University of the Philippines Population Institute 10. Director of the Philippine Press Institute 11. Representative of the Asian Social Institute/Institute of Social Order 12. President of the Philippine Rural Reconstruction Movement 13. President of the Philippine Medical Association 14. President of the Philippine Nurses Association 15. President of the National League of Puericulture Centers 16. President of the Family Planning Organization of the Philippines 17. President of the Catholic Bishops Conference of the Philippines 18. President of the National Union of Students of the Philippines 19. Executive Secretary of National Council of Churches 20. Executive Director of Institute of Maternal and Child Health 21. Executive Director of the Association of Philippine Medical Colleges

The Commission may, from time to time, invite such other persons, organizations or agencies as it may deem necessary to contribute to its work.

The Commission will be headed by a Chairman responsible for calling and presiding over meetings, who shall be designated by the President from among the members of the Commission.

The Commission shall meet at least twice a year or at the call of the Chairman. It shall adopt rules and regulations as may be necessary for the conduct of its business and to carry out the purposes of this Order.

The Chairman of the Commission may constitute continuing or ad hoc committees consisting of the members of the Commission or such other experts as are deemed necessary to conduct studies for the Commission, or to assist it in the discharge of its functions.

The Chairman of the Commission may, for and in behalf of the Commission, receive gifts, or donations in whatever form and from whatever sources, and shall administer, obligate, and disburse same, to hire and maintain a staff and to carry out the purposes and objectives of the Commission in accordance with the procedures prescribed by the Revised Budget Act, Republic Act No. 992, and other pertinent laws, rules and regulations.

The Commission shall have an Executive Committee which shall discharge the administrative and executive powers of the Commission when the latter is not in session. The Executive Committee shall be composed of:

1. Secretary of Education 2. Secretary of Health 3. Secretary of Social Welfare 4. President of the Family Planning Organization of the Philippines 5. President of the Catholic Bishops Conference of the Philippines 6. President of the Philippine Medical Association 7. Commissioner on National Integration 8. Executive Director of the National Council of Churches 9. Director of the University of the Philippines Population Institute

The Executive Committee shall meet at least once a month or at the call of the Chairman who shall be designated by the President from among the members of the Committee.

The Executive Committee shall have an Executive Director, who shall act as its action officer and serve as secretary of the Executive Committee and the Commission. The Executive Director shall be designated by the Executive Committee in consultation with the Chairman of the Commission.

Subject to the direction and supervision of the Executive Committee, the Executive Director will have responsibility for the operation of the national population program, and for making decisions on a day-to-day basis. The Executive Director shall have responsibility for preparing periodic reviews of program progress, for annual budget estimates, and for recommending policy to the Commission, and shall perform such other functions as are prescribed by the Commission.

The Commission shall have such personnel as may be assigned or detailed to it from departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the Government and arrange for such services as the Executive Committee may, with the approval of the Chairman of the Commission, deem necessary for the performance of the Commission’s work.

The procurement of supplies, materials and equipment needed by the Commission may be made without the benefit of public bidding as an exception to the provisions of Executive Order No. 298, series of 1940, as amended, provided, however, that a thorough canvass of the market shall be made beforehand.

The Commission may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its functions.

This Order repeals Executive Order No. 171, series of 1969.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Executive Order Nos. : 141-280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.