MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 607

CREATING A PHILIPPINE COUNTERPART COMMISSION TO THE HAWAIIAN COMMISSION FOR THE OBSERVANCE AND COMMEMORATION OF THE 75TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ARRIVAL OF THE FIRST FILIPINO IMMIGRANTS IN HAWAII, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, the year 1981 will be the 75th Anniversary of the arrival of the first Filipino immigrants in Hawaii;

WHEREAS, “in recognition of this highly-significantly event in the history of modern-day Hawaii, “the Honorable George R. Ariyoshi, Governor of the State of Hawaii, U.S.A., has created and named a 15-man Commission” to plan, organize and implement” the observance of this historic event;

WHEREAS, the Governor of Hawaii has officially requested the participation of the Philippine Government in the observance of “this milestone in Hawaii’s history”;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President/Prime Minister of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and applicable laws, do hereby create a Philippine Counterpart Commission to the Hawaiian Commission for the observance of this memorable occasion, which shall be composed of the following:

A. Members from the Government Sector:

B. Members from the Private Sector:

The Commission shall formulate and prepare plans for and supervise the Philippine participation in the observance and commemoration of the 75th Anniversary of the arrival of the first Filipino immigrants in Hawaii; it shall synchronize the overall planning and programming of all activities and resources in connection therewith, collaborate and coordinate with and assist its Hawaiian counterpart in all aspects in the planning, organizing and implementation of all preparations leading to a successful observance and commemoration of said event; and shall perform such other functions and exercise such powers as are reasonably connected with or incidental to its existence.

The Commission shall establish a Secretariat in the City of Manila but it may conduct its business and have one or more offices in such places in the Philippines or Hawaii as may be necessary for the attainment of its objectives.

The Secretariat shall serve as the implementing arm of the Commission.

The Commission may create such committees as may be necessary to carry out its functions and is hereby further authorized to directly call upon any Ministry, bureau or public office in the executive branch of the government or upon any government-owned or controlled entity or agency for assistance as it may consider proper and to request, utilize, and make use of their facilities and services of their personnel for the efficient performance of its functions. Personnel from government agencies detailed with the Commission, including those who may be on consultancy basis from the private sector, may be paid such reasonable allowances or honoraria approved by the Office of the President/Prime Minister.

The Office of the President/Prime Minister shall include and provide from its budgetary appropriations the necessary funds for the operations and maintenance of the Commission. Special releases of funds in connection with the Commission’s functions which cannot be funded by regular appropriations is hereby authorized. To augment these funds, the Commission is hereby authorized to solicit in whatever manner it deems fit, and accept and receive sums of money, materials and services in the form of grant-in-aid, subsidies, and contributions given by any international, national or other public or private entity, agency or individual. All contributions given by any private entity, agency or individual shall be tax deductible. Likewise, all funds solicited by or voluntary contributions coming into or received by the Commission shall be tax exempt.

The Commission may draw from available budgetary appropriation of any Ministry, bureau, agency or public office in the executive branch of the government or any government-owned or controlled entity or instrumentality, and the entity concerned shall make available to the Commission such funds and other assistance as the latter may require to carry out its functions.

All funds solicited by or voluntary contributions coming into or received by the Commission shall be deposited with the Philippine National Bank in the name of the Commission and the necessary withdrawals therefrom shall be made only by checks duly signed by the Chairman and counter-signed by the Auditor. The Chairman may, however, delegate this function to the Vice-Chairman in order to expedite the transaction of the business of the Commission.

All books of accounts kept in connection with the operation and maintenance of the Commission shall always be made available for audit by the Auditor designated by the Commission on Audit.

The Commission shall prescribe and promulgate such policies and guidelines it may consider proper for the effective exercise of its functions and the discharge of its powers under this Executive Order.

The Commission shall submit to the President/Prime Minister a progress report of its activities every three (3) months and shall wind-up its affairs not later than three (3) months after December 31, 1981. A final report of its accomplishment shall be submitted to the President/Prime Minister not later than one (1) month thereafter.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Executive Order Nos. : 606-630]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.