MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 834

Creating a National Board on the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department Programs, Budget and Operations.

Whereas, the Philippine Government is signatory to the Treaty Agreement dated December 28, 1967 establishing the Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center (SEAFDEC), together with the governments of Japan, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and Vietnam;

Whereas, the establishment of the Aquaculture Department of SEAFDEC in Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines was approved in June, 1973 during the Sixth Meeting of the SEAFDEC Council for the purpose of:

a. Promoting, undertaking and coordinating research which is necessary for the development of the aquaculture industry in the region;

b. Training experts in aquaculture at various levels from researchers down to technician level;

c. Disseminating knowledge and information in the field of aquaculture and related activities to meet the needs of the member countries;

Whereas, the presence of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department in the Philippines dramatizes the country’s lead role in aquaculture development in Asia and the Pacific;

Whereas, as such, the Philippine Government has continued to underwrite the operational costs of the Aquaculture Department in addition to providing tax exemptions, immigration privileges and other amenities granted to other international agencies based in the country;

Whereas, after a decade of operation, there is need to introduce innovative managerial schemes to enhance the Aquaculture Department’s role in fisheries development which will redound to the immediate benefit not only of the Filipino people but also of the millions of people in the Southeast Asian Region;

Whereas, for the purpose of complementing the Philippine government’s Integrated Fisheries Development Plan, in order to promote stability, effect better management and supervision, harmonize and integrate institutional purposes, minimize costly duplications, and maximize dissemination of research information and application in aquaculture research, training and extension, effective linkages with other national and international agencies must be established;

Whereas, an autonomous member of the University of the Philippines System was established by virtue of Executive Order No. 628, the Visayas, Miag-ao, Iloilo, mandate by PD 1200 to become the national center for fisheries and marine sciences education, training and research;

Now, Therefore, I, Ferdinand E. Marcos, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of the National Board on the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department Programs, Budget and Operations . A National Board is hereby constituted as a step towards institutionalizing a more effective control and management of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department in the country. It shall be composed of Ministers/Heads of the following agencies or their representatives:

a. Ministry of Natural Resources, Chairman b. Ministry of Human Settlements, Member c. Ministry of the Budget, Member d. University of the Philippines System, Member e. National Science and Technology Authority, Member f. National Economic and Development Authority, Member g. Philippine Representative to the SEAFDEC Council, Member

The head of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department shall be a non-voting member and shall provide the Secretariat to the National Board.

Section 2. Functions of the Board . The National Board shall discharge the following functions and responsibilities:

a. To review and approve the annual program budget of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department particularly the Philippine contribution before presentation to the Ministry of the Budget and the approval of the SEAFDEC Council;

b. To approve the internal operating budget of the Aquaculture Department to ensure adequate financial support of approved programs;

c. To ensure efficient operation of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department within the country by reviewing periodically its organization, management, operations and progress of its researches;

d. To evaluate, on an annual basis, the performance of the Aquaculture Department for the assessment of future programs and budgets;

e. To recommend such other rules and regulations that shall ensure effective internal financial administration of the Aquaculture Department;

f. To recommend to the President the nominees to the SEAFDEC Council for the position of Chief of the Aquaculture Department;

g. To study and implement mechanisms for a more effective dissemination of research results and transfer of technology on aquaculture to relevant government institution and to private enterprise;

h. To effect the integration of the aquaculture research efforts of the AQD and those leading national research institution such as the U.P. in the Visayas which shall ensure the efficient operation and management of the Aquaculture Department for the Philippine Government;

i. To study the delegation of supervisory and administrative responsibility over the Aquaculture Department to a national institution such as the U.P. in the Visayas which shall ensure the efficient operation and management of the Aquaculture Department for the Philippine Government.

Section 3. The Regional Integrity of the Aquaculture Department . The Aquaculture Department remains an integral part of the SEAFDEC subject to policies, rules and regulations of the SEAFDEC Council and the SEAFDEC Treaty Agreement and commitment of the host country to the regional endeavor in fisheries. The creation of the National Board is an internal mechanism within the Philippines to ensure that its commitments to the SEAFDEC are efficiently and effectively carried out.

Section 4. Funding . The SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department, from out of the appropriations provided by the Philippine government, shall allocate an amount adequate to support the operations and maintenance of the National Board.

Section 5. Effectivity . This Order shall be effective immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of October, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 781-857]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.