MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 41

PROMULGATING RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE DETAIL OR ASSIGNMENT OF MILITARY PERSONNEL TO CIVILIAN OFFICES AND OFFICIALS

By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the laws or the Philippines, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby promulgate the following rules and regulations governing the detail or assignment or military personnel to civilian offices and officials:

1. Except for the assignment of Aides-de-Camp and Military Assistants, requests for the detail of military personnel to civilian offices and officials shall not be specified by name but by qualifications so as not to disturb the professional growth of AFP officers as programmed by their prescribed military career management pattern. Should it be imperative to ask for military personnel by name, the requesting agency or official will submit to the approving authority the names of at least three (3) military personnel for each detail or position to be filled.

2. As used in this Order, the following terms shall be construed as follows:

a. Aide-de-Camp . – A commissioned officer of the Armed Forces of the Philippines in the active service who is personally selected by a general or a flag officer or by a civilian official entitled to an aide-de-camp as provided hereunder, and is attached to the latter’s office personally for the purpose of providing him general assistance in his duties,

b. Military Assistant . – A commissioned officer of the AFP in the active service detailed and attached to a civilian government office for the purpose of rendering to such office professional aide and/or assistance regarding military matters.

3. The following officials are entitled to Aides-de-Camp:

a. The President of the Philippines, in such number and of such grades as he may determine;

b. The Secretary of National Defense and his Undersecretaries in such number and of such grades as the Secretary may determine; and

c. Visiting foreign military and civilian dignitaries as warranted by protocol during the period of their visit in the Philippines.

4. a. Military Assistants and enlisted aides may be assigned to the Office of the President in such number and of such grades as the President may determine; and to the Office of the Secretary of National Defense and his Undersecretaries in such number and of such grades as the Secretary of national Defense may determine; and to the National Security Council and the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency in such number and of such grades as the President may determine until such time that civil officials thereat have been developed with the desired degree of professionalism, unless otherwise prescribed by law; and

b. Subject to the approval of the President, one Military Assistant of field grade and one enlisted aide may be assigned each to the Vice-President of the Philippines, the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Chairman of the Senate Committee on National Defense and Security, and the Chairman of the House Committee on National Defense and Security, unless otherwise prescribed by law.

5. The Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines, subject to confirmation of the Secretary of National Defense, may authorize an Armed Forces security detail to any civilian office, official, or to any private entity or person upon request when such detail in his opinion would be in the public interest: PROVIDED, That such detail shall only be for one mission of not more than thirty (30) days and orders are issued therefor.

6. In addition to the assignment or detail enumerated in paragraph 1 to 4 above, the President may assign or detail from the AFP to any civilian government office or entity commissioned and enlisted personnel of the Armed Forces; or place on duty with any civilian government office or entity military personnel on detached service with the Office of the President: PROVIDED, That such assignments or details shall not exceed 0.5% of the officer and 0.2% of the enlisted strength of the AFP, respectively; and that, while in such civilian government office or entity, any such officer or enlisted personnel so detailed shall not receive pay and allowances from the appropriation of the Armed Forces of the Philippines but shall be paid from the appropriation of the civilian office or entity to which detailed, except those assigned in the Department of National Defense, National Security Council, National Intelligence Coordinating Agency and other offices involved in national security as determined by the Secretary of National Defense, provided he shall not occupy any plantilla position.

7. The assignment or detail of military personnel to civilian government offices or officials, except those covered by paragraphs 4a and 4b above, shall be for a maximum period of six (6) months’ duration only. For these reserve officers called to active duty pursuant to the provisions of Republic Act No. 2234, their detail or assignment in any civilian office shall not exceed the terminal date of their tour of active duty.

8. This Order does not regulate nor in any way apply to the assignment or detail of Army, Air Force, or Naval Attaches to Philippine diplomatic missions abroad.

9. Executive Order No. 67 dated September 23, 1954, is hereby revoked.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Sixty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.