MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 364

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE COMMITTEE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ASIAN HANDICRAFT CENTER.

WHEREAS, the Philippines has been chosen as the Asian Handicraft Center during the recently-concluded ECAFE Second Preparatory Meeting for the Establishment of said Center; and

WHEREAS, there is need for the immediate establishment of the Center, programmed to be inaugurated in early 1973;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Philippine Committee for the Establishment of the Asian Handicraft Center composed of the following:

The Committee is charged with the following duties and responsibilities;

a) Determine the site, location, building and other requirements for the establishment of the Asian Handicraft Center in the Philippines;

b) Implement various matters taken up during the Second Preparatory Meeting for the Establishment of the Asian Handicraft Center held at Bangkok, Thailand on November 8 to 12, 1971;

c) Comply with the necessary requirements for the participation of the Philippines in the national pavilion project of the Center for the display and sale of handicraft products;

d) Screen and nominate proper Philippine officials and staff members for the management and operation of the Asian Handicraft Center;

e) Serve as the liaison body of the Philippines with ECAFE, the Governing Council of the Center and other international agencies involved in the project; and

f) Submit to the proper authorities a progress report of its accomplishments from time to time, as may be required.

The Chairman is hereby authorized to call upon any officer or employee of any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, including corporations owned and controlled by it for such assistance as may be needed by the Committee for the proper discharge of its functions and duties. Their expenses and those of the Committee shall be borne by their respective agencies, subject to availability of funds.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1972). [Executive Order Nos. : 366-435]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.