MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 879

DIRECTING THE PROPAGATION OF THE FILIPINO IDEOLOGY AND CREATING A COMMITTEE TO EVOLVE, SUPERVISE AND MONITOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROGRAM FOR ITS DISSEMINATION

WHEREAS, both the New Society established in 1972 and the New Republic inaugurated in 1981 were dedicated to the release of the majority of our people from poverty and the promotion of their economic and social welfare;

WHEREAS, the means we chose to bring forth this fundamental change in Filipino society, was a revolution founded on democratic precepts, a constitutional process of radical reform that rejected violence, chaos and destruction;

WHEREAS, the barangay, the ancient social and political unit of the Filipino, was restored by the national leadership to serve as the medium through which to carry out this essential program of transformation;

WHEREAS, the mass of the citizenry whose dignity was the objective of such radical but democratic reform was summoned by the national leadership to participate in various nationwide programs of development, such as, among others, the

1. Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran (KKK) — The new revolution for livelihood and progress, which places funds at the disposal of the community’s poorest, not as a handout but as an incentive to effort.

2. Barangay Brigades Development Program — Designed as an instrument of developing good works in the community and in the nation. Its one great objective is to make the barangay utterly absorbed in the affairs of the world under a distinctive mood of self-reliance and volunteerism.

3. Land Reform Movement – Movement strives to emancipate the rice and corn tenants from feudal bondage. The law (PD 27) transfers to them ownership of rice and corn lands, bringing to an end the exploitive agricultural share tenancy system.

4. Masagana 99 – Launched in 1973, the movement aspires to have the farmers increase their production to 99 sacks of 4.4 tons of unmilled rice (palay) per hectare. It sets its sights on self- sufficiency in food, using modern methods of irrigation, infrastructure buildup, and input increases.

5. Masagana Program – Movement designed to accelerate production of yellow hybrid corn; uses similar methods employed under Masagana 99.

6. Blue Revolution Program – Movement aimed at accelerating sea-farming projects.

7. Samahang Nayon Movement – Biggest farmer institution involving the development of farmer cooperatives; inculcating self-reliance in production, procurement and marketing of farm products. A component of the land reform program. PD 27 requires farmer beneficiaries to become bona fide members of a cooperative organization called Samahang Nayon.

8. Small Farmer Development Program – Established to assist the small farmer, small fishermen and landless agricultural workers to obtain higher productivity and increase farm family incomes through group action. Also implemented as a component of land reform.

9. Home Development Mutual Fund or PAG-IBIG Fund – Created through PD No. 1530, the HDMF institutionalized a system of voluntary contribution for housing purposes.

10. Medical Care – Medicare insurance coverage for public and private workers, later expanded to include self-employed dependents, retirees and other groups (PDs 1013 and 1519). This program enabled the reduction of the financial burden of hospitalization.

11. Enercon Movement – A continuing program which encourages the people to take energy conservation measures.

12. Integrated Municipal Food & Nutrition Program – Movement aimed at educating the people combat food deficiency and malnutrition.

13. Self-Employment Assistance Program – A productivity-oriented program where non-interest and non-collateral capital assistance is granted to individuals and groups who then engage in incoming-producing ventures.

14. Kabataang Barangay – A nationwide movement designed to organize the youth into a unified whole and to have them involve themselves in socio-economic-political activities.

15. Balikatan Program – Carried out under the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women, the program aims at ensuring the full integration of women for economic, social and cultural development at the national level.

16. Cooperative Program – An essential supplement to land reform, this program is a means by which small farmers, can act collectively so that they will have economic strength. Within the cooperative system, small and fragmented landholdings are consolidated into operational units, farm technology is transferred more systematically to the rural sector, credit is better administered, and government and civic programs more effectively implemented.

WHEREAS, through these mass-based programs citizens were given the opportunity for self-improvement through the acquisition and application of skills, the exercise of initiative, and the productive use of resources;

WHEREAS, this revolutionary effort undertaken together by the government and the people, embodied the essence of the Filipino ideology, a national creed that honors the cooperative spirit, promotes peaceable change, and safeguards the right of the poor to dignity and advancement;

WHEREAS, the masses themselves have yet to see this ideology fully developed and articulated, or to find its relationship to national destiny, and for this purpose it is necessary that they are drawn into the task of understanding the elements of the country’s moral and intellectual legacy and the new salutary values which are the source of the Filipino ideology;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. All agencies and instrumentalities of government shall undertake a program of orientation and dissemination of the Filipino ideology among their personnel and the general public they serve. For this purpose, the inclusion in the annual program and budget of government agencies and instrumentalities of a specific amount to fund the propagation of the Filipino ideology is hereby authorized.

SEC. 2. The Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports shall include the study and understanding of the Filipino ideology in the curricula of all levels of education and training in all schools in the country.

SEC. 3. The Civil Service Commission shall include in its qualifying examinations for government service basic knowledge on the Filipino ideology.

SEC. 4. There is hereby created a Committee on the Propagation of the Filipino Ideology which shall have the following functions:

a. Cull from the existing body of writings on Filipino ideology and from other works of Philippine literature the fundamentals of that ideology and organize the same for dissemination to our people.

b. Provide guidance on the formulation of a program of orientation and dissemination of the Filipino ideology in both government and private sectors.

c. Approve the above program and supervise its implementation.

d. Initiate regular programs and special projects to provide a venue for the discussion, synthesis and refinement of the Filipino ideology.

e. Report to the President on the progress of the program.

SEC. 5. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

Upon the recommendation of the Committee, the President shall designate as members of the Committee representatives from the various Church denominations, Labor Group and other sectors.

The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Members may have their respective alternates who shall be designated by them and whose acts shall be considered the acts of their principals with the right to receive benefits.

SEC. 6. The Committee shall have an Executive Working Group which shall be headed by the Executive Director, President’s Center for Special Studies with the following as members:

Representatives of the members of the above Committee

General, Manager, National Housing Authority

Representatives of such Church groups may be called upon

Representative of the Labor Groups

Representative from Other Sectors as necessary.

SECTION 7. The Executive Working Group shall have the following functions:

a. Under the guidance of the Committee, evolve and submit for its approval, action plans and programs of implementation for the propagation of the Filipino ideology.

b. Serve as action group in the implementation of specific programs and projects approved by the Committee.

c. Provide secretarial and other administrative support services to the Committee.

d. Monitor the implementation of programs on the propagation of the Filipino ideology and submit periodic reports to the Committee on the status of such program.

e. Establish and administer an operations center or appropriate offices of the Committee.

f. Undertake such other tasks as the Committee may direct with respect to the propagation of the Filipino ideology.

SEC. 8. The Executive Working Group shall organize a Secretariat which shall provide administrative and monitoring services for the Committee. For this purpose and subject to the approval of the Committee through its Chairman, the Executive Working Group may hire qualified individuals to constitute its technical and administrative staff and employ the services of consultants to assist such staff.

SEC. 9. The Minister of the Budget shall release to the President’s Center for Special Studies the amount of One Million Pesos (P1 Million) from the Special Activities Fund of the President, which amount shall be used to fund the initial administrative and operating activities of the Committee. The Minister of the Budget shall, upon the recommendation of the Committee on the Propagation of the Filipino ideology, release funds as grants to any government agency or instrumentality undertaking approved programs or projects on the Filipino ideology.

SEC. 10. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of March in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1983). [Executive Order Nos. : 858 – 927]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.