MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 811

CREATING THE FILMS RATINGS BOARD, DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, one of the major powers of the Experimental Cinema of the Philippines (ECP) under Executive Order No. 770, is to establish a national film rating and classification system;

WHEREAS, this film rating and classification system shall be the basis of an incentive system to encourage the production of quality Filipino films;

WHEREAS, there is a need to create a body or agency under the ECP that shall administer and enforce the film rating and classification system envisioned in Executive Order No. 770.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, and Presidential Decree No. 1416, do hereby order as follows:

SECTION I. Creation of Film Ratings Board . — There is hereby created a Film Ratings Board, hereinafter known in this Order as the Board, under Experimental Cinema of the Philippines.

SEC. 2. Composition of the Board . — The Board shall be composed of a chairman and twenty-seven (27) members to be appointed by the President of the Philippines. The Members of the Board shall serve for a minimum term of two years.

In the selection of Members of the Board, a multi-sectoral representation shall be considered to bring about the highest degree of efficiency in its operations.

The Chairman and Members of the Board shall receive such per diems and allowances as authorized by the ECP Board of Trustees.

SEC. 3. Aims and Objectives . — The Board shall endeavor to upgrade the quality of Filipino films through the establishment and effective implementation of a film rating and classification system.

Specifically, the Board shall have the following goals:

1. To foster intellectual, technical and aesthetic sophistication in the quality of films produced and exhibited in the Philippines;

2. To encourage the production of films that strengthen and solidify our national identity, seek to enhance the quality of life, contribute to the dignity and ennoblement of the human spirit, portray themes that have universal roots, and depict and examine human conditions;

3. To increase the marketability of locally produced films in both domestic and foreign markets; and

4. To encourage quality orientation in the film industry through recognition of outstanding performances of cast and talents.

SEC. 4. Powers and Functions of the Board . — The Board shall have the following powers and functions:

1. Establish standards that shall govern the quality of films;

2. Establish a film rating and classification systems;

3. Review and update the standards to keep them aligned with the requirements of the industry;

4. Disseminate standards on an industry-wide level;

5. Review and classify all local films;

6. Develop systems and procedures that shall insure an efficient and effective method of rating films;

7. Implement the rating systems in support of the interest of the Filipino film industry;

8. Insure proper awarding of incentives to deserving films;

9. Coordinate with the Board of Review for Motion Pictures and Television in the discharge of the functions of the Films Ratings Board; and

10. Perform such other related functions as may be required by law or the ECP Board of Trustees.

SEC. 5. Director, his Functions and Duties . — The chief executive officer of the Board shall be the Director, who shall be appointed by the President upon recommendation of the Board of Trustees of the Experimental Cinema of the Philippines. The Director shall concurrently be the Chairman of the Film Ratings Board.

The Director shall manage the affairs of the Board and shall with the cooperation of his staff perform such functions and duties assigned to him by law, by the ECP Board of Trustees and by the Film Ratings Board.

SEC. 6. The Board shall promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement its aim and objectives, subject to the approval of the ECP Board of Trustees and the President of the Philippines.

SEC. 7. The Board may request any ministry, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its functions.

SEC. 8. All personnel of the Board shall be appointed by the ECP Director-General, upon recommendation of the Director of the Board.

SEC. 9. The Board of Standards created under Executive Order No. 640-A is hereby abolished and all its personnel, assets, books and records are hereby transferred to the Film Ratings Board.

SEC. 10. All executive orders, administrative orders, rules or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of June in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 781-857]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.