MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 60

PROMULGATING RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE CONTROL AND SUPERVISION OF THE IMPORTATION, SALE AND POSSESSION OF CHEMICALS USED AS INGREDIENTS IN THE MANUFACTURE OF EXPLOSIVES AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby promulgated the following rules and regulations for the control and supervision of the importation, sale and possession of chemicals used as ingredients in the manufacture of explosives and for other purposes.

SECTION 1. Any person or entity desiring to import, possess or sell any of the chemicals specified herein shall make an application to the Chief of Constabulary, Headquarters, Philippine Constabulary, stating therein the purpose for which the license and/or permit is sought and such information as may be specifically requested by the Chief of Constabulary before acting upon the application. Upon approval by the Chief of Constabulary, the Chief of the Firearms and Explosives Office shall issue the license or permit applied for.

SECTION 2. The Chemicals referred to in Section 1 hereof shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

a. Potassium Chlorate b. Nitrates of Ammonium, Potassium and Sodium

SECTION 3. Only persons or entities issued Permits to Purchase certain quantities of any of these chemicals by the Firearms and Explosives Office shall be allowed to purchase from licensed importers or dealers.

SECTION 4. All importers, dealers and end-users of these chemicals are hereby required to secure the necessary license within three (3) months from the approval of this Order. Failure to do so shall be sufficient ground for the confiscation of all such chemicals in their possession.

SECTION 5. All holders of permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this Executive Order shall keep and maintain a permanent record wherein all acquisitions, purchases and dispositions of all such chemicals shall be entered chronologically, together with the names and addresses of all persons or entities to whom they are sold or issued. In the case of end-users, they shall also maintain a permanent record indicating therein chronologically how such chemicals were used and disposed of. All entries in said record shall be supported by their corresponding permits issued by the Chief of the Firearms and Explosives Office of the Philippine Constabulary. These records shall be open for inspection any time by the proper authorities.

SECTION 6. Violation of any of the provisions of this Order and the rules and regulations that may be issued in implementation thereof shall be sufficient cause for the cancellation of the license and confiscation of all such chemicals in the possession of the licensee and the imposition of a fine of not less than P600 nor more than P2,000, or imprisonment for not less than three (3) months nor more than two (2) years, in the discretion of the Court, as provided under Act No. 3023.

SECTION 7. Executive Order No. 9 dated February 1, 1954, is amended accordingly.

SECTION 8. This Order shall take effect after fifteen (15) days following its publication in the Official Gazette.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.