MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 579

CREATING A NATIONAL COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR SPORTS DEVELOPMENT AND PRESCRIBING THE GOVERNANCE OF THE NATIONAL SPORTS ASSOCIATIONS

WHEREAS, as provided for by P.D. No. 604, as amended, the various amateur sports organizations otherwise known as the National Sports Associations have been tapped to accelerate the task of developing their respective sports;

WHEREAS, the developmental activities of these various amateur sports organizations need to be coordinated in a meaningful manner consistent with national commitments to participate in regional and international competition;

WHEREAS, there is a need to further rationalize the use of scarce resources to support the development activities of the National Sports Associations; and

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and pursuant to the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. There shall be created a National Coordinating Committee for Sports Development under the Ministry of Youth and Sports Development. The Committee shall be composed of a Deputy Minister of the Ministry of Youth and Sports Development to be designated by the President as ex-officio chairman, and four members to be appointed by the President from among persons who have shown keen interest in sports development. The term of office of the appointive members shall be at the pleasure of the President.

The National Coordinating Committee for Sports Development shall be responsible, in furtherance of the purpose of Section 7 of Presidential Decree No. 604 as amended, for overseeing and coordinating the activities of the various National Sports Associations in accordance with established policies. It shall likewise review and approve the requests of National Sports Associations for government assistance to finance their developmental activities, including those coming from the sweepstakes funds.

The Ministry of Youth and Sports Development shall provide the secretariat services needed by the Committee in pursuance of its functions.

SEC. 2. A uniform governing structure for each of the accredited National Sports Associations is hereby prescribed. In lieu of the present governing structures of said sports associations, including their directorates, there shall be created an Executive Committee for each individual National Sports Association which shall have authority for managing its affairs and activities. The Executive Committee shall be composed of a chairman and two members all of whom shall be elected from among the members of the individual sports association. A member of the National Coordinating Committee for Sports Development shall sit in and participate in the deliberations of the Executive Committee but without the right to vote.

SEC. 3. All laws, decrees, charters, executive orders, administrative orders, proclamations, rules and regulations or parts thereof that are in conflict with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Presidential Staff Director

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Executive Order Nos. : 531-605]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.