MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 526

PROVIDING FOR THE RATIONALIZATION OF GOVERNMENT COMPUTER SERVICES

WHEREAS, there is a need to rationalize the existing computer services in the government to eliminate wasteful duplication and proliferation;

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 1480 directs the National Computer Center to develop and implement a nationwide government program that will optimize the utilization of computer technology and facilities;

WHEREAS, the President has continuing authority under Presidential Decree No. 1416 to reorganize the administrative structure of the National Government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, and pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1416, do hereby order the following:

1. Pending the formulation of a Master Plan for government computer systems by the National Computer Center, the following guidelines shall be adopted:

a. The existing computer equipment of each ministry, including bureaus, offices and attached government-owned and/or controlled corporations, shall be made available to all entities within the ministry.

b. Where computer capacity cannot be fully utilized within the ministry, excess capacity shall be made available to other ministries and agencies.

c. If the existing computer system within the ministry is inadequate, computer facilities of other ministries or agencies may be availed of.

d. The acquisition of computers and/or data entry equipment shall not be authorized.

2. The National Computer Center shall immediately develop a Master Plan for government computer services that optimizes utilization of equipment and manpower at all times.

3. An Inter-Agency Committee is hereby created to assist the National Computer Center in:

a. The development and evaluation of an annual and long-range computer development program oriented towards improving the capability of agency facilities to service up to but not beyond their respective requirements, except in the case of the Technology Resource Center which will operate primarily as a service facility;

b. The formulation of policies and standards;

c. The evaluation of computer systems requirements of government agencies.

The Committee shall be headed by the Managing Director of the National Computer Center who shall act as its Chairman, with the head of the Technology Resource Center as Vice-Chairman. Membership shall be composed of representatives of the Office of the Director-General of NEDA, Ministry of the Budget and ministries and/or agencies whose computer systems have a capacity of at least 300,000 bytes.

4. The main thrust of NCC activities shall be the coordination of agency computer services rather than providing such directly.

5. The National Computer Center shall accelerate its EDP training programs to develop and increase technical expertise among agencies with computer facilities.

6. Any other decree, law, order, rule or regulation inconsistent herewith is hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

7. This Order shall be effective immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1979). [Executive Order Nos. : 436 – 530]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.