MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1049

INCREASING THE SUBSISTENCE ALLOWANCE OF AFP AND INP PERSONNEL UNDERGOING TRAINING IN LOCAL TRAINING INSTITUTIONS

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 1015, dated March 27, 1985, directed the increase of subsistence allowance of patients confined in AFP/INP hospitals and dispensaries and of cadets of the Philippine Military Academy, the Philippine Air Force Flying School and the Philippine National Police Academy to Twenty Pesos (P20.00) per day, and prescribing the manner of subsequent adjustments thereto;

WHEREAS, due to the general increase in the prices of commodities, the current subsistence allowance rate of P12.00 a day is not adequate to meet the quality and quantity of food needed by AFP and INP personnel undergoing training in local training institutions to enable them to cope with the rigors of physical and mental training;

WHEREAS, the attendance in local training institutions practically dislocates the finance of AFP and INP personnel by losing such additional pay and allowances as combat pay, hazardous duty pay, specialist pay, sea duty pay, additional subsistence allowance and/or other privileges inherent in their duty assignments;

WHEREAS, the attendance in local training institutions separates AFP and INP personnel from their families for a certain period of time which necessitates their spending more for subsistence because they have to eat meals separately from their families and because the meals available in the training institutions are more expensive;

WHEREAS, AFP and INP personnel undergoing training in foreign military schools are granted appropriate per diems, clothing allowance and incidental travel expense allowance, thereby placing them financially in a far advantageous position over those undergoing training in local training institutions;

WHEREAS, there is a need to continually train AFP and INP personnel in training institutions in order to improve their professional knowledge, skill and expertise, which will redound to the operational effectiveness of the AFP and INP.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct:

SECTION 1. The rate of subsistence allowance of AFP and INP personnel undergoing training in local training institutions shall not be less than Twenty Pesos (P20.00) per day.

SECTION 2. The Minister of National Defense and the Chairman, NAPOLCOM, respectively, shall issue such implementing instructions as are necessary and proper to carry out the intent of this order.

SECTION 3. The funds needed to implement this order shall be charged against the reserved appropriations of the AFP and the INP for CY 1985 and subsequent funds therefor shall be incorporated in the annual appropriations of both agencies.

SECTION 4. All rules and regulations and other issuance or parts thereof that are in conflict with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 5. This Order shall take effect September 1, 1985.

DONE IN THE CITY OF MANILA, this 8 th day of August in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030-1093]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.