MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1030

AMENDING SECTION 1 OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 898, REORGANIZING THE COMMITTEE OF TRANSPORTATION COOPERATIVES AND BROADENING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS.

WHEREAS, under Executive Order No. 898 dated 28 March 1983, the Committee on Transportation Cooperatives was renamed the Office of Transportation Cooperatives, headed by a Chairman, appointed by the President of the Philippines, and by the Deputy Minister of Transportation and Communications as co-Chairman;

WHEREAS, due to the importance of the role and functions in the overall plan for the integration and rationalization of the public transportation system in the country, the Office of Transportation Cooperatives functions and operates like any other important bureau under the Ministry of Transportation and Communications;

WHEREAS, the OTC Chairman is legally mandated to exercise such powers and perform such functions, duties and responsibilities that require full time work and attention and, therefore, the appointee thereto should preferably not be serving in an ex-officio capacity and, hence, should be entitled to a fixed salary or compensation;

WHEREAS, the aforesaid Executive Order had not provided for any salary or compensation for the position of a Chairman of the Office of Transportation Cooperatives;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order that:

Section 1. Section 1 of Executive Order No. 898 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Section 1. Composition. The Committee on Transportation Cooperatives (CTC), created under Memorandum Order No. 395 dated 19 October 1973, is hereby renamed the Office of Transportation Cooperatives and shall be managed by a Board to be composed of an appointee from the Office of the President, duly appointed by the President to the position as Chairman; a Deputy Minister of Transportation and Communications as co-Chairman; a Deputy Minister of Labor and Employment, the Director-General of the Philippine Constabulary/Integrated National Police, the Chairman of the Land Transportation Commission, the National Chairman of the Katipunan ng mga Kooperatibang Pansasakyan ng Pilipinas, Inc. as members and who shall serve in an ex-officio capacity;

The Chairman shall have the rank, salary and privileges of a Bureau Director, and shall be directly responsible to the Minister of Transportation and Communications. He shall exercise authority and be responsible for the overall operations of the Office.

There shall be an Executive Director of the Office of Transportation Cooperatives who shall also sit as a member of the Board thereof. He shall be appointed by the President and shall serve for a term of two (2) years, with an annual compensation to be fixed by the Committee.

The officials next in rank to or such officials duly designated by the regular members shall serve as alternate members. The alternate members shall attend meetings of the Committee and shall be entitled to per diems and allowances due the members and their respective representatives.

The Chairman and each member of the Board of the Office of Transportation Cooperatives shall receive a monthly commutable representation allowance and a per diem for every meeting actually attended at such rate as may be determined by the Board and approved by the Minister of Transportation and Communications.”

Section 2. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030 – 1093]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.