MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 304

RECONSTITUTING THE INSTITUTE OF NATIONAL LANGUAGE AND DEFINING ITS POWERS AND DUTIES

WHEREAS, Commonwealth Act No. 184, as amended by Commonwealth Act No. 333, establishes an Institute of National Language charged with the paramount duty of studying the major native languages and selecting thereby the basis of the national language;

WHEREAS, the National Language as conceived the fundamental law has been declared one of the official languages of the Philippines effective July 4, 1946, pursuant to Commonwealth Act No. 570;

WHEREAS, to facilitate and enhance the effective propagation and development of the national language and to actively involve all linguistic groups in this nationalistic endeavor, it has become necessary that the Institute of National Language be reconstituted;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, and upon the recommendation of the Director of the Institute of National Language, do hereby reconstitute the Institute of National Language (INL), whose members shall represent the following major linguistic groups; Bicol, Cebuano, Cultural minority languages, Hiligaynon, Ilocano, Pampango, Pangasinan, Samar-Leyte and Tagalog, composed of the following:

The INL shall have the following powers duties and functions:

1. Promulgate the necessary rules and regulations, consistent with existing standards, as well as with the latest trends in linguistic science, for the expansion and amplification of the national language;

2. Update the grammar of the national language;

3. Design a dictionary, thesaurus, encyclopedia or any similar linguistic tool with the latest trends in lexicography, philology, and encyclopedia-making;

4. Design and promulgate such language policies as are relevant to progressive educational, cultural, social and economic development of the nation;

5. Study and decide on major issues affecting national language;

6. Design policies aimed at the massive production of books, pamphlets and similar reading materials in the national language in the form of translations and/or original works; and

7. Perform related functions.

The INL shall render a semi-annual report of its activities to the President of the Philippines, together with the recommendations and/or suggestions that are deemed necessary for the implementation of this Order.

The INL shall meet at least once a month or often as necessary and may held such special meetings as may be called by the Chairman or upon representation of at least five members.

The INL is hereby empowered to call upon any department, bureau, office or agency of the government, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations for such assistance as may be necessary for the successful prosecution of its duties and responsibilities.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.