MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 116

CREATING AN ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF FALLOUT SHELTERS

WHEREAS, the radiation hazards in a nuclear war or accidental nuclear explosion can cause considerable destruction and loss of lives;

WHEREAS, the professional and school levels of architects and engineers must take into account a new design, element – nuclear radiation – in building design and construction; and

WHEREAS, the dangerous effects of radioactive fallout underscores the need for the construction of fallout shelters which will give protection to the greatest number of our people through, the united efforts of government and private sectors;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create an Advisory Committee on the Design and Construction of Fallout Shelters, composed of the following:

The Committee shall:

(a) Evaluate the fallout shelter potential of existing structures in the country;

(b) recommend for identification, existing buildings that could serve as emergency fallout shelters after due evaluation;

(c) proposed modification of existing buildings and other structure from the standpoint of radiation protection without unnecessarily altering their normal function and appearance;

(d) provide means for effective communication regarding shelter design and construction between the National Civil Defense Administration and the members of the entities named above;

(e) recommend methods of stimulating shelter construction by development of plans and designs with little or no increase in cost of buildings and without adversely affecting the appearance of the building or its intended use; and

(f) by communicating approved technical information conducive to shelter construction to architects, engineers, contractors and building owners.

The Chairman of the Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency and instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may need for the accomplishment of its task.

All evaluations, designs, reports, advice and recommendations of the Committee shall, from time to time, be submitted to the President of the Philippines through the Civil Defense Administrator.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library