MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 14

CREATING A PRELIMINARY COMMITTEE FOR THE REVISION OF THE REVISED ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

WHEREAS, there is urgent need for the revision and updating of the Revised Administrative Code in keeping with modern trends of public administration and progressive legislations on the subjects;

WHEREAS, there are scattered laws, executive orders, rules and regulations which have to be incorporated and harmonized for integrated effect in the said code; and

WHEREAS, preliminary studies, hearings and conferences are likewise necessary to collate the recommendations and suggestions of administrative bodies and management consultants before the final draft of legislation can be submitted to Congress;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a preliminary committee for the revision of the Revised Administrative Code to be composed of the following:

The U.P. Law Center shall act as the Secretariat. The Head of the U.P. Division of Research and Law Reforms shall be the Project Director. He shall direct the administrative functions of the Committee and exercise overall supervision over the personnel of the project.

The Committee is empowered to call upon any department, bureau, office, subdivision, agency or instrumentality of the government including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its functions.

The Project Director is authorized to grant to the personnel of the project honorariums or allowances in such reasonable amounts as he may determine.

The Committee shall finish its work and submit to the President of the Philippines its report, together with the draft of a new Administrative Code for submission to the Congress of the Philippines, not later than December 31, 1966.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.