MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 200

PROMULGATING A MANUAL OF STUDENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

WHEREAS, it is in the interest of the State and Society that college and university education, in both public and private institutions, provide facilities therein for academic development as well as conditions for intelligent social participation; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary for the attainment of this objective, that rapport be promoted between school authorities and students, by establishing student rights and defining student responsibilities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby promulgate the following Manual of Student Rights and Responsibilities:

SECTION 1. Student Rights . – Every student enrolled in a post-secondary course in a college or university authorized or recognized by the government shall, among other things, enjoy the following rights:

a) The right to organize a free student government that can administer, legislate and adjudicate within its approved constitutional jurisdiction;

b) The right to be represented on all policy-determining bodies of the educational institution, through the duly authorized student government representative, whenever policies relating to curriculum, student discipline and the use or collection of student fees, funds and contributions are considered for adoption or amendment. This right shall be exercised by participation in the discussion and by voting subject to the provisions of law; and

c) The right to publish and issue within the bounds of law, good morals and school regulations and objectives, regular student-controlled publications free from censorship, or any pressure aimed at controlling editorial policy or staff appointments: Provided , That the publication expenses shall be paid out from student funds.

SECTION 2. Student Responsibilities . – Every student enrolled in a post-secondary course in a college or university authorized or recognized by the government shall, among other things, bear the following responsibilities:

a) The responsibility to fulfill the duties imposed upon him by his legally constituted student government or other legally constituted student officers or organizations to which he has voluntarily affiliated;

b) The responsibility to recognize and comply with the policies and regulations concerning his school duties, campus activities and discipline within the school; and

c) The responsibility, in his publications, to abide by the laws of the land, school regulations and the ethics of journalism.

SECTION 3. Implementing Rules and Regulations . – The Secretary of Education shall issue the appropriate rules and regulations including such sanctions as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this Order.

SECTION 4. This Order shall take effect immediately. Executive Order No. 170 dated February 15, 1969, is hereby revoked.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ERNESTO M. MACEDA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 200, December 5, 1969