MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 381

CREATING THE MANILA INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT REHABILITATION AND IMPROVEMENT COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to rehabilitate the Manila International Airport (MIA) terminal buildings and associated navigational aid and communications facilities installed therein;

WHEREAS, recent technical advances in civil aviation and the present and projected air traffic density necessitates the expansion of the MIA complex;

WHEREAS, the Civil Aeronautics Administration area now being occupied by the Philippine Air Force could be made available for airport expansion;

WHEREAS, there is a further need to establish a trading center in the context of a foreign trade zone within the MIA complex;

WHEREAS, there are private firms that are willing to undertake the rehabilitation and improvement of the MIA complex;

WHEREAS, there are international lending institutions willing to extend financial loan to the Government for the above purpose;

WHEREAS, the general concept of the manner of rehabilitation and expansion of the MIA has been established and stages of development have been identified; and

WHEREAS, there is a necessity to create a body to formulate, develop and implement plans for rehabilitation and expansion in order to avoid duplication of effort and functions and dissipation of scarce resources;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law hereby create a Committee on MIA Rehabilitation and improvement to be composed of the following:

The Committee herein constituted shall undertake the following:

1. Determine which specific entities/institutions will tapped for the financing of navigational, communications and other airport equipment and the construction of the terminal buildings and facilities.

2. Determine who, and if possible by itself, undertake the necessary studies required for loan applications to financial institutions.

3. Receive, evaluate, and determine which private firm(s) may participate in the construction of airport buildings and facilities, under the condition that the repayment for these services will be made thru tax credits under R. A. 5279.

4. Develop the program of construction and development of the whole MIA complex at the present site.

5. Outline the plans for the evacuation of Nichols Airfield by the Philippine Air Force and the utilization of the area for a Trading Center and expanded facility requirements of the Airport complex.

6. Determine the course of action to be taken for the possible relocation of the MIA to other sites.

To assist the Committee, a Technical Staff is further created to be composed of:

The Committee and the Technical Staff shall meet at the call of the Chairman and the initial report shall be submitted to the Office of the President within two weeks.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon all government departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities for such service, assistance, and cooperation in fulfilling its functions and responsibilities and to enlist the services of any government official or employee in the performance of its tasks.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1972). [Executive Order Nos. : 366-435]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.