MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1016

WITHDRAWING THE INSPECTION, COMMODITY AND EXPORT CLEARANCE REQUIREMENTS ON PHILIPPINE EXPORTS

WHEREAS, the country’s economic recovery program recognizes the role of exports in hastening the attainment of economic stabilization and continuing the promotion of economic growth;

WHEREAS, the growth of exports can be better achieved where procedure and documentation requirements, that result in increased cost and sometimes in the loss of export opportunities, are at a minimum;

WHEREAS, inspection, commodity clearance, and export clearance requirements of government commodity offices or agencies have been identified as among the procedural and documentary requirements which may be eliminated in the interest of facilitating exports;

WHEREAS, the current economic crisis amounts to a grave emergency which affects the stability of the nation and requires immediate action;

WHEREAS, the issuance of this Executive Order is an essential and necessary component of the national economic recovery program to meet and overcome the emergency;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The provisions of special or general law to the contrary notwithstanding, all inspection, commodity and export clearance requirements on the Philippine commodity exports are hereby dispensed with, except the following:

1. those required as a result of the existence of import quotas in other countries, such as garments and sugar;

2. those covering items which are banned for exports;

3. those covering exports of logs, copper and coffee; and

4. those covered by international agreements to which the Philippines is a signatory.

SEC. 2. Any or all of the clearance requirements dispensed with in the preceding section may be reinstated with prior notice, by an inter-agency committee composed of the representative of the Ministry of Trade and Industry, as Chairman, and the representatives of the Ministries of Finance and Budget, Central Bank, and the National Economic and Development Authority, as members, taking into account factors such as requirements of the importer or importing country, security, health, safety and other reasons in the national interest.

SEC. 3. The inter-agency committee shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to effectively implement the provisions of this Executive Order.

SEC. 4. The provisions of this Executive Order are hereby declared to be separable, and in the event one or more of said provisions are declared unconstitutional, the validity of the other provisions shall not be affected.

SEC. 5. The provisions of other laws, decrees, executive orders, administrative orders, rules, regulations or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SEC. 6. This Executive Order shall take effect thirty (30) days after its promulgation.

DONE in the City of Manila this 25th day or March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.