MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 984

TRANSFERRING THE PHILIPPINE ATMOSPHERIC, GEOPHYSICAL AND ASTRONOMICAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION TO THE NATIONAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY AUTHORITY, PROVIDING FOR ITS REORGANIZATION, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, under the New Republic, national development shall be pursued with renewed dedication and greater determination through a more efficient, effective and economical government;

WHEREAS, the National Science and Technology Authority (NSTA) was established under Executive Order No. 784 to centrally direct the integration of all government scientific and technological efforts;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA), as created under Presidential Decree No. 78, as amended, largely performs scientific and technological functions which need to be integrated with the overall program of the central science and technology organization;

WHEREAS, it would therefore be desirable to transfer the PAGASA to the NSTA;

WHEREAS, as a result of such transfer, a reorganization of PAGASA would become necessary in order to effect needed adjustments that would eliminate overlaps and duplications with existing units of NSTA;

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416 as amended, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416 as amended, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. The Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration, hereinafter referred to as PAGASA, is hereby transferred from the Ministry of National Defense and placed under the supervision and control of the National Science and Technology Authority (NSTA). Such transfer shall include functions, applicable appropriations, records, property and equipment, and such personnel as may be necessary.

SECTION 2. The PAGASA shall be headed by an Administrator  who shall be assisted by a Deputy Administrator, both of whom shall be appointed by the President upon recommendation of the Director General of NSTA.

SECTION 3. The Administrative shall have as its major organizational units the existing National Weather Office; National Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Data Office, which is hereby renamed National Institute of Climatology; National Institute of Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Sciences, which is hereby renamed National Institute of Atmospheric Sciences; National Flood Forecasting Office; and Typhoon Moderation and Research Office.

The heads of these major organizational units shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines, upon recommendation of the NSTA Director General.

The organizational units shall continue to perform the functions presently assigned to them by law.

The National Geophysical and Astronomical Office of PAGASA is merged with the Philippine Institute of Volcanology of the NSTA, which is hereby renamed Institute of Volcanology and Seismology. Such merger shall include applicable functions, appropriations, records, property and equipment, and such personnel as may be necessary.

SECTION 4. The NSTA Director General is authorized to transfer such functions of the units of PAGASA to the appropriate units of the NSTA, as well as to reorganize PAGASA as necessary, including the Institute of Volcanology and Seismology of NSTA, in order to eliminate overlaps and duplicative functions between PAGASA units and NSTA units and among units of PAGASA: Provided , that any resulting reorganization and formulation of new staffing patterns as may be necessary shall be subject to the provisions of Section hereunder.

SECTION 5. The field units and personnel of PAGASA are placed under the administrative supervision of the NSTA regional offices, but under the technical supervision of PAGASA and/or its major organizational units: Provided, That the Director General is hereby authorized to allow field units and personnel of PAGASA to remain under the supervision and control of PAGASA or any of its units by reason of compelling and peculiar operational needs. In the event that PAGASA field units or portions thereof are placed under the administrative supervision of the NSTA regional director, the relevant technical standards, guidelines and orders of PAGASA shall be enforced through the NSTA regional directors.

SECTION 6. The NSTA Director General is hereby authorized to issue such orders, rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this Executive Order: Provided , that approval of the Office of Budget and Management is obtained relative to the new staffing patterns of units affected including appropriate salary rates, the internal organization at the divisional and section levels of units affected, and the alignment of existing appropriations. The NSTA Director General may appoint qualified personnel of units of PAGASA and NSTA affected by the reorganization to appropriate positions in the new staffing patterns and those not so appointed are deemed laid off.

The NSTA Director General shall effect the implementation of this Executive Order, particularly with respect to personnel actions required to be taken, with six months from the issuance of this Executive Order.

SECTION 7. All those who are laid off under the provisions of this Executive Order shall be entitled to all benefits and gratuities provided for under existing laws.

SECTION 8. All present incumbents of positions in the PAGASA and units of the NSTA affected shall continue to exercise their usual functions, duties and responsibilities pending the issuance of the appropriate implementing orders.

SECTION 9. All laws, decrees, orders, proclamations, rules, regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 10. Any portion or provision of this Executive Order that may be declared unconstitutional shall not have the effect of nullifying the other provisions thereof, provided that such remaining portions can still stand and be given effect in their entirety to accomplish the objectives of this Executive Order.

SECTION 11. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th day of September, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.