MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 703

CREATING THE SPECIAL PRESIDENTIAL REORGANIZATION COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, the Constitution as amended, authorizes the establishment of a modified form of parliamentary government with a President as head of State and Chief Executive of the Republic of the Philippines and a Prime Minister to be nominated by him who shall run the day to day affairs of the Government;

WHEREAS, pursuant to said provisions of the Constitution, a presidential election was held on June 16, 1981 with the people voting overwhelming for the incumbent president;

WHEREAS, one of the major programs of the new government is to undertake a top-to-bottom reorganization to avoid duplication of work, eliminate red tape and corruption, and generate savings and to channel these savings for the improvement of the livelihood of the people; and

WHEREAS, the President is granted under Presidential Decree No. 1416 a continuing authority to reorganize the national government.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416, do hereby create a committee to undertake the reorganization of the national government for the purpose of effecting simplicity, economy and efficiency in government operations.

SECTION 1. The Committee herein created shall be known as Special Presidential Reorganization Committee. It shall be composed of the following:

The staff of the present Presidential Commission on Reorganization shall serve as the Secretariat of the Committee herein created.

SEC. 2. The Committee shall study the operational structure of the government and submit to the President its proposals with the end in view of effecting simplicity, economy and efficiency in its operation.

SEC. 3. The Committee created herein is authorized to call upon any ministry, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the national government for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its tasks.

SEC. 4. The Committee shall submit its initial report and recommendation to the President within thirty (30) days from the date of this Order.

SEC. 5. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.