MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 874

PRESCRIBING GUIDELINES FOR THE MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSITION OF THE PEOPLE’S TECHNOLOGY COMPLEX AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, in the implementation of its Export Industry Modernization Program, the Technology Resource Center conceived with the Province of Cavite and the Municipality of Carmona and agreed on the development and subdivision of a parcel of land in Carmona, Cavite into a manufacturing site/complex for light export-oriented industries known as the People’s Technology Complex (“PTC”) which land has a development area of 52.9894 hectares, more particularly described in Annex “A” hereto attached and made part hereof and hereinafter referred to as the “PTC Area.” The said parcel of land has been originally registered under the name of the Municipality of Carmona, Cavite, Province of Cavite under Original Certificate of Title No. 0-2018 and subsequently under Transfer Certificate of Title No. T-131298 of the Registry of Deeds of Trece Martires City.

WHEREAS, the PTC Area is designed as a technology terminal for the application of improved production technologies and for the location of service facilities common to the said industries, and thus:

(1) generate employment opportunities and upgrade the manpower and livelihood skills for the residents of the Municipality of Carmona and the Province of Cavite;

(2) generate investments in the area in the amount of P500 million;

(3) accelerate the growth of labor-intensive and export oriented small and medium scale industries utilizing substantial domestic raw materials;

(4) promote the relocation and dispersal of industrial firms from the Metro Manila Centers to regional locations with access to necessary infrastructure facilities.

WHEREAS, under the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 526 and Executive Order No. 708 the disposal of real properties belonging to the Government is subject to the approval of the President.

NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the laws, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines do hereby order and direct:

Section 1. PTC Area . The parcel of land located in Carmona, Cavite covered by Original Certificate of Title No. 0-2018 and subsequently under Transfer Certificate of Title No. T-131298 of the Registry of Deeds of Trece Martires City, comprising a development area of 52.9894 hectares is hereby declared to be managed and disposed of in accordance with the guidelines hereunder provided.

Section 2. Disposition of the Area . Saleable lot areas shall be sold, leased or otherwise disposed of in favor of small/medium scale industries that shall have potential for export growth as evaluated and approved by the TRC, The price, terms and conditions of the scale, lease or disposition shall be determined jointly by the TRC, the Municipality of Carmona and the Province of Cavite. Upon such determination of each sale, lease or other disposition pursuant to this authority, the Municipality of Carmona and/or the Province of Cavite shall execute the corresponding Deeds and other necessary documents in favor of the industry/firm locator or project proponent.

Section 3. Disposition of Proceeds . The Provincial Treasurer of Cavite shall receive and receipt for the proceeds of the disposition of the lot area. The proceeds equivalent to the land cost shall be shared between, and remitted to, the Municipality of Carmona and Province of Cavite as follows:

Carmona

P11,922,615.00

Cavite

9,273,254.00

TOTAL

P21,195,760.00

Development cost shall, subject to auditing rules/regulations and approval of the TRC, be reimbursed to the Province of Cavite; provided that the total value of such development costs shall not exceed P14.50 million, in addition to financial charges incurred to carry on development; provided further that the subdivision development and improvements thereon shall have been completed and performed in accordance with the engineering plans and specifications furnished to and approved by the TRC; and provided finally that the PTC area shall have a complete system of concrete roads, curbs and gutters, planting strips, water system and electrical facilities. Proceeds in excess of land and development costs, financing charges incurred for development, and promotion costs, shall accrue in favor of TRC, the Province of Cavite and Municipality of Carmona in equal parts.

Section 4. Promotion, Management and Maintenance of PTC . The TRC is hereby directed and authorized to promote, manage and administer the PTC, and to issue rules, regulations and restrictions therefor, including the authority to install, connect and maintain public utilities, electrical, telecommunication and water systems with any source, network or franchise holder, the provision of any law, act, or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding. The Municipality of Carmona and the Province of Cavite shall render such assistance as may be requested by TRC in the performance of this responsibility. For this purpose an area not less than 1.56 hectares shall be transferred without cost to TRC as site for the management facilities. Funds necessary to carry out this undertaking may be sourced from the firm locators or project proponents thru special assessments.

Section 5. Development Funding . The TRC is hereby further directed to assist the Province of Cavite in sourcing the funds necessary to carry on the development of the PTC, which may not have been provided under budgetary appropriations, revenue allocations or other corporate sources of the Province of Cavite. Any savings from any general or special or infrastructure act may be appropriated and expended for the purpose upon recommendation by the Ministry of Budget and approval of the President.

Section 6. Advisory Council . As a forum for consultation and advice between TRC, the Municipality of Carmona and the Province of Cavite, there is hereby created a PTC Advisory Council to be composed of the Governor of Cavite as Chairman, the TRC Director General as Vice-Chairman and the Mayor of Carmona, Cavite, the TRC Managing Director for the Livelihood External Assistance Program Office and the TRC Chief of Legal Council.

Section 7. Service Appointments, Incentives and Transactions . To carry out its programs, services and projects effectively, TRC is hereby declared a critical government agency in accordance with P.D. No. 985. The TRC Board of Trustees is hereby empowered to, in its sole discretion, determine and approve, and institute and implement for the TRC, its organizational structure, staffing patterns, compensation and benefits systems. Sections 10, 11, and 12 of P.D. No. 1097 are hereby reaffirmed, any law to the contrary notwithstanding.

Section 8. Repealing Clause . All provisions of laws, decrees, executive orders, rules or regulations or acts inconsistent herewith are hereby superseded, repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 9. Separability Clause . Any portion or provision of this Executive Order that may be declared unconstitutional shall not have the effect of nullifying the other provisions thereof, provided that such remaining portions can still stand and be given effect in their entirety to accomplish the objectives of this Executive Order.

Section 10. Effectivity . This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12th day of February in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Reference : Annex A

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1983). [Executive Order Nos. : 858 – 927]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.