MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 155

CREATING THE GOMEZ, BURGOS, ZAMORA CENTENNIAL COMMISSION

WHEREAS, the 17th of February of 1972 will mark the First Centenary of the execution of Fathers Mariano Gomez, Jose Burgos and Jacinto Zamora;

WHEREAS, serious doubts have been cast about their participation in the Cavite Mutiny of January 20, 1872, for which they were charged and sentenced to death;

WHEREAS, two decades after their execution our national hero, Jose Rizal, also expressed his disbelief in their guilt, at the same time placing on record, for posterity, his observation that the country was already venerating them as martyrs; and

WHEREAS, the Filipino people owe it to themselves to observe the day of their execution in such a manner as to bring into full view the real significance of that historic event in the formation and development of our nationhood;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a GOMEZ, ZAMORA, BURGOS CENTENNIAL COMMISSION composed of the following:

The Commission shall have the following duties and functions:

1. Prepare and take charge of the general program of the Centenary;

2. Publish the writings of the three priests and such works of others about them as are considered necessary in the proper understanding of their lives and labour, specially as regards the development of the Filipino nation;

3. Solicit and administer donations from the public and the Government for carrying out the purposes of this Order and to perpetuate the memory of the martyrs; and

4. Take other measures necessary for the successful execution of the program of activities adopted.

The Commission shall from time to time report its accomplishment to the President who shall cause such report to be published for the information of the public.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE J. LEIDO, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.