MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 292

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 180, SERIES OF 1969, RECONSTITUTING THE COMMITTEE ON WOOD INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT UNDER THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

Realizing the need for the accelerated development of the Philippine wood industry as a vital factor in the economic program of the country;

Appreciating the need for the government to provide a stable environment in which the wood industry will operate, in return for a fair share to the government of the proceeds of forest products and services; and

In view of the rapid and expansive growth that the wood industry is capable of attaining;

I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the authority conferred upon me by law, do hereby amend Executive Order No. 180, series of 1969, reconstituting the Committee on Wood Industries Development under the Office of the President as follows:

1. The committee shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

a) To study, discuss and arrive at action recommendations to solve current problems confronting the wood industry;

b) To study, review and discuss present policies embodied in existing laws, rules and regulations affecting the wood industry with a view to evolving new policies and reforms as may be found necessary to boost the expansive growth of the industry, while at the same time placing more responsibility for the management, development and protection of forest resources with the proper government agency.

c) To study, review and arrive at recommendations on an equitable sharing of proceeds between the industry and the government from the sale of forest products.

d) To undertake research and market development programs designed to accomplish the objectives of growth in the wood industry; and

e) To harness available potential resources from both the government and the private sectors for the development of the industry.

2. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

The private sector representatives shall elect one among themselves who shall act as Committee Vice-Chairman.

The Committee may call on any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of national government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in connection with the performance of its functions, and such assistance shall be extended whenever the same is sought by the committee or any of its members.

Executive Order No. 180 dated April 15, 1969 is modified accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.