MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 12

CREATING THE ANTI-SMUGGLING FUND COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, the problem of smuggling is not the concern solely of the government;

WHEREAS, the citizenry can help immensely in the successful prosecution of the ant-smuggling campaign not only by lending their services to the government but also by giving financial assistance to help acquire equipment and other facilities needed in the campaign, secure necessary information leading to the arrest of smugglers and the confiscation of smuggled goods, and wage an educational drive to enlist the earnest cooperation of the people by making them keenly aware of the evils of smuggling; and

WHEREAS, civic-spirited citizens have manifested their willingness to participate actively in the anti-smuggling campaign;

NOW, THEREFOR, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create an Anti-Smuggling Fund Committee which shall be composed of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Treasurer, Secretary and not more than twelve members, all to be appointed or designated by the President of the Philippines.

The Committee shall be charge with the duty and responsibility of raising funds thru voluntary contributions which shall be turned over to the Secretary of Finance through whom said private funds shall be disbursed in furtherance of the anti-smuggling campaign, including the payment of cash rewards to deserving individuals who have rendered valuable assistance in connection therewith. The Committee is hereby authorized to appoint and organize as many sub-committees and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out its work. It shall meet at such times and places as may be designated by the Chairman and shall submit a report on its activities to the President of the Philippines from time to time. All the funds received by the Anti-Smuggling Fund Committee shall be deposited by the Secretary of Finance with the Philippine National Bank and withdrawals therefrom shall be made only by checks duly signed by the Treasurer of the Committee and countersigned by the Chairman and by the Secretary of Finance, provided , that should the Chairman be concurrently the Secretary of Finance, then an Auditor named or designated by the President of the Philippines shall be the other countersigning officer.

All books of accounts of the Anti-Smuggling Fund Committee shall always be made available for audit by the authorized representative of the Auditor General.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.