MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 433

CREATING A STUDY COMMITTEE OF STATE HIGHER EDUCATION

WHEREAS, the state higher education system accounts for more than P200 million of the budget of the national government;

WHEREAS, the organization, location and fields of emphasis of the state higher education system need to be evaluated in the light of development requirements;

WHEREAS, there is a need to rationalize the state higher education system to make it responsive to the needs of national development;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby create a Study Committee on State Higher Education which shall undertake a thorough study and assessment of the State University and College system including other state-supported higher educational schools, and make recommendations for the formulation of a policy framework to govern state higher education.

Specifically, the Committee shall:

1. analyze the performance of the government higher education system and its relevance to development goals;

2. prepare a long-term perspective plan for the Philippine public higher education system, including the estimate of resources needed and financial implications of the perspective plan;

3. identify and recommend policy measures affecting the higher education system, including the role of the public and private sectors in education and the role of the University of the Philippines System in relation to other state colleges and universities.

The Committee shall be composed of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman and three (3) members as follows:

The Committee shall have the power to:

a. Adopt and prescribe the guidelines that will govern the study proper;

b. Solicit, when necessary, such assistance from both government and non-government entities as may be required in the discharge of its functions;

c. Defray all expenses of the study including compensation of all the personnel; and

d. Perform such other acts as may be necessary and proper for the discharge of its functions and responsibilities.

The Committee shall be assisted in its work by an Advisory Group, which is hereby constituted, consisting a representative from each of the following:

1. Philippine Association of State Universities and Colleges

2. Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities

3. Catholic Educational Association of the Philippines

4. Association of Christian Schools & Colleges

5. Association of Colleges of Agriculture of the Philippines

6. Ad Interim Board for Technician Education

7. Fund for Assistance to Private Education

8. University of the Philippines

9. Mindanao State University

The Advisory Group shall advise the Committee in the task of formulating the policies that will govern the higher educational system.

The Educational Projects Implementing Task Force (EDPITAF)  shall provide the technical and administrative support service for the Committee. The Committee may contract the services of competent persons and may request the detail of personnel from the Department of Education and Culture, the National Economic and Development Authority and other government agencies as may be necessary to assist the Committee in the performance of its functions. The EDPITAF personnel assigned to the Committee as well as those contracted and detailed personnel shall be granted such allowances for the duration of the project at such amounts as may be determined by the Committee. The Executive Director of the EDPITAF shall be the Head of the Technical Staff which shall be composed of the aforementioned personnel.

The Secretary of Education and Culture and the Director- General of the NEDA are hereby authorized to allocate within their available funds such amounts as are appropriate and necessary for the operation of the Committee.

All government offices and instrumentalities thereof are hereby enjoined to extend all support and cooperation to the Committee in the performance of its functions.

The Committee shall submit its report to the NEDA Board upon the expiration of this order.

This Order shall take effect immediately and shall in full force and effect for six months from the date of the issuance hereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of September in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1974). [Executive Order Nos. : 366 – 435] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.