MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 843

CREATING A COMMISSION ON EXPORT PROCEDURES

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the government to encourage exports of the Philippine products;

WHEREAS, it is imperative to eliminate the obstacles of red tape and cumbersome export procedures in order to accelerate the growth of exports;

WHEREAS, it is expedient to establish an agency to study, review, revise, amend, introduce innovations, simplify and consolidate procedures to the end that the exportation of products be more expeditious; and

WHEREAS, it is the objective to facilitate export documentation through the establishment of a “one-stop shop” operation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416,  as amended, do hereby create a Commission on Export Procedures (hereinafter called Commission) composed equally of the government and private sector representatives as follows:

SECTION 1. The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:

(1) to undertake an overall review of existing documentation requirements for the exportation of goods, including rules and regulations, administrative orders, circulars, guidelines and procedures governing exports to the end that bureaucratic red tape be eliminated;

(2) to review the procedural and documentation requirements of all government agencies which have functions connected with the export of products to pinpoint causes of delays and to find ways and means to eliminate such causes of delay;

(3) to revise, amend, introduce innovations, consolidate and simplify rules and regulations, administrative orders, circulars, guidelines and procedures to expedite exports and to defense with excessive documentation and inspection requirements under such safeguards as the Commission may deem proper and sufficient;

(4) to pass upon any proposed export document requirements by any government agency before its implementation and to disapprove or suspend the same if it will unduly delay exportation; and

(5) to promulgate its own rules of review and such regulations to implement its powers and duties.

SEC. 2. The Ministry of Trade and Industry shall provide the Secretariat of the Commission to be headed by an Executive Director, appointed by the Commission, the functions of which shall be prescribed by the Commission.

SEC. 3. The Commission, after a thorough study, may set up an Export Documentation Center whose personnel shall be detailed from government agencies involved with exports such as Central Bank, Bureau of Customs, and other agencies, to process any application to export without need of referring the said application to their respective offices and thus facilitate exportation.

SEC. 4. The Center is authorized to charge reasonable fees for services rendered to the exporters which may be immediately used by the Center to maintain its operations.

SEC. 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 781-857]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.