MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 432

CREATING THE FILIPINO MUSLIMS WELFARE AND RELIEF AGENCY

WHEREAS, the Philippine government has long exerted efforts to uplift the living conditions of Muslim Filipinos as part of the over-all program of national development;

WHEREAS, the Islamic conference, a confederation of Islamic nations throughout the world, has recognized these efforts of the Philippine government and has offered to assist in these efforts;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government welcomes such assistance and believes that maximum benefit can be obtained from it if handled by one agency exclusively charged to do so;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND, E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby create the Filipino Muslims Welfare and Relief Agency to be given primary responsibility for the disposition of any assistance extended by the Islamic Conference for the benefit of the Filipino Muslims.

The Filipino Muslims Welfare and Relief Agency shall be charged with the following duties and responsibilities:

1. Identify priority areas for the application of assistance from Islamic Conference.

2. Inform the Islamic Conference, through the Department of Foreign Affairs, of these priority areas and the type and extent of assistance needed.

3. Coordinate the mobilization of in-country resources needed for the priority areas identified.

4. Utilize the assistance extended by the Islamic Conference in the priority areas identified.

5. Monitor the progress of work in these priority areas.

6. Inform the Islamic Conference, through the Department of Foreign Affairs, of the statutes of relief and development efforts in these priority areas.

The Presidential Task Force for the Rehabilitation and Development of Muslim Mindanao shall serve as the secretariat of this Agency.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1974). [Executive Order Nos. : 366 – 435] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.