MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 45

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL MANAGEMENT TASK FORCE TO COORDINATE FOREIGN-FINANCED PROJECTS, PRESCRIBING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, there is need to insure the speedy and proper implementation of foreign-financed projects in order that available resources could be utilized to the optimum, specific targets met and inter-agency cooperation enhanced; and

WHEREAS, the present government organizational structure requires an appropriate body to facilitate and coordinate the implementation and execution of these projects;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Presidential Management Task Force headed by a Presidential Action Officer.

1. The Presidential Management Task Force shall have the following powers and functions:

a. To evaluate actual performance of each project, identify problem areas and their causes, and recommend appropriate measures. For this purpose, the Task Force is hereby authorized:

(1) To conduct field inspections to ascertain the actual status of projects;

(2) To examine and/or secure directly from entities concerned financial statements, books of accounts and other pertinent records; and

(3) To establish a reporting system and require the implementing agencies to submit periodic accomplishment reports.

b. To coordinate and facilitate inter-agency participation required in project implementation, including funding and logistical support.

c. To establish and maintain direct liaison between the Philippine Government and consultative organizations concerned with multi-lateral financing arrangements.

d. To submit regular fortnightly reports to the President on the progress of projects indicating the degree of completion of each project in relation to established targets, reasons for delays in implementation and specific remedial stops to include disciplinary measures where necessary.

e. To follow up directives issued by the President to implementing agencies.

f. To perform such other related duties and functions as the President may from time to time direct.

2. The Presidential Management Task Force is hereby empowered to call upon any department, bureau, office or agency of the government for such assistance as it may require in the discharge of its functions.

3. All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby directed to cooperate with and assist the Presidential Management Task Force in effecting the prompt and successful accomplishment of its assigned duties.

4. The Deputy Director General (Operations) of the Presidential Economic Staff is hereby designated Presidential Action Officer. He shall designate such assistants as may be necessary to constitute the Presidential Management Task Force.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.