MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 594

AMENDING THE SALARY SCHEDULE PROVIDED UNDER PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 985

WHEREAS, pursuant to the mandate of the Constitution calling for the standardization of compensation of government personnel, Presidential Decree No. 985 otherwise referred to as the “Budgetary Reform Decree on Compensation and Position Classification of 1976” was promulgated;

WHEREAS, a Salary Schedule consisting of twenty-eight salary grades has been provided under Presidential Decree No. 985 which shall be used in the standardization of compensation of national government personnel;

WHEREAS, the standardization of compensation of government personnel on the basis of the prevailing level of compensation in private industry in the country has been adopted as a national government policy;

WHEREAS, the results of the 1979 salary survey conducted by the National Government in private industry indicates a need to further increase government salaries; and

WHEREAS, there is now a need to revise the salary rates of the Salary Grade Schedule in P.D. No. 985 in view of the increases in salary rates for national government personnel based on the 1976 survey of salaries in private industry and the new minimum wage prescribed in P.D. No. 1614 effective May 1, 1979, and in anticipation of the implementation of further upward revision of national government salaries based on the results of the 1979 salary survey;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Salary Schedule for the National Government, as provided under Section 11 of Presidential Decree No. 985, is hereby revised as follows:

THE SALARY SCHEDULE

Section 2. The Minister of the Budget shall promulgate the rules and regulations for the implementation of this Order.

Section 3. All Executive Orders, rules or regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed and or modified accordingly.

Section 4. This Order shall take effect on January 1, 1980.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of May, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Executive Order Nos. : 531-605]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.