MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 998

CREATING AN AD HOC COMMITTEE TO EVALUATE AND STUDY THE COUNTRY’S VARIOUS SPORTS PROGRAMS

WHEREAS, the Government has initiated several sports development programs causing possible duplication and/or overlapping of functions of agencies tasked with the implementation of said programs;

WHEREAS, there is a need to fully assess these programs, redefine the functions of all sports agencies concerned whenever possible and establish along range plan for the development of the different sports with emphasis on the expansion of the mass base for all sports in the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the powers vested in me by the constitution, do hereby order and direct:

Section 1. There is hereby created an Ad Hoc Committee with the assigned functions to study and evaluate all existing sports development programs in the country and upon completion of said study, to render a detailed report and recommendation to the President.

Section 2. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

Section 3. The Committee may appoint and/or designate such necessary officials and personnel to assist in the efficient performances of its functions.

Section 4. The Committee may adopt and promulgate rules and regulations as it considers necessary for the effective discharge of its responsibilities.

Section 5. To ensure effective performances of its functions, the Committee shall prepare an initial budget for the Committee for the approval of the President to be drawn from the approved budget of Project Gintong Alay.

Section 6. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of January, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.