MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 334

CREATING THE COCONUT COORDINATING COUNCIL

Realizing the need for the accelerated development of the Coconut Industry as a vital factor in the economic progress of the country;

Appreciating the need for the government to provide a stable environment in which the Coconut Industry will operate in return for a fair share to the government of the proceeds of the coconut products and other by-products; and

In view of the rapid and expanding growth that the Coconut Industry is capable of attaining;

I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Coconut Coordinating Council under the Office of the President, composed of the following officials or their authorized representatives who shall attend meetings and deliberations of the said Council:

The Council shall have the following major functions and powers:

a) Supervise, coordinate, and evaluate the implementation of the coconut self-sufficiency program of the government.

b) Supervise, coordinate, and integrate all policies and programs of all agencies and instrumentalities of the government charged with the prosecution of existing laws, policies, procedures, rules and regulations concerning production, stabilization, procurement and distribution, processing and marketing of coconut and other by-products.

c) Formulate the long and short range programs calculated to achieve major self-sufficiency in coconut industry.

d) Coordinate with the PHILCOA in the formulation and implementation of plans and programs for the success of the coconut industry.

e) Coordinate and evaluate the activities and accomplishments of all agencies of the government charged with the prosecution of the different aspects of the coconut industry. Accordingly, it shall coordinate the release of the public funds in accordance with approved programs and projects in the coconut industry; and shall release to the public such information and statistics pertinent to the progress and accomplishments of the different aspects of the national program.

f) Perform other functions as may be necessary to attain the objectives of Republic Act No. 6260, and such other duties as the President may direct.

The Council may call on any department, bureau, office, agency and other instrumentality of the government for assistance in the form of personnel, facilities, and other resources in the discharge of its functions.

The Coconut Coordinating Council shall submit to the President periodic progress reports of its activities.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of August, in the year if Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.