MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 942

REORGANIZING THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

WHEREAS, the salary scale of lawyer positions in the Legal Division of the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) has not been implemented in accordance with the mandate of Presidential Decree No. 1726;

WHEREAS, the low salary scale of lawyer positions in the NBI has made it very difficult for the NBI to recruit qualified lawyers;

WHEREAS, there has been an exodus of experienced NBI lawyers not only to the private sector, but also to other government offices offering better pay;

WHEREAS, due to the importance of the functions and duties of the NBI, there is a need to upgrade salaries and streamline positions to make the NBI more effective and responsive to its functions and objectives;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and by Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended by Presidential Decree No. 1772, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Effective January 1, 1984, the following positions in the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) shall have the salary herein provided:

SEC. 2. The Director of the NBI is hereby authorized to reorganize his legal and administrative staff within three (3) months from the date of effectivity hereof in such manner as he may deem necessary or proper to promote efficiency in the service. Any officer or employee who is not appointed by the Director of the NBI as a result of the reorganization herein authorized, or who refuses his appointment, shall be paid the money value of his accumulated vacation and sick leaves, and such retirement gratuity as may be due him under existing retirement laws. Anyone not appointed who does not qualify under any existing retirement law may be paid one month salary for every full year of service, a fraction of more than six (6) months being considered a full year, payable in lump sum, from out of the salary lapses in the NBI.

SEC. 3. The amount necessary for the implementation of this Executive Order shall be taken from the salary savings of the NBI.

SEC. 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of March, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Executive Order Nos. : 928-1029]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.