MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 108

CREATING A SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON THE CREATION OF NEW AGENCIES OR OFFICES AND NEW POSITIONS

WHEREAS, new Government agencies or offices and new positions had been created entailing additional expenses on the part of the Government even when the need for them was not manifest or when there was no specific appropriation for the purpose;

WHEREAS, this is a practice that is not in consonance with the proper husbanding of our resources for the maximum good; and

WHEREAS, the imperatives of good government demand that public funds should be expended to produce maximum service at the lowest possible cost;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Special Committee on the Creation of New Agencies or Offices and New Positions, which shall be composed of the following: The Budget Commissioner, as Chairman, and the Deputy Auditor General and the Undersecretary of Finance, as Members.

The Special Committee on the Creation of New Agencies or Offices and New Positions shall determine the need for the creation of any new agency or office or new position in the Executive Branch of the Government, and hereafter no such agency, office or position shall be created or implementation of such creation effected, without the favorable recommendation of the said Committee and the approval of the President of the Philippines. The said Committee shall recommend the creation of a new agency or office or position in the Executive Branch only if upon a majority vote of its members it determines that there is an absolute need for it and there is a specific appropriation for the purpose.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library