MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 971

ESTABLISHING A REWARD SYSTEM FOR INFORMATION LEADING TO THE DISCOVERY AND SEIZURE OF COPRA AND OR OTHER COCONUT PRODUCTS ATTEMPTED TO BE BROUGHT OUT OR EXPORTED FROM THE TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION OF THE COUNTRY IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1464, AS AMENDED

WHEREAS, numerous reports show that there is rampant and unabated illegal exportation of copra and other coconut products;

WHEREAS, these illegal activities have resulted in substantial losses in dollar earnings for the country and have retarded government efforts to ensure the coconut industry’s position in the international market;

WHEREAS, it is imperative to draw on the vigilance and involvement of the citizenry in the campaign against these illegal activities by providing a system of reward for persons who are instrumental in the discovery and seizure of copra and other coconut products attempted to be brought out or exported from the territorial jurisdiction of the country.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by law, do hereby direct and order that:

Section 1. The Commissioner of Customs is hereby directed to immediately establish a reward system for information leading to the discovery and seizure, in favor of the National Government, of all copra and/or other coconut products attempted to be brought out or exported from the territorial jurisdiction of the country which are not properly authorized and documented as required by existing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 2. The amount of the reward shall be equivalent to fifty per cent (50%) of the proceeds from the sale at public auction or by a negotiated sale of the copra and/or other coconut products attempted to be brought out or exported from the country and forfeited in the favor of the National Government in accordance with the relevant provisions and procedure set forth in Presidential Decree No. 1464, as amended. The reward shall be paid to any private individual or any officer employee of the Bureau of Customs, or the Armed Forces of the Philippines including the Philippine Constabulary-Integrated National Police (“PC/INP”) and/or the Philippine Coast Guard who provide information and/or effect the actual seizure of copra and/or other coconut products attempted to be brought out or exported from the country.

Section 3. The Commissioner of Customs shall issue or promulgate such rules and regulations to implement, and carry out the purposes and provisions of this Executive Order including the manner of sharing the reward among all persons assisting in the gathering of information and the actual seizure and the procedure for the payment of the reward.

Section 4. The Philippine Coconut Authority, the Philippine Coast Guard, the PC/INP and other appropriate government agencies shall coordinate with and assist the Bureau of Customs on the seizure and/or forfeiture proceedings of copra and/or other coconut products attempted to be brought out or exported from the territorial jurisdiction of the country.

Section 5. This Executive Order shall be effective immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of July 1984, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.