MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 636

CREATING A PHILIPPINE GAMEFOWL COMMISSION

WHEREAS, international cockfight derbies are held in the country as a national recreation and tourism attraction;

WHEREAS, the gamefowl industry which is the main source of materials for cockfighting can be developed to profitable levels;

WHEREAS, it is necessary that international cockfight derbies be regulated in order to derive from the maximum benefits not only for those who are directly engaged in them but for the country as well; and

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Philippine Gamefowl Commission . – There is hereby created under the Office of the President, a Philippine Gamefowl Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, which shall be composed of seven (7) members, as follows: the Director of Animal Industry; the Chairman of the Games and Amusements Board; a representative of the Ministry of Local Government and Community Development; a representative of the Ministry of Finance; and three (3) other members from the private sector to be appointed by the President, one of whom shall be a representative of a recognized cockpit owners/operators association.

The President shall designate the Chairman of the Commission from among its members.

SEC. 2. Powers and Functions of the Commission. – The Commission shall have the following functions:

a. Promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relative to the holding of international cockfight derbies in the Philippines, including the frequency, sites, conduct and operation of the derbies;

b. Issue licenses for the holding of international cockfight derbies;

c. Prescribe policy guidelines for the issuance of permits by the Bureau of Animal Industry for the importation or entry of gamecocks into the country for breeding or competition purposes;

d. Fix and periodically revise whenever necessary, subject to the approval of the Minister of Finance, the rates of license fees and other levies that may be imposed on international cockfight derbies; and

e. Perform such other functions as may be authorized by law.

SEC. 2. 3. For purposes of this Executive Order, international cockfight derbies shall refer to special cockfight events involving imported gamecocks.

SEC. 2. 4. The licensing and regulation of regular cockfighting shall continue to be in accordance with existing pertinent laws and regulations.

SEC. 2. 5. Such amount as may be necessary for the operating expenses of the Commission for the current and immediately following calendar year is hereby authorized to be appropriated out of any unappropriated funds in the National Treasury. Subsequently, the appropriations for the Commission shall be included in the general appropriations act.

SEC. 6. Repealing Clause . – All laws, decrees, charters, executive orders, administrative orders, proclamations, rules and regulations or parts thereof that are in conflict with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 7. Effectivity . – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.