MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 88

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 4 DATED JANUARY 7, 1966, ENTITLED “CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL AGENCY ON REFORMS AND GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS.”

Paragraph 4 of Executive Order No. 4 dated January 7, 1966, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“4. The Presidential Agency on Reforms and Government Operations shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

“a. To provide a central clearing house through which the general public and all government officials may transmit inquiries, ventilate grievances and lodge complaints, and receive information and welcome advice.

“b. To investigate all activities involving or affecting immoral practices, graft and corruption, smuggling (physical or technical), lawlessness, subversion, and all other activities which are prejudicial to the government and the public interest, and to submit proper recommendations to the President of the Philippines.

“c. To establish and maintain direct liaison between the President of the Philippines and the executive departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, and all branches of local governments, and to coordinate with these offices to insure the speedy and effective implementation of the policies of the Administration.

“d. To enlist the assistance of appropriate government agencies and entities and local governments for the transmission and implementation of policies, programs and/or reforms which are calculated to develop a strong and dynamic moral character, integrity and civic consciousness among the masses of our people.

“e. To investigate cases of graft and corruption, and violations of Republic Act Nos. 1379 and 3019, and gather necessary evidence to establish, prima facie , acts of graft and acquisition of unlawful amazed wealth and, for the purpose it shall have access, inter alia , to the records of the Presidential Anti-Graft Committee created by Executive Order No. 378 dated February 18, 1960, and abolished by Executive Order No. 457 dated December 20, 1961, which are now in the custody of the National Bureau of Investigation.

“f. To make and submit a regular report on the overall conduct and performance or reforms and remedies intended to improve the administration of government or its essential services and operations.

“g. To conduct seminars and educational campaigns in government offices and, whenever possible, in communities for the purpose of instilling the proper sense of spiritual and moral values as the foundation of an enduring national vitality, strength and character.

“h. To receive and evaluate, and to conduct fact finding investigations of sworn complaints against the acts, conduct or behavior of any public official or employee and to file and prosecute the proper charges with the appropriate agency. Other complaints shall be investigated, regardless of form, so long as they are signed. However, it shall have no jurisdiction over private persons or entities, unless there is evidence of collusion between the private individual and the public official or employee and the matter under investigation is within the official functions of the latter, or except when the private citizen is a former public official whose actuations as such are the subject of inquiry, Cases shall be disposed of within ninety (90) days from receipt.

“i. To perform such other duties and functions as the President of the Philippines may from time to time direct.”

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.