MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 519

CREATING A HEALTH SCIENCES CENTER AS AN AUTONOMOUS MEMBER OF THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES SYSTEM

WHEREAS, health is an essential component of the New Society’s program for the upliftment of the Filipino;

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 5163 established a Health Sciences Center, consisting of the units of the University of the Philippines related to the health sciences;

WHEREAS, the internal organization of the University of the Philippines System would be improved with greater coordination and unity of leadership among its health units;

WHEREAS, the President of the Philippines is authorized to re-organize the government by virtue of P.D. No. 1416;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby Order:

Section 1. Establishment of the Health Sciences Center . – The Health Sciences Center created by R.A. No. 5163 is hereby constituted as an autonomous university within the University of the Philippines System, consisting of the Colleges of Medicine, Pharmacy and Dentistry, Institute of Public Health, Philippine General Hospital, School of Allied Medical Professions, Institute of Ophthalmology, Institute of Health Sciences (Tacloban), Comprehensive Community Health Program, Anesthesiology Center for the Western Pacific, National Teacher Training Center for the Health Professions, and such other units of the University as may be approved by its Board of Regents.

Sec. 2. Organization . – The Center shall be headed by a Chancellor, who shall be a member ex-officio of the Board of Regents of the University of the Philippines System, pursuant to P.D. No. 58.

The Chancellor shall be the executive officer of the autonomous University and shall discharge the following functions and responsibilities:

a. To prescribe rules for the governance of the autonomous university, consistent with its purposes and the policies laid down by the Board of Regents of the University of the Philippines System;

b. To submit to the President of the University System for approval by the Board of Regents the courses of study and academic programs, rules of discipline, and awards of degrees and diplomas as recommended by the University Council;

c. To maintain links with other units of the University System so as to ensure fruitful academic interchange and the maximization of the use of human and physical resources;

d. To submit to the President an annual report on the operations of the autonomous University and such other reports as may be required;

e. To prepare and recommend to the President for approval of the Board of Regents the budget of the autonomous University;

f. To perform such other functions as the Board of Regents may delegate to him;

g. To institute or effect the appropriate and efficient exercise of such functions or responsibilities as may be necessary for the expeditious administration of the autonomous University.

Sec. 3. Staffing and Compensation . – The staffing and compensation structure of the Center and the Office of the Chancellor shall be determined in accordance with P.D. No. 1177, P.D. No. 985, and other pertinent budget and compensation law.

Sec. 4. Funding . – The sum of Three Hundred Fifty Thousand Pesos (P350,000) shall be released to the University of the Philippines System in Calendar Year 1979 for purposes of implementing this Order. This shall be charged to the Special Activities Fund in B.P. No. 1 pursuant to Special Provision No. 3 governing the said Fund and authorizing its use for new organizational units of Government. Amounts necessary for the operation of the Center beginning in calendar year 1980 shall be duly provided for in the General Appropriations Act, observing pertinent budget law: Provided , That the timing and amount of capital outlays funds needed for the construction of the physical plant of the Center in Quezon City shall be duly evaluated within the context and as part of the national public buildings program, subject to the limits of available funds.

Sec. 5. Effectivity . – This Order shall be immediately effective.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of January, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1979). [Executive Order Nos. : 436 – 530]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.