MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 637

PRESCRIBING REVISED ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONSHIPS WITHIN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

WHEREAS, pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 955, organizational and administrative reform measures have been directed to be undertaken within the Office of the President in order to establish a more effective staff support system for the President;

WHEREAS, a system of Presidential Assistance has been established in the Office of the President in accordance with Presidential Decree No. 830;

WHEREAS, there is further need to clarify administrative relationships within the Office of the President to ensure the realization of effective coordination and integration in the internal administrative affairs of the Office of the President; and

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree Nos. 830 and 1416, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. The Presidential Executive Assistant shall, in behalf of the President, be chief executive officer of the Office of the President. As such, he shall be responsible for exercising direct and immediate supervision over the internal management of the Office of the President.

In accordance with the above, all organizational units within the Office of the President proper, except those pertaining to the private offices of the President and the Presidential Security Command which shall remain directly under the President, shall report to and be under the immediate supervision and control of the Presidential Executive Assistant.

SEC. 2. There is hereby created the position of Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant who shall assist the Presidential Executive Assistant in the management and supervision of the Office of the President in such manner as the Presidential Executive Assistant shall determine.

SEC. 3. Pursuant to Section 3 of Presidential Decree No. 955, the Presidential Executive Assistant shall provide overall coordination in the operation of the system of Presidential Assistants established under P.D. 831. Accordingly, he shall exercise administrative supervision overall the Presidential Assistants including the Chief of the Finance Office.

SEC. 4. The Presidential Executive Assistant, as chief executive officer of the Office of the President proper, shall have powers and functions as follows:

1. Exercise direct supervision and control over the various units of the Office of the President proper including their internal administrative requirements and for this purpose, he may designate such Presidential Assistants as may be necessary, to assist him in the performance of his functions;

2. Exercise exclusive authority to sign papers “By authority of the President ” or other signing arrangements of similar nature.

3. Supervise the preparation, review or finalization, as the case may be, of proclamations, executive orders, decrees, letter of instructions; and sign the papers referred to in Letter of Instructions No. 342.

4. Together with the Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant, attest Presidential Decrees and similar Presidential issuances;

5. Determine and assign such matters as he may deem proper to the appropriate Presidential Assistants or units in the Office of the President proper; prescribe and define the nature and extent of the authority that may be exercised in connection with such assignments; and determine the appropriate officials who may be authorized signatories for particular types of papers, communications or similar action documents;

6. Promulgate such rules and regulations necessary to carry out the objectives, policies and functions of the Office of the President proper; and

7. Perform such other functions as the President may direct.

SEC. 5. The Presidential Assistants, under the overall coordination and administrative supervision of the Presidential Executive Assistant, shall have powers and functions, as follows:

1. Implement assignments explicitly given to them by the President;

2. Provide the President with information and analysis on development within their respective areas of competence, as well as in other areas they deem important or which may warrant immediate Presidential attention;

3. Assist the Presidential Executive Assistant for the effective and efficient operation of the Office of the President proper;

4. Coordinate and consult closely with other Presidential Assistants and Presidential Advisers, and heads of the different line departments and agencies of the government in the conduct of their respective staff functions and duties;

5. Call upon any of the units in the Common Support System of the Office of the President proper for assistance in the performance of their technical staff work; and

6. Perform such other functions as the President may direct.

SEC. 6. All existing authorizations to sign papers that have legal or substantive directory implications, including those “By authority of the President”, “By order of the President”, “By the President”, “For the President” or other authorizations of similar legal nature, as well as the authority to attest Presidential decrees and similar Presidential issuances, as are inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby revoked.

SEC. 7. All laws, decrees, charters, executive orders, letters of instructions, administrative orders, proclamations, rules and regulations or parts thereof that are in conflict with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of December in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.