MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 202

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION TO SURVEY PHILIPPINE EDUCATION

WHEREAS, there is need to assess and improve the educational system to make it responsive to the challenge of modernization and the goals of national development; and

WHEREAS, such improvement to be effective must be based on an educated appraisal of the performance of the system in general, with emphasis on qualitative shortages as pertain to deficient management structures, inability of the system to achieve the goals of human resources development, and the lack of mechanism for channelling resources;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Presidential Commission to Survey Philippine Education (hereinafter referred to as the ”Commission”) which shall undertake a thorough study and assessment of education in the Philippines and make recommendations for policy and implementation.

The objectives of the Survey on Philippine Education are:

1. To analyze the performance of the educational system and its relevance to development goals. Emphasis should be placed on the system’s capacity to meet human resources development goals, including the manpower requirements of national development. It shall also ascertain means for improving the efficiency of the system within the limits of available resources;

2. To recommend specific ways of improving the system with particular emphasis on developing policies and mechanisms for channelling resources, according to priorities for the purposes of achieving improvement in the system generally and meeting qualitative needs particularly; and

3. To identify critical areas in Philippine education for more detailed research and study.

The Commission shall be composed of a chairman, a vice-chairman, and five (5) other members drawn from government and private sectors, as follows:

The Commission shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

a) Adopt and prescribe the guidelines that will govern the survey proper;

b) Avail of the funds that are, under existing laws, available to support the research activities of the Department of Education;

c) Solicit, when necessary, such assistance from both government and non-government sources as it may require in the discharge of its functions;

d) Defray all expenses of the survey, including compensation of all the personnel; and

e) Perform such other acts and things as may be necessary and proper for the discharge of its functions and responsibilities.

The Chairman shall act for the Commission in all administrative matters including the appointment of the Survey Director and the staff.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ERNESTO M. MACEDA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Executive Order Nos. : 141 – 280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 202, December 24, 1969