MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 307

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE AGRICULTURAL TRAINING COUNCIL

WHEREAS, the continuous development of agriculture is indispensable to effective economic and social development;

WHEREAS, the development of agriculture should include food production, farm management and other agricultural endeavors;

WHEREAS, Philippine agricultural productivity and efficiency can be further enhanced by the introduction or adoption of modern agricultural methods and farming techniques and effective manpower training and utilization;

WHEREAS, such improved methods and techniques may be acquired by the youth thru a systematic practical and theoretical training program available under the National 4-H Club Foundation of the United States and similar other organizations in other countries;

WHEREAS, there is need for a central policy coordinating and implementing body to handle the program; and

WHEREAS, the activities and operations of this body shall be distinct and separate from the activities and operations of any other existing government agency having similar functions;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Philippine Agricultural Training Council.

1. The Council shall be composed of the following:

2. The Chairman, National 4-H Club Advisory Council of the Philippines shall be Action Officer of the Council. He shall head the secretariat of the Council.

3. The Council shall have the following duties and functions:

a. Administer the program in the Philippines;

b. Have responsibility for relationships with the National 4-H Club Foundation of the U.S. and other similar organization;

c. Review and evaluate progress of the training program;

d. Top all sources of funds to be used in the operation of the program;

e. Adopt rules and procedures necessary to carry out the purposes of this Order; and

f. Submit periodic reports of operations.

4. The Council may draw from available budgetary appropriation of any department, bureau, agency or instrumentality of the Government, and the entity concerned shall make available to the Council, such funds and other assistance as the latter may require to carry out the program. Voluntary contributions may be used for expenses of program operation.

5. This Order takes effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Executive Order No. 307, March 23, 1971