MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 619

DESIGNATING CHIEF REGIONAL ACTION OFFICERS AND REGIONAL ACTION OFFICER FOR BASIC NEEDS AND SERVICES FOR REGIONS IX, X, XI, AND XII

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the government to hasten the normalization and development of Southern Philippines, or Region IX, Region X, Region XI, and Region XII;

WHEREAS, the prompt delivery of the eleven (11) basic needs of shelter, health/medical service, education, sports and recreation, ecological balance, mobility, water, power, food, economic base/livelihood, and clothing enumerated by the Ministry of Human Settlements (MHS); and the fulfillment of the six (6) basic services for tanod, disaster, youth, volunteer, and ladies auxiliary listed by the Ministry of Local Government and Community Development (MLGCD) are vital for the achievement of these objectives of the government in Southern Philippines;

WHEREAS, the delivery and fulfillment of these basic services and needs require the designation of action, officers for each in the barangay, municipal, city, provincial, regional, and national levels;

WHEREAS, institutional and fund supports are likewise needed to insure the speedy and effective implementation and supervision of the various projects and activities which shall be undertaken along these basic services and needs;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order:

1. Appointment of Action Officers

1.1 The Minister of Human Settlements shall appoint, in coordination with the Ministry of Local Government and Community Development (MLGCD), one (1) National Action Officer (NAO) for each of the seventeen (17) basic services and needs herein enumerated; one (1) Chief Regional Action Officer (CRAO) for each of the four regions in Southern Philippines; and the seventeen (17) Regional Action Officers (RAO’s) corresponding to these same basic services and needs for each of Region IX, Region X, Region XI, and Region XII;

1.2 The Chief Regional Action Officer for each region shall in turn designate, subject to the confirmation by the Ministry of Human Settlements, one (1) Action Officer for each of these basic services and needs in the provincial or city, municipal, and barangay levels, together with a Chief Provincial/City Action Officer, a Chief Municipal Action Officer, and a Chief Barangay Action Officer in every province, city, municipality, and barangay in his region or area of responsibility.

2. Functions and Responsibilities

2.1 The Action Officers designated in the national, regional, provincial, municipal, and barangay levels shall be under the Minister of Human Settlements as the National Coordinator.

2.2 The National Action Officers, Chief Regional Action Officers, Chief Provincial/City Action Officers, Chief Municipal Action Officers, and Chief Barangay Action Officers shall be mainly responsible for the coordination and supervision of the delivery and fulfillment of the basic services and needs herein enumerated in their respective/assigned regions or areas of responsibility by the designated action officers thereat.

2.3 The designated Action Officers for each of the basic needs and services herein identified for the national, regional/city, municipal, and barangay levels shall each be responsible for the identification of the problems, proposals for the appropriate management actions therefor, and coordination with appropriate agencies or offices, in their respective levels and areas of responsibility.

2.4 In addition to the above-enumerated functions and responsibilities, the following guidelines for the activities of the designated Action Officers are also hereby prescribed for all levels:

(a) holding of meetings at least twice a month;

(b) coordination as a group/action planners with the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) in the National level; the Regional Development Councils (RDC’s) in the regional level; and the appropriate agency/office for development plan formulation in the city/provincial, municipal, and barangay levels;

(c) establishment of priorities in the national, regional, city/provincial, municipal, and barangay development plans;

(d) implementation of specific programs and projects;

(e) conduct of surveys of needs, requirements and problems in their respective levels and propose solution therefor for consideration by the appropriate officials/offices in the different levels;

(f) monitoring and submission of feedbacks and consolidated barangay, municipal, city/provincial, regional and national monthly reports; and

(g) performance of other functions and responsibilities as directed by the President and/or the Minister of Human Settlements.

3. Organization

3.1 The Office of the Regional Action Officers for the Basic Needs and Services for Regions IX, X, XI, and XII, which shall be directly under the Presidential Committee on the Rehabilitation and Development of Southern Philippines (PCRDSP-PMO 697) under the overall administrative setup of the Ministry of Human Settlements, is hereby created.

3.2. A Coordinating Center for Southern Philippines based in Metro Manila and Regional Centers for Basic Needs and Services in Regions IX, X, XI, and XII, the plans and operating guidelines for the fund, organizational, and manpower requirements for which shall be prepared by the PCRDSP-PMO 697 Secretariat in coordination with the Ministry of Human Settlements (MHS), the Ministry of Local Government and Community Development (MLGCD), and the Presidential Management Staff (PMS), for approval by the Minister of Human Settlements/National Coordinator not later than fifteen (15) working days after the issuance of this Executive Order.

3.3 Pending the full operationalization of the Coordinating Centers for Southern Philippines and the Regional Centers for Basic Needs and Services as herein prescribed, the PCRDSP-PMO 697 Secretariat and Regional Committees in Regions IX, X, XI, and XII are hereby tasked to provide administrative and monitoring supports to the designated Chief Regional Action Officers and Regional Action Officers.

4. Funds

4.1 For purposes of planning, organization, coordination, and administrative support, the total amount of Ten Million Pesos (P10M) is hereby released from the Special Activities Fund of the Office of the President for the current fiscal year (CY 1980), provided, that pending the regular allocation of funds for the same purposes, the same amount shall be released next year, CY 1981.

4.2 The Ministry of the Budget is hereby directed to immediately release the funds hereby appropriated.

4.3 This special fund and all funds appropriated thereafter for the purpose as herein stated shall be administered by the Ministry of Human Settlements through the Southern Philippines Development Authority (SPDA).

5. Participation of Other Ministries and Offices

5.1 The Office, through the National Coordinator, is hereby authorized to call on all other ministries, bureaus, offices, agencies, including government owned and/or controlled corporations and local government units for support and participation in the delivery of the basic needs and services as herein prescribed.

6. Repealing Clause

6.1 All other Memorandum Orders, Letters of Instructions, Executive Orders and rules and regulations inconsistent with this order are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly, provided, that the monitoring work of the Presidential Regional Officers for Development (PROD) as per provisions of Letter of Instructions 36 and Letter of Instructions 36-A are retained by said officers in regions in Southern Philippines where the aforementioned Letters of Instructions have actually remained in force.

This Order takes effect immediately.

DONE IN THE CITY OF MANILA this 2nd day of September in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Senior Presidential Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Executive Order Nos. : 606 – 630 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.