MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 900

REVISING THE RATES OF SPECIFIC TAX ON CERTAIN PETROLEUM PRODUCTS

WHEREAS, the change in the international pricing system for petroleum and the consequent dismantling of the Consumer Price Equalization Fund make imperative adjustments in the prices of petroleum products to more realistic levels;

WHEREAS, in the restructuring of prices of petroleum products, it is likewise necessary to adjust for certain such products the specific tax component thereof in order to impose a ceiling on the profit which a company will realize therefrom; and

WHEREAS, the adjustments in the rates of specific taxes are necessary to attain an equal level with increases in prices of petroleum products without in any manner increasing the tax burden of the consuming public;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution and by Section 290-B of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1977, as amended by Presidential Decree No. 1773, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The rates on certain petroleum products prescribed in Section 153 of the National Internal Revenue Code is hereby revised as follows:

“SEC. 153. Specific tax on manufactured oils and other fuels . – On refined and manufactured mineral oils and motor fuels, there shall be collected the following taxes which shall attach to the articles hereunder enumerated as soon as they are in existence as such:

“(a) Kerosene, per liter of volume capacity four and one-half centavos;

“(b) Lubricating oils, per liter of volume capacity, eighty centavos;

“(c) Naphtha, gasoline and all other similar products of distillation, per liter of volume capacity, one peso and thirty-four centavos: Provided , That on premium and aviation gasoline, the tax shall be one peso and thirty-eight centavos and one peso, respectively, per liter of volume capacity;

“(d) On denatured alcohol to be used for motive power, per liter of volume capacity, one centavo: Provided , That unless otherwise provided for by special laws, if the denatured alcohol is mixed with gasoline, the specific tax on which has already been paid, only the alcohol content shall be subject to the tax herein prescribed. For the purposes of this subsection, the removal of denatured alcohol of not less than one hundred eighty degrees proof (ninety per centum absolute alcohol) shall be deemed to have been removed for motive power, unless shown to the contrary;

“(e) Processed gas, per liter of volume capacity, three centavos;

“(f) Thinners and solvents, per liter of volume capacity, sixty-one centavos;

“(g) Liquefied petroleum gas, per kilogram, twenty-one centavos: Provided, That liquefied petroleum gas used for motive power shall be taxed at the equivalent rate as the specific tax on diesel fuel oil;

“(h) Asphalts, per kilogram, twelve centavos;

“(i) Greases, waxes and petrolatum, per kilogram, fifty centavos;

“(j) Aviation turbo-jet fuel, per liter of volume capacity, sixty-four centavos.”

SEC. 2. The rate prescribed in Section 156 of the National Internal Revenue Code is hereby revised as follows:

“SEC. 156. Specific tax on diesel fuel oil . – On fuel oil, commercially known as diesel fuel oil, and on all similar fuel oils, having more or less the same generating power, per liter of volume capacity, twelve and three-fourth centavos, which tax shall attach to this fuel oil as soon as it is in existence as such.”

SEC. 3. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 1st day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1983). [Executive Order Nos. : 858 – 927]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.