MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 119

CREATING THE LEYTE DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, the economic policies of the government are designed primarily to promote an accelerated and balanced growth;

WHEREAS, there is need to foster the accelerated and balanced development program, of the Province of Leyte, within the context of national plans and policies for social and economic development; and

WHEREAS, to achieve this end, there is necessity to create an advisory committee in the Office of the Governor, Province of Leyte, to insure consistency of action in matters of policy formulation pertinent to the development of the Province of Leyte;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the LEYTE DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE, hereinafter referred to as COMMITTEE, which shall conduct scientific and systematic surveys of the assets and potentialities of the area, plan its development, and pool the resources thereof for the implementation of programs to enhance the economic, social, industrial and commercial development and the general welfare of the province and its people.

The Committee shall be composed of the Governor, as Chairman, and the heads of government offices, agencies and entities, including representatives from various organizations in the province having to do with its economic and social development, as members.

The Committee shall have the following functions end responsibilities:

a. To formulate or integrated and realistic development plan for the province in accordance with the approved national development plan;

b. To set targets, establish priorities, formulate programs and develop projects to satisfy the urgent requirements of the province;

c. To formulate guidelines for the systematic and effective coordination of project implementation activities;

d. To coordinate and integrate the diverse efforts of the various public and private entities directly engaged in implementing plans find projects leading to the rapid socio-economic growth of the area;

e. To make such recommendations to the President on any matter concerning Leyte provincial planning or effecting the plans or activities thereof;

f. To enlist end accept such technical assistance or financial support as it may deem essential to the proper discharge of its tasks; and

g. To perform such other functions as may be directed by the President.

The Committee is hereby authorized to create or designate such office or committee within the province as may be necessary to assist it in the discharge of its functions.

All expenses necessary for the operation and projects of the Committee shall be for the account of member agencies or offices, unless otherwise provided by law.

All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby directed to cooperate with and assist the Committee in the prompt accomplishments of its responsibilities.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library