MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 798

CREATING THE JUSTICE SYSTEM CONSULTATIVE COMMISSION (JUSCCOM)

WHEREAS, the government is committed to institute meaningful reforms in the justice system;

WHEREAS, the enactment of Batas Pambansa Blg. 129 has paved the way for the reorganization of the judiciary and the improvement of the performance of public service in the justice system;

WHEREAS, there is need for a continuing search for innovative trends to systematize procedures and expedite judicial processes;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order as follows:

1. A commission to be known as the Justice System Consultative Commission (JUSCCOM) is hereby created with the following composition:

Minister of Justice Ricardo C. Puno Retired Chief Justice Cesar Bengzon Retired Chief Justice Roberto Concepcion Retired Associate Justice Jose B.L. Reyes

2. Membership in the Commission shall be honorary and the members thereof shall serve without compensation.

3. The Commission shall conduct studies of innovative trends towards the improvement of the rules of procedure and the expedition of judicial processes and shall recommend legislative measures which may to this end be appropriate and necessary.

4. The Commission shall take care of its internal operations, and may for this purpose form sub-committees and/or call upon resource persons to aid it in its work. The Minister of Justice shall coordinate the work and the internal operations of the Commission and extend to it all the necessary technical and secretarial assistance.

5. The Commission shall from time to time, report the results of its studies to the President. The President may also call upon the Commission at any time for consultation upon any matter pursuant to the purposes set forth in this executive order.

Done in the City of Manila this 14th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 781 – 857 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.