MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 901

PRESCRIBING RULES AND REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT THE SCIENTIFIC CAREER SYSTEM INITIALLY IN THE NATIONAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY AUTHORITY

WHEREAS, a Scientific Career System has been established within the civil service pursuant to Executive Order No. 784 dated March 17, 1982 in order to support and encourage the development of science and technology which is one of the major dimensions in the country’s national development efforts;

WHEREAS, the implementation of the new system would bring about profound changes in the operation of the total civil service and must therefore be put into effect on a gradual basis starting with the National Science and Technology Authority which is the primary agency in the field of scientific and technological development;

WHEREAS, there is need to prescribe rules and regulations to put the system in operation in the NSTA;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416 as amended, do hereby order and direct:

SECTION 1. Statement of Policy – It shall be the policy of the government to support and encourage the development of science and technology, to attract scientific experts into the public service, and to provide a system for the recognition and reward of technological and scientific specialists in the government who have, by their scientific productivity, efficiency, innovativeness and effectiveness on the job, shown their dedication to the public service.

SECTION 2. Definition and Character – The Scientific Career System (SCS) is a system of recruitment, career progression, recognition and reward of scientists in the public service as a means of developing a pool of highly qualified and productive scientific personnel.

The System shall be characterized by:

(a) Entrance to and career progression or advancement based on qualification, merit and scientific productivity;

(b) Career paths that shall allow scientists to develop within their respective areas of expertise without leaving their status as scientists; and

(c) Incentives and rewards to insure attraction and retention of highly qualified manpower in the science and technology sector.

SECTION 3. Coverage – The System shall apply to scientific personnel with masteral and/or doctoral degrees in the sciences who are directly involved in research and development.

Other highly qualified scientific personnel who are occupying sensitive positions which are critical to research and development at the time of the approval of these rules may be included in the system upon the recommendation of the Director General of the National Science and Technology Authority (NSTA).

The System shall embrace the NSTA and its component agencies provided that other scientific personnel in the national government shall likewise be covered by the System as soon as rules and requirements for the purpose have been worked out.

As used in these rules, the System shall cover natural sciences, engineering and technology, medical sciences and agricultural sciences as listed in Annex 1. The Scientific Career System herein established may hereafter, upon the recommendation of the NSTA Director General, include other fields and disciplines in its coverage for the purpose of meeting the requirements of the national scientific community.

SECTION 4. Rank in the System – Appointment in the System shall be based on rank – from Scientist I to Scientist V. Scientific personnel shall be admitted into the System to the extent that they meet the minimum qualifications as follows:

(a) Scientist I – Completion of a masteral degree in the appropriate fields of science and the (10) years of productive scholarship and professional research and development (R & D) work beyond the masteral degree or a doctoral degree and five (5) years of productive scholarship and professional R & D work beyond the doctoral degree.

(b) Corresponding qualification requirements for the other ranks (Scientists II-IV) shall be developed by the SCC.

SECTION 5. Salary Schedule – The salary schedule for the scientists appointed to the System shall be in accordance with the attached compensation plan (Annex II), and shall include fringe benefits and reasonable allowances comparable to those of the Career Executive Service, provided that the said plan may be revised with the concurrence of the Office of Budget and Management.

SECTION 6. Administration of the System –

(a) The Civil Service Commission (CSC) shall administer the System and shall have final authority to decide on all matters pertaining to the System.

(b) A Scientific Career Council (SCC) shall be established jointly by the CSC and NSTA to screen candidates for appointment to the System. The Council shall be composed of the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission as ex-officio Chairman, the Director General of the National Science and Technology Authority as ex-officio Co-Chairman and the following ex-officio members: the Chairman of the National Research Council of the Philippines, the President of the National Academy of Science and Technology, and the President of the University of the Philippines System.

The Scientific Career Council shall establish special technical committees in the following fields of specialization, namely, biological, physical and engineering sciences to assist the SCC in performing its tasks. Similar committees for other fields may also be created as needed.

Each of the above technical committees shall be composed of at least five (5) members who are recognized authorities in their respective fields and who shall each serve for a term of two (2) years. At least two (2) members shall be regular members of the National Academy of Science and Technology and at least three (3) regular members of the National Research Council of the Philippines.

(c) A Scientific Career Evaluation Committee (SCEC) shall be established in the NSTA to assist in the preliminary screening of candidates for appointment to the System.

SECTION 7. Appointment/Advancement in the System –

(a) Upon request of the head of the NSTA the SCEC shall assess qualifications of candidates for appointment and/or advancement in the System.

(b) The SCEC shall submit its assessment of the candidates to the NSTA head who shall submit to the Scientific Career Council the names of those nominated for further screening.

(c) The SCC shall proceed to evaluate the candidates and recommend approval/disapproval of their appointment/advancement in the System.

(d) The NSTA head shall appoint scientific personnel to the rank in the System subject to approval by the CSC, except to the highest rank which shall be made by the President of the Philippines.

(e) All those appointed to the System shall constitute a pool of scientists who may be assigned to special scientific projects within the NSTA or on an inter-agency basis. However, upon completion of the project, the scientist shall return to his post in the NSTA.

(f) In line with the policy of providing scientific personnel with broad experience in leadership and research management which directly affects their effectiveness in R & D work and their professional advancement, or whenever demanded by the exigencies of the service as determined by the Scientific Career Council, those appointed in the System may be temporarily designated to positions in the Career Executive Service in which case, they shall continue to receive the compensation and/or allowances pertaining to their scientific rank or the temporary position whichever are higher.

SECTION 8. Funding – The funds required to implement the System shall be drawn from the existing appropriation of the NSTA and its agencies and thereafter shall be provided in future appropriation measures.

SECTION 9. Criteria for Appointment in the System – The following shall be the criteria for appointment to scientific ranks:

(a) Education – shall refer to advanced academic degree of at least masteral level from a college or university of recognized standing either locally or abroad.

(b) Productivity – shall refer to significant outputs and contributions in relevant fields of applied and natural sciences. This shall include:

(1) Scientific articles in publications of international circulation, and other work of similar nature.

(2) Discoveries, inventions, and other significant original contributions.

(3) Practical applications of research findings, discoveries, inventions in commerce in public policy and in government.

(4) Books, monograms, compendiums and major bodies of published work.

(5) Training of young scientists.

(6) Professional Standing – shall refer to the level of acceptance and recognition in the scientific community in terms of professional, moral and ethical integrity.

In addition to the foregoing article, no person shall be considered for appointment to the System unless he has been granted eligibility under PD 997  or Republic Act No. 1080.

SECTION 10. Training and Development – The Civil Service Academy and the NSTA shall develop and administer a continuing program of training and development for all scientific personnel in the government service.

SECTION 11. Security of Tenure – No person covered by the System shall be divested of, or demoted in, rank except for cause as provided by law. The provisions of the Civil Service Law and Rules on administrative discipline shall apply in proceeding against members of the System.

SECTION 12. Effectivity – These rules shall take effect upon their approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

References : Annex I and Annex II

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1983). [Executive Order Nos. : 858 – 927]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.