MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 393

PRESCRIBING REGULATIONS IN THE OPERATION AND ACTIVITIES OF PRIVATE DETECTIVES, WATCHMEN AND SECURITY GUARDS.

WHEREAS, the operation and activities of private detectives, watchmen and security guards are directly related to or affect the peace and order condition of the country;

WHEREAS, to insure that the operations and activities of private detectives, watchmen and security guards will not jeopardize or impair peace and order, it is necessary that such activities be subject to government supervision and regulation;

WHEREAS, the activities of certain persons who should be classified as private detectives, watchmen and security guards, which should be regulated by the government, are not at present adequately provided for;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby order that the power of supervision and such other powers vested in the Philippine Constabulary under Republic Act No. 5487, otherwise known as the Private Security Agency Law, over private detectives, watchmen and security guards agencies shall extend or apply to any person who offers or renders personal services to watch or secure either residential or business establishments, or both, or any building, compound or area including but not limited to logging concessions, agricultural, mining or pasture lands for hire or compensation, or as an employee thereof, who shall be known as a watchman or security guards; and to any person, association, partnership or corporation who permits, trains, musters, furnishes, solicits individuals or business firms, private or government-owned or controlled corporations to engage his services or those of its watchman, who shall be known as a watchman or security guard agency.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1972). [Executive Order Nos. : 366-435]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.