MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 985

GRANTING ADDITIONAL COST-OF-LIVING ALLOWANCE (COLA) TO GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES

WHEREAS, with the recent economic stabilization measures adopted, increase in the cost of living is inevitable;

WHEREAS, to enable government employees to cope with recent price increases and in the light of recently approved minimum wage increases in the private sector, it is necessary that adjustments in the pay scale of government employees be effected ;

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the government to help augment government personnel income in times of economic difficulties;

WHEREAS, P.D. No. 1597 empowers the President to grant additional compensation to government employees;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, and Section 2 ( e) of P.D. No. 1416 do hereby order and direct:

1. Each and every official and employee of the National Government whether permanent, temporary, emergency, contractual or casual shall be granted an additional cost-of-living allowance (COLA) at the following rates:

1.1 P150.00 per month for those receiving a basic salary rate of P1 , 500.00 per month and below or P6.85 COLA per day but not to exceed P150 per month for those receiving a basic wage rate of P50.00 per day and below.

1.2 P100 per month for those receiving a basic salary rate of P1 , 501 per month or above or P4.55 COLA per day but not to exceed P100 per month for those receiving a basic wage date of more than P50.00 per day.

2. Local government units may authorize the additional cost-of-living allowance under this Executive Order to their officials and employees, subject to the limits of their financial capabilities and under such conditions as may be determined by the Joint Commission on Local Government Personnel Administration.

3. Government-Owned and/or Controlled Corporations may authorize the additional cost-of-living allowance under this Executive Order to their officials and employees, subject to the existing available resources in the corporations for the purpose, and such other conditions as may be determined by the Office of Budget and Management.

4. The amount needed to implement this Order with respect to national government agencies shall be charged to (a) salary lapses, and other personnel services savings of the ministry/bureau/office/agency concerned as a first priority funding source, and (b) to the lump-sum appropriation for salary increases, incorporated in the budgets of national government agencies/offices. Any deficiency shall be charged against the Salary Adjustment Fund authorized in the CY 1984 General Appropriations Act and additional income to be generate from the new revenue measures.

5. Payment of the additional cost-of-living allowance herein directed shall be effective on June 16, 1984.

6. The rules and regulations necessary to implement this Order shall be issued by the Minister of the Budget for the national government agencies and government-owned and controlled corporations; and by the Joint Commission on Local Government Personnel Administration for local government units.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.