MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 114

PROVIDING INSTRUCTIONS TO BE FOLLOWED IN THE CONDUCT OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS DURING THE TIME THE PRESIDENT IS OUTSIDE THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the President of the Philippines is leaving for Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand on an Official visit on January 9, 1968, to take up matters of vital interest to our country;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following instructions are hereby issued for the conduct of public affairs during his absence:

1. The President of the Philippines shall continue to exercise all the functions of his office as enjoined by the Constitution and the laws, in the same manner as when he is within the national territory.

2. The Vice-President shall exercise general supervision over the conduct of affairs in the exe­cutive departments, except as to administrative function. He shall preside over Cabinet meetings and shall represent the President in social functions requiring the presence of the latter. He shall also preside over official ceremonies, receive and return the official calls of foreign dignitaries in behalf and in representation of the President, and on such occasions the Vice-President shall be entitled to the honors and courtesies due the President of the Philippines. The Vice-President, if he so desires, can meet his visitors in the President’s Study Room.

3. The Executive Secretary shall exercise general supervision over the administrative functions in the executive departments. He shall, as heretofore, sign all papers that are ordinarily signed by him by or under the authority of the President and shall decide routine matters.

4. Each Secretary of Department shall attend to and decide matters which pertain to his department and which under the law he may decide. On those matters which require approval of the President, in case urgent action is needed, such approval shall be obtained by radio through the Executive Secretary. On other departmental business which, although within the jurisdiction of a Secretary of Department, is of such importance as to affect the general policies of the Government and, therefore, should be the subject of consultation with the President, the Secretary concerned may communicate for such purpose with the President through the Executive Secretary by radio or other convenient means of communication: Provided , That where there is no Secretary of Department present, the Undersecretary of Department designated by him may act in his behalf; Provided , further , That action on important masters involving new policies, guidelines on economic development, investments, loans, disposal of valuable government properties, etc., shall be held in abeyance until the President’s return, unless the same are of urgent nature in which case prior clearance with the President should be obtained.

5. All official communications to the President, whether by letter or by radio, shall be transmitted through or by the Executive Secretary.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 140 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library