MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1058

INCREASING THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE CULTURAL CENTER OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 15 dated October 5, 1972, created the Cultural Center of the Philippines (CCP) to implement more effectively and vigorously the constitutional mandate that arts and letters shall be under the patronage of the State;

WHEREAS, through the years, the CCP has faithfully and successfully carried out its purposes and objectives, and has effectively awakened the consciousness of our people to our cultural heritage;

WHEREAS, there is now a need to increase the membership of the Board of Trustees of CCP to provide for multi-sectoral representation which will further promote, assist and encourage the artistic inclinations of our people;

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and pursuant to the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Section of Presidential Decree No. 15, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 6. Board of Trustees . The governing powers and authority of the corporation shall be vested in, and exercised by, a Board of eleven (11) Trustees who shall serve without compensation.

(a) The Trustees appointed by the President of the Philippines pursuant to Executive Order No. 30 dated June 25, 1966, and currently holding office shall be the first Trustees to serve on the Board of the new Center and shall be known as Founding Trustees. They shall elect the remaining Trustees for a complete Board of eleven (11) members. Elected Trustees shall hold office for a period of four (4) years.

(b) Vacancies in the Board of Trustees due to expiration of term, resignation, incapacity, death or any other cause as may be provided in the By-Laws , shall be filled by election by a vote of a majority of the Trustees to be held at the next regular meeting following the occurrence of such vacancy. Said elected Trustees shall then hold office for a complete term of four (4) years, unless sooner terminated by reason of resignation, incapacity, death or any other cause. Should only one Trustee survive, the vacancies shall be filled by the surviving Trustee acting in consultation with the ranking officers of the Center. Such ranking officers shall be designated in the Center’s By-Laws . Should the Board, for any reason be left entirely vacant, the vacancies shall be filled by the President of the Philippines acting in consultation with the aforementioned ranking officers of the Center.

(c) No person may serve as Trustee who is not a resident of the Philippines, of good moral standing in the community and at least 25 years of age, Provided , That there shall always be a majority of the Trustees who are citizen of the Philippines.

(d) The majority of the Trustees holding office shall constitute a quorum to do business.”

2. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 10th day of October, 1985 in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

( Sgd .) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Executive Order Nos. : 1030-1093]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.