MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 74

CREATING A COMMITTEE ON FIRE CONTROL AND PROMULGATE GENERAL PROCEDURE ON ITS FUNCTIONS AND OPERATION.

WHEREAS, the occurence of destructive and dangerous fires has wrought havoc on homes and industry and caused serious economic loss to the nation; and

WHEREAS, to prevent future disasters and to provide adequate protection to life and property, it is necessary to adopt more effective methods of preventing and fighting fires and to coordinate on a nationwide scope the fire fighting equipments and resources of the Government and the private sector;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Committee on Fire Control composed of the following:

It shall have a headquarters at the National Civil Defense Administration which shall:

(a) cause the investigation of the origin and causes of all fires and to gather statistical data on fires;

(b) study, recommend and adopt ways and means of fire prevention and control;

(c) promote and prescribe suitable fire-fighting plans and facilities;

(d) conduct information drives on the effects of fire on the economy and the necessity and means of preventing and controlling fires;

(e) coordinate with authorities concerned in the adoption and enforcement of ordinances, codes, regulations and measures for the effective handling, storing and transport of petroleum, gas, acetyline, dynamite, gunpowder, explosives, blasting supplies, or ingredients thereof, and other highly combustible materials.

(f) organize, on provincial, city and municipal levels, Committees on Fire Control which shall: (1) promote and enforce regulations on fire prevention and control; (2) recommend the adoption of appropriate fire prevention and control ordinances; (3) recommend to proper authorities the removal or remodelling of buildings or structures considered fire hazards; (4) cause the immediate investigation of causes of fires and to rendered prompt report to the Committee on Fire Control, by radio, telegraph, or similar means and submit a written report thereon;

(g) to encourage observance of Fire Prevention Week;

(h) forge mutual aid agreements among provinces, cities, and municipalities dividing the nation into regions for an effective fire control program;

(i) create consultative or advisory groups from the Government and private sectors;

(j) provide the necessary logistical and administrative support from all Committee members ; and

(k) dovetail the activities and programs for civil defense purposes,

The Committee shall submit from time to time to the President of the Philippines its reports and recommendations.

The Committee is authorized to issue such rules and regulations and operating procedures as it may deem necessary to provide for an effective nationwide fire control program. It is authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, instrumentality and subdivision of the Government for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its functions.

Executive Order No. 165 dated February 27, 1956, is hereby revoked.

Done in the City of Manila, thin 13th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.