MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 331

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE VIRGINIA TOBACCO BOARD

WHEREAS, the preservation, promotion and enhancement of the Philippine Virginia tobacco industry in all its varied aspects and phases, as a declared national policy require a vigorous, concerted and integrated planning and programming and a coordinated implementation of projects on the part of government agencies and the private sector that have certain functions and obligations relating to the Philippine Virginia tobacco industry;

WHEREAS, the successful accomplishment of this vital concern urgently requires additional funds other than those derived from public revenues for carrying out the purposes herein stated;

WHEREAS, responsible civic-spirited and patriotic elements of the country have manifested their readiness to cooperate in this undertaking and have made financial commitments; and

WHEREAS, it is imperative that an effective organization be provided to receive and administer such donations and contributions and to carry out the purposes herein-stated for the enduring benefit of the millions of tobacco farmers;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Philippine Virginia Tobacco Board, hereinafter referred to as the “Board”, to be composed of:

The purposes and objectives of the Board are:

1. To serve as an institutional link between the government and private sectors involved in the Philippine Virginia tobacco industry;

2. To serve as a planning and programming unit for the development and promotion of the Philippine Virginia tobacco industry, particularly in the areas of research, extension work and marketing;

3. To study and recommend systems or standards of classification and grading of flue-cured tobacco and proper handling and packaging in order to make the Philippine Virginia Tobacco acceptable in the domestic and foreign markets;

4. To formulate and recommend consistent tobacco research policies and comprehensive scientific and technological programs for implementation by the government and private sectors in regions where its application is feasible or profitable to Virginia tobacco farmers;

5. To promote coordination and cooperation in tobacco research and extension work in order to minimize duplication of efforts;

6. To encourage and facilitate the active participation of domestic and foreign sectors in furnishing financial, technological and other forms assistance and for the exchange of information among local and foreign institutions, researchers and workers;

7. To review and analyze flue-cured tobacco research projects, schedules of activities, programs and project proposals, and to recommend such measures as may be necessary to accomplish the objectives and policies involved in these activities; and

8. To advise the President of the Philippines on Philippine Virginia tobacco matters.

To carry out the purposes and objectives mentioned hereinabove, the Board shall have the power and is authorized:

1. To accept and receive from public and private sectors specific proposals, scientific and/technological research and development programs or plans and financial, technical and other support for the purpose of developing and promoting the Philippine Virginia tobacco industry;

2. To recommend the award of grants to tobacco researchers and inventors for their contributions towards the attainment of maximum efficiency in tobacco production, curing and other aspect of research;

3. To recommend the grant of scholarships in tobacco science and technology to deserving government employees or citizens, priority being given to sons and daughters of progressive tobacco growers;

4. To recommend travel grants for scientific and technological purposes;

5. To recommend the sending of delegates or observers to tobacco science or trade congresses, conferences or conventions;

6. To promote and sponsor scientific and technological conferences and conventions in the Philippines on matters dealing with the Philippine Virginia tobacco industry;

7. To recommend tobacco trade attaches with proper scientific background;

8. To grant incentive awards to tobacco growers for excellence in the production of quality flue-cured tobacco;

9. To enter, make and execute contracts of any kind as may be necessary or incidental to the attainment of its purposes with any person or corporation;

10. To make rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines, to govern the Board and the disposition and disbursements of its funds; and

11. To do all such things, transact all such business and perform such functions directly or indirectly necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of the purposes and objectives of the Board.

The Board, in the pursuit of its objectives, shall coordinate with government as well as private offices and agencies, which are involved one way or another in the Philippine Virginia tobacco industry.

The books of accounts of the Board shall be subject to audit by the Auditor General or his representative in accordance with law.

The Board may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned and controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in the pursuit of its purposes and objectives.

The Board shall render annually, or as often as it may deem necessary, to the President of the Philippines reports of its activities and recommendations.

If for any reason the Board is terminated, the funds or any residual assets of the Board remaining at the time of such termination shall be reverted to the State for disposition in accordance with law.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.