MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 511

STRENGTHENING THE SUPERVISORY AUTHORITY OF THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND CULTURE OVER PUBLIC AND PRIVATE COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES

WHEREAS, it is desirable that the degree of supervision exercised by the Ministry of Education and Culture over public and private colleges and universities be strengthened so that all activities, programs and projects in the field of education can be better coordinated and directed towards the attainment of national objectives;

WHEREAS, it is also desirable that the responsibility for administering an improved system of supervision of public and private colleges and universities be identified within the organizational structure of the Ministry of Education and Culture;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me under the Constitution, and pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1416 do hereby order:

SECTION 1 . Any provision of law, decree, instruction or order to the contrary notwithstanding, the Bureau of Higher Education shall process, review and recommend to the Minister of Education and Culture for integration the plans, programs and budgets of public colleges and universities. No action shall be taken by concerned school authorities of such colleges and universities on such plans, programs and budgets unless the same shall have been first acted upon in the Ministry of Education and Culture.

SEC. 2 . The Bureau of Higher Education shall prepare and recommend to the Minister of Education and Culture for adoption and promulgation appropriate standards and guidelines which shall apply to personnel recruitment, movement and discipline in both public and private colleges and universities. It shall be the responsibility of the Bureau of Higher Education to monitor the implementation of, and compliance with such standards and guidelines and the Director of the Bureau of Higher Education shall make recommendations thereon to the Minister of Education and Culture.

SEC. 3 . The Minister of Education and Culture may, upon order of the President at any time, conduct an examination of the operations, administration, condition and affairs in general of any public or private college or university. The school authorities concerned shall make available for such examination all documents, papers and records of the college or university involved. The Minister of Education and Culture may conduct the examination through his duly designated representatives, and they shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum for the purpose of such examination.

SEC. 4 . The Minister of Education and Culture may call on any department, bureau, office, agency, instrumentality or political subdivision of the government including private educational institutions for cooperation and assistance in the performance of its duties and functions. Refusal of any such office or official to cooperate with and assist the Ministry shall subject the official concerned to administrative disciplinary action.

SEC. 5 . All laws, decrees, instructions or orders or parts or provisions thereof inconsistent with this Order shall be, as they are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 6 . This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1978). [Executive Order Nos. : 436 – 530]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.