MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 274

REQUIRING THE SUBMISSION OF AN ANNUAL PROGRAM OF PROCUREMENT BY THE DEPARTMENTS, BUREAUS, OFFICES AND AGENCIES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, the government spends a tremendous amount of money annually for the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment to meet all government needs;

WHEREAS, emergency purchases and piecemeal requisitions are found to be wasteful and extravagant and therefore must be done sparingly;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that procurement of supplies, materials and equipment be handled systematically and judiciously in order to obtain the most advantageous terms from the suppliers; and

WHEREAS, to achieve an economical, efficient and effective procurement system, the using agencies and the Bureau of Supply Coordination must devise a system of projecting and planning their supply needs to be used as a basis for a workable procurement program;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E.MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Heads of departments, bureaus, offices and agencies of the National Government shall submit an Annual Procurement Program showing a projection of their procurement needs for a period of one (1) year starting July 1 and ending June 30 of every fiscal year. This Annual Procurement Program shall include, among other things, a complete description or specification of the items arranged according to commodity groupings, the quantity of each kind distributed by quarter and the estimated cost.

Supplementary Procurement Programs may be submitted in case of increase hi supply requirements to be funded out of additional funds allocated. An Amendatory Procurement Program may also be submitted if there are changes affecting the Annual Procurement Program and/or the Supplementary Procurement Program.

All Procurement Programs shall be approved by the department head concerned.

The Annual Procurement Program shall be filed with the Bureau of Supply Coordination not later than April 1 immediately preceding the ensuing fiscal year covered by the Program.

The Amendatory or Supplementary Procurement Programs shall be prepared and submitted any time during the fiscal year as the need arises.

The Bureau of Supply Coordination, upon receipt of these plans, shall draw up its own program of procurement. It shall consolidate and categorize the items to find out the overall needs of the Government and determine the system of procurement that will be most effective, economical and expeditious. It may group these items into the following:

(1) those that will be placed under the Direct Order and Payment System;

(2) those that may be procured through the normal bidding procedure by the Bureau of Supply Coordination upon submission of the proper requisition;

(3) those whose procurement may be recommended for delegation to, or requested directly by, the agencies concerned if it is found out that it will be more advantageous for the agencies to procure;

(4) those that may be recommended for procurement by negotiation under existing regulations including those obtainable from government agencies and foreign governments;

(5) those that may be carried in the stores of the Bureau of Supply Coordination; and

(6) those that may be filled from surplus or excess items.

The Bureau of Supply Coordination’s Consolidated Program of Procurement shall be forwarded to the Secretary of General Services for approval. After its approval, the Secretary of General Services shall issue the necessary implementing instructions. The Bureau of Supply Coordination shall advise the departments, bureaus, offices and agencies concerned of the action taken on their plans for their information and guidance.

The Secretary of General Services shall issue the necessary supplementary rules and regulations to implement the Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of November in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Executive Order Nos. : 281 – 365 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.