MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 681

WHEREAS, the implementation of the government’s environmental program requires the involvement and participation of agencies and sectors, particularly with respect to policies formulated and implemented;

WHEREAS, the national government recognizes environmental management thrusts, especially international and regional coordinative programs:

WHEREAS, the governments of the East Asian Region recognize the indispensability of maintaining a high quality for the environment, to include the living resources of the region in the over-all context of development;

WHEREAS, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations manifest recognition of the leadership of the Philippines in its ability to organize and host international conferences/meetings;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct:

1. That the Executive Director of the National Environmental Protection Council, Ministry of Human Settlements and the duly authorized representative of the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs shall constitute a preparatory committee and coordinate in the successful staging of the two meetings.

2. The above-mentioned officials to organize immediately working and technical committees that will attend to the various requirements of the meetings, in the process enlisting the support of officials and leaders from other government offices and the private sector that can contribute to the success of the undertaking;

3. That a secretariat primarily staffed by the National Environmental Protection Council, Ministry of Human Settlements and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs be immediately activated to serve as support staff to the preparatory committee;

4. The following government agencies to assist in their respective areas to competence, to wit:

a) The Minister of the Budget, in facilitating the release of up to Two Hundred Fifty Thousand (P250,000.00) provided under Section 1 (Chapter XXXIV International Commitments Funds, KBI 2.1) of the 1981 National Budget based on the financial work program submitted by the preparatory committee;

b) The Minister of National Defense in ensuring the safety and well-being of delegates and visitors, which will include ASEAN Environment Ministers and UN officials;

c) The Ministry of Tourism to assist in arranging welcome and departure honors for the delegates;

d) The Ministry of Public Information to assist the preparatory committee in facilitating the media coverage of the Ministerial Meet.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of April in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.