MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 63

CREATING THE SUGAR STABILIZATION COMMITTEE UNDER THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT.

Pursuant to the authority conferred upon me by law, and realizing the need for the stabilization of the price of domestic sugar, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a SUGAR STABILIZATION COMMITTEE under the Office of the President.

1. The Committee shall be composed of the following members:

(a) Members of the Sugar Quota Board, namely:

1. Sugar Quota Administrator 2. Representative of the National Federation of Sugarcane Planters. 3. Representative of the Philippine Sugar Association.

(b) Mr. Ismael Reinosc, member of the .Board of Directors, Philippine National Bank.

(c) Mr. Isabelo M. Lavaro, representing the management of both the Philippine National Bank and the Philippine Exchange Co., Inc.

(d) Mr. Teodoro Valencia, Manila Times Columnist, representing the consumers.

The members of the Committee shall elect from among themselves their CHAIRMAN.

2. The Committee shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

(a) To stabilize the price of domestic sugar at level which will be within the reach of the consuming public and at the same time afford a reasonable profit to the producers.

(b) To make available such additional quantity of sugar, if and when necessary, so as to stabilize the price of domestic sugar at the desired level.

(c) To issue such rules and regulations relative to the procurement of domestic sugar from sugar producers by the Philippine Exchange Company, Inc., and its distribution to and among sugar dealers.

3. The Committee may provide per diems and/or allowances for its members in such amount as it may deem just and reasonable, subject to prior approval by the President of the Philippines.

4. The Committee is hereby empowered to create positions as may be necessary in carrying out its functions, and to appoint persons thereto and fix their compensation, subject to approval by the Civil Service Commission in proper cases as required by law to call upon any department, bureau or office in the executive branch of the government or upon any government owned or controlled corporation and to utilize or make use of the services of their personnel, and to provide for reasonable per diems or allowances for such personnel, subject to approval by the President of the Philippines; and to acquire or purchase supplies, materials and other facilities, and to own and operate motor vehicles.

5. Such amount as may be necessary for operational and other necessary expenses of the Committee shall be provided by the Philippine Sugar Institute.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-140]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.