MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE-ORDER NO. 908

CONSTITUTING THE PRESIDENTIAL STAFF FOR POLICY RESEARCH AND DOCUMENTATION.

WHEREAS, the Office of the President requires the service of a. staff specializing in policy research, data banking, and editorial services;

WHEREAS, these services to the Office of the President are at present dispersed and require integration into a single unit;

WHEREAS, there is need to develop these services as an effective aid to the functions of the Office of the President;

WHEREAS, the President is empowered by P.D. 1416 to conduct the continuing reorganization of the Government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby Order:

Section 1. – Creation of the Presidential Staff for Policy Research and Documentation. There is hereby created a Presidential Staff for Policy Research and Documentation, hereinafter referred to as “the Staff”, which shall be under the supervision and control of the Office of the President of the Philippines.

Section 2. – Goals and Objectives. The Staff will have the following goals and objectives:

a. To integrate and strengthen services of the Office of the President relating to policy research, analysis and documentation of developments, and editorial services covering specifically Presidential statements and addresses.

b. To establish a coherent system for the effective delivery, coordination and development of these services within the Office of the President.

c. To undertake sustained study and documentation of existing policies of the Philippine Government, as well as analyze comparative policy developments in other countries.

d. To upgrade editorial services relating to the editing for publication of Presidential statements and addresses.

e. To undertake other editorial and research projects as the President may require.

Section 3. – Organization of the Staff. The staff shall be part of the Office of the President, and it shall be headed by a Presidential Staff Director. In line with its functions, it shall have the following sections: a research and library section, an editorial section, and a publication section.

Section 4. – Staff Appointments. The function of the Staff is hereby declared as policy determining and highly confidential and appointments thereto shall be exempt from the rules and regulations of the Office of Compensation and Position Classification.

Section 5. – Appropriations . To carry out the objectives of this Executive Order, there is hereby appropriated for CY 1983 from the Special Activities Fund of the President the amount of One Million Five Hundred Thousand Pesos (P1,500,000.00) for the organization and operations of the Staff. Thereafter, further appropriations for the Staff shall be included in the General Appropriations Act.

Section 6. – Effectivity. This order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1983). [Executive Order Nos. : 858-927]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.