MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 929

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO ORGANIZE THE PALARONG PILIPINO.

WHEREAS, a Palarong Pilipino should be held as a substitute of the Palarong Pambansa to discover new talents in various discipline of sports, effect a well planned and organized national games patterned after the Southeast Asian Games and the Asian Games, encourage promotion of sports and recreation, create sports interest and enthusiasm among the people on a countrywide basis and to stage a sports festival which will be considered as the actual national games of the Philippines which will serve as the principal aim of every young Filipino who joins competitive sports; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary that a committee be created to organize, implement, coordinate all activities related to the holding of the Palarong Pilipino;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. The Committee for Palarong Pilipino . – There is hereby created a Committee to be known as the Committee for Palarong Pilipino which shall be attached to the Office of the President for general direction and coordination.

SEC. 2. Composition . – The Committee shall be headed by the Executive Director of the Project: Gintong Alay with representatives from the following:

1. Philippine Olympic Committee 2. Ministry of Human Settlements/University of Life 3. Ministry of Local Government 4. Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports 5. Armed Forces of the Philippines 6. Private Sector

SEC. 3. Functions . – The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. Set up the general guidelines to realize the objectives of the Palarong Pilipino.

2. Come up with a development plan in support of the various national sports association.

SEC. 4. Powers of the Committee . –

1. Call upon any government agency for assistance in the realization of the Palarong Pilipino;

2. Disburse funds subject to the usual government auditing and accounting requirements;

3. The Chairman of the Committee shall sign requests for all disbursement of funds under the disposition of the Committee; and

4. Request for appropriations and/or allotment of funds for the operational expenses of the Committee.

SEC. 5. Reports . – The Committee shall submit to the President of the Philippines a quarterly report on the accomplishments, problems and their solution, and expenditures.

SEC. 6. All orders, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby modified or repealed accordingly.

SEC. 7. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty – four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Executive Order Nos. : 928-1029]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.