MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 963

AUTHORIZING THE REORGANIZATION OF THE METROPOLITAN WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM

WHEREAS, there is a need to enhance the efficiency and productivity of the Metropolitan Waterworks & Sewerage System as a service instrumentality of the Government;

WHEREAS, the enjoyment by the public of adequate water and sewerage services greatly depends on an effective and efficient organization;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1772, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The General Manager of the Metropolitan Waterworks & Sewerage System (MWSS) shall redesign the organizational structure of the MWSS to improve efficiency and productivity, and to upgrade public service in accordance with the following guidelines:

a. Facilitation of planning, organization, direction, coordination, and control of the long, medium and short-range policies of the MWSS;

b. Utilization of contemporary management concepts and use of the latest technologies available to large organizations like the MWSS; and

c. Streamlining of the systems and procedures and/or decentralization of functions with the end in view of rendering faster service without surrendering appropriate controls.

SEC. 2. For purposes of this reorganization, the Board of Trustees, upon recommendation of the General Manager of the MWSS, is hereby authorized and directed to:

a. Create/abolish positions;

b. Classify/re-classify positions;

c. Determine appropriate compensation rates and packages for MWSS officers and employees;

d. Promulgate the necessary implementing guidelines to carry out the MWSS reorganization.

SEC. 3. Any official or employee of the MWSS whose position is abolished or who is otherwise appointed as a result of the reorganization herein authorized, or who refuses any appointment in the reorganized MWSS shall be paid all the benefits to which he may be entitled under existing laws: Provided , That, if he does not qualify under existing laws, he may be paid a gratuity equivalent to one month salary for every year of service, payable in lump sum, out of the salary lapses and savings lapses and savings of the MWSS.

SEC. 4. All personnel actions in the MWSS needed to implement this and future reorganization shall not be subject to the rules and regulations of the Office of Compensation and Position Classification: Provided , however, That approval of appointments by the Civil Service Commission as required by law shall be necessary.

SEC. 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 20th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Executive Order Nos. : 928 – 1029 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.