MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 655

ENJOINING THE WIDESPREAD APPLICATION OF GASIFIER EQUIPMENT FOR IRRIGATION AND OTHER FARM-RELATED PURPOSES, AND DESIGNATING THE FARM SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION AS THE LEAD AGENCY IN ITS IMPLEMENTATION

WHEREAS, there is an imperative need to increase food production in order to cope with the demand of an expanding population;

WHEREAS, the Farm Systems Development Corporation (FSDC), through its BISA Program, is mandated to assist in the food production effort by setting up small-scale irrigation systems owned and operated by Irrigator’s Service Associations;

WHEREAS, the FSDC, in line with the implementation of the BISA program, has demonstrated the feasible application of gasifier equipment for irrigation systems and other farm-related purposes, as a means of reducing dependence of rural enterprises on costly petroleum-based products; and

WHEREAS, the use of gasifier equipment to complement the use of traditional fuels in applications such as irrigation, electricity generation and transportation shall be henceforth promoted as an alternative energy source;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Farm Systems Development Corporation shall have primary responsibility for undertaking activities leading to widespread utilization for irrigation and other farm-related applications, of gasifier equipment using wood charcoal and other agricultural wastes as fuels.

SEC. 2. Such activities shall include, but need not be limited to:

a. The production and manufacture of gasifier equipment, and technical assistance to end-users in the installation and maintenance of such equipment;

b. The identification of the most suitable markets and prospective users of such technology;

c. The encouragement and availment of the appropriate participation of the private and/or public sectors in the distribution and utilization of such technology, considering further the different requirements of small-scale and large-scale users;

d. The development of provincial, regional or national programs and strategies for implementing the application and use of such technology;

e. The implementation of such projects and programs as are needed for the utilization of such technology;

f. The determination of such specific and general incentives as may be necessary to effect increasing acceptance of the general use of such technology; and

g. The establishment of such measures of performance as may result in the meaningful monitoring of the progress of their activities.

SEC. 3. In the pursuance of its activities as herein directed, the Farms Systems Development Corporation shall utilize its resources as may be necessary and expedient in order to insure the success of this project. For this purpose, it may create a subsidiary and/or other special groups as may be necessary to enable it to more efficiently discharge its responsibilities.

SEC. 4. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1981). [Executive Order Nos. : 631 – 705 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.