MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 232

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT BUDGET COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, there is need to ensure harmony and consistency as to the ends and objectives of the Annual Budget and Long-Range Development Plans;

WHEREAS, to achieve this end, it is necessary that development planning agencies and other principal fiscal agencies of the Government should be involved more fully in basic budgetary decision-making;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Presidential Development Budget Committee which shall be composed of the following:

The Committee shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

(a) To establish the level of the annual government expenditure program;

(b) To establish the ceiling of government spending for economic and social development, national defense, general government and debt service;

(c) To determine the proper allocation of expenditures for each development activity between current operating expenditure and capital outlays;

(d) To allocate the amount set for capital outlays under each development activity for the various capital or infrastructure projects;

(e) To assess the reliability of revenue estimates;

(f) To recommend appropriate tax or other revenue measures and the extent and type of borrowings;

(g) To conduct periodic review and general examination of costs, accomplishments and performance standards applied in undertaking developmental projects; and

(h) To perform such other functions as may be necessary to affectuate the purpose of this Order.

The Committee shall be assisted by a Technical Staff composed of the employees from the different agencies represented in this Committee, with the Fiscal Policy Staff of the Budget Commission serving as the nucleus of the Technical Staff.

The Committee may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its functions. It shall likewise call on an advisory group consisting of representatives from agencies which have related functions to the tasks on hand. These are the Bureau of Internal Revenue, the Bureau of Customs, University of the Philippines, Joint Legislative-Executive Tax Commission, and the Congressional Committee on Appropriations and Ways and Means.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Executive Order Nos. : 141-280]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.