MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 847

CREATING A DRUGS INTELLIGENCE COORDINATING COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, the current intensified government drive against drug abuse has necessitated the participation of many government agencies whose perspectives and approaches to the drug problem differ from one another;

WHEREAS, the success of the government’s drug campaign demands the integrated and cooperative efforts of these government agencies in order to bring about a rational and uniform national strategy against drug abuse;

WHEREAS, such unified and concerted efforts can best be achieved by promoting and facilitating the exchange of intelligence between such government agencies and coordinating and focusing their efforts towards the attainment of their common objectives; and

WHEREAS, the National Intelligence Board under the Office of the President is the proper forum where such intelligence can be collected, evaluated and disseminated and it is best equipped to handle the coordination aspect of the government’s drug campaign;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created a committee, under the National Intelligence Board of the Office of the President, to be known as the Drugs Intelligence Coordinating Committee, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, to be composed of the following:

The Chairman of the Dangerous Drugs Board shall be the Special Adviser of the Committee and he may be called upon by the Chairman of the Committee to provide any report, information and/or data which the Committee may require.

The Chairman of the Committee may designate persons from other government and non-government entities to be members/advisers of the Committee.

SEC. 2. The Committee shall promote and facilitate the exchange between member agencies of intelligence relating to dangerous drugs, coordinate their intelligence activities and efforts, and maximize the use of their manpower and other resources.

SEC. 3. No intelligence project, activity or operations shall be undertaken by any member agency unless a clearance therefor shall have been previously secured from the Chairman of the Committee.

SEC. 4. It shall be the duty of all member agencies to furnish the Secretary General of the Committee with all information which may be of interest or value to the Committee as determined by its Chairman.

SEC. 5. The Chairman of the Committee may authorize representatives to establish liaison and work with foreign agencies concerning drugs intelligence in consultation with the Director of the National Bureau of Investigation.

SEC. 6. Administrative and logistics requirement shall be borne by respective member agencies.

SEC. 7. The Chairman of the Committee shall issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement this Order.

SEC. 8. All orders, circulars and instructions insofar as they are in conflict with this Order are hereby rescinded.

SEC. 9. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Executive Order Nos. : 781-857]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.