MALACAÑANG

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 113

DIRECTING THE UPDATING OF THE MEDIUM-TERM PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN, 1993-1998 FOR THE PERIOD 1996-1998

WHEREAS , the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan, 1993-1998, as approved by the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) Board on December 15, 1992, shall be the basis for all development activities to be undertaken by the government during the said planning period;

WHEREAS , the development goals of improved quality of life through the twin strategies of international competitiveness and human development remain to be the overriding objectives of the government in the medium-term;

WHEREAS , recent developments such as the World Trade Organization (WTO), World Summit for Social Development, the Social Reform Agenda, and the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA), among others will affect the prioritization and implementation of programs and projects which were originally identified in the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan;

WHEREAS , there is a need to formulate a strategic plan which will contain a realistic program of action for the remaining three years of the Plan period considering these recent developments and which will ensure that the Plan targets are achieved in 1998.

NOW, THEREFORE , it is hereby ordered that:

SECTION 1. The National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) shall coordinate the preparation of the Updated MTPDP, 1996-1998. The NEDA Board Committees and the Cluster system shall be tapped as the plan updating committees.

SEC. 2. All government departments, offices and instrumentalities, including local government units (LGUs) shall formulate their respective updated plans for the period 1996-1998.

SEC. 3. The Plan shall contain at least the following basic elements:

1 Revised targets for the next three years;

2. Statement of goals and policies;

3. Priority programs and projects; and

4. Legislative agenda

SEC. 4. The updated MTPDP, 1996-1998 shall be submitted to the NEDA Board by December 1995.

SEC. 5. All departments, agencies and government-owned and controlled corporations shall draw inputs from their regional offices considering updated regional development strategies, physical framework and local needs. The regional development component of various department, agency and corporate updated plans shall be consistent with the updated regional development plans.

SEC. 6. All local government units shall likewise consider their respective regional development framework and local needs in the preparation of their own updated plans.

SEC. 7. The private sector shall be consulted to obtain their opinions and positions on matters related thereto.

SEC. 8. The form and content of and the institutional process to be followed in the formulation of the Updated MTPDP, 1996-1998 are contained in the attached guidelines which shall be made an integral part of this circular.

SEC. 9. All agencies and instrumentalities of the government are therefore enjoined to follow these guidelines.

SEC. 10. Funds that are necessary for the attainment of the objectives of this Circular shall be provided by the Department of Budget and Management subject to the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

SEC. 11. This circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 31st day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety -Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia