Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 163

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE NATIONAL CONVENTION OF THE CAREER EXECUTIVE SERVICE OFFICIAL DURING THE CELEBRATION OF THE 24th ANNIVERSARY OF THE CAREER EXECUTIVE SERVICE.

The Career Executive Service Board (CESB) and the National Council of Career Executive Service Organizations, Inc. (NCCESO) are closely coordinating in evolving a unified approach in response to the trends and development in the global environment which demands new and relevant technology, structures and priorities. The rapid pace in which these are evolving, exacts necessary changes in the nature of public governance and management, and concomitantly, the quality and roles of the executives in the bureaucracy.

The President has anticipated that a vastly different bureaucracy will be put in place in the Philippines to meet the challenges of the 21st century and to keep in step with the vigorous nations of Asia-Pacific. He is rallying and leading all stakeholders in national development to “pole-vault into the 21st century.” The CESB and NCCESO have embarked on regional consultations towards identifying the executive and governance requirements that would meet these challenges.

The 24th CES anniversary celebration will be a momentous event for the CES officials and all CES stakeholders to review and redefine their significant roles in re-envisioning the country into the third millennium. This will also be an opportune time for the CES officials to demonstrate that they are a strong and united force after 24 years of service since their recognition as a critical sector in the bureaucracy. For this purpose, the CES officials are authorized to participate in the CES National Convention to be held middle of November 1997 in Metro Manila on official business with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and allowable expenses chargeable against their respective offices, subject to availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations. Officials concerned shall adopt such measures as may be necessary to ensure that there is no disruption of normal office activities/services in their respective offices by reason hereof.

Within 30 days thereafter, participants shall submit a report on the National Convention outputs, action plans and recommendations to the office of their respective Department Secretaries and Heads of Agencies, copy furnished the Career Executive Service Board, Civil Service Commission and this Office.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Manila, August 15, 1997

Source : CDAsia