Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 17

In line with the current initiatives to streamline the Office of the President (OP) through abolition, merger, or transfer of agencies to appropriate departments so that necessary policies and programs can be drawn up including OP’s Action Plans for 1993, the OP will hold a three-day Corporate Planning Workshop on November 6-8, 1992 at the Development Academy of the Philippines (DAP) Conference Center, Tagaytay City.

Senior Deputy Executive Secretary Dionisio de la Serna shall be the overall coordinator of the Corporate Planning Workshop pursuant to the provisions of Memorandum Order No. 41 which delegates to the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary the functions of exercising administrative supervision over various units in OP and overseeing the operational activities of OP-attached agencies.

WORKSHOP FORMAT

The workshop shall be divided into six (6) clusters. The members of each Cluster shall present their agency report following the format shown in Annex A during the cluster presentation.

A workshop shall follow after each cluster presentation whereby the rest of the clusters shall critique the action plans and streamlining proposals of the concerned cluster.

WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS

The following are hereby directed to personally attend the conference/workshop which will start promptly at 8:00 a.m.

Office of the President Proper

1. Senior Deputy Executive Secretary Dionisio de la Serna 2. Deputy Executive Secretary Luis Liwanag II 3. Undersecretary Leonora Vasquez-de Jesus 4. Presidential Assistant Romulo Lumauig (PLLO) 5. Assistant Executive Secretary Renato Corona (Legal) 6. Assistant Executive Secretary Rafael Lagos (Legislative) 7. Asst. Secretary Mary Ann Fernandez 8. Asst. Secretary Manuel Gaite 9. Asst. Secretary Demetrio Ignacio 10. Director Miguel Sison (PACE) 11. Director Ambrosio Ramos (Admin) 12. Director Carlito Gaddi (PAO) 13. Director Susana Vargas (Finance) 14. Director Teresita Valdellon (Accounting) 15. Director Florino Ibañez (Personnel) 16. Director Aurora Aquino (Records) 17. Director Reynaldo San Gabriel (Engineering) 18. Director Hermogenes Lorenzo (Malacañang Clinic)

OP Attached Agencies

The aforecited participants shall submit ten (10) copies of their detailed reports and eighty (80) copies of the reports’ Executive Summary (following the attached format shown in Annex A) to the Presidential Management Staff (PMS) on or before November 3, 1992.

ADMINISTRATIVE AND SECRETARIAT SUPPORT

The Presidential Management Staff (PMS) shall provide administrative and secretariat support to the workshop.

ARRANGEMENTS AND BOOKING

Necessary arrangements for food and lodging have been made only for the above-named officials.

Each workshop participant shall pay the amount of P2000.00 to cover the cost of accommodation, food and other expenses. Payments shall be arranged with Director Susana Vargas of OP Finance Department at tel. nos. 49-56-03 or 521-23-01 loc. 6021, not later than November 6, 1992.

All participants are enjoined to take the bus that will be provided by the PMS to and from Tagaytay.

Confirmation of attendance and bus reservation shall be made with the PMS at telephone numbers 40-35-59 or 48-77-39 on or before 3 November 1992.

For strict compliance.

By authority of the President (Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE Executive Secretary

Manila, October 22, 1992

Reference: ANNEX A

Source : CDAsia