Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 86

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE INTERNATIONAL SEMINAR ON URBAN CRIMES

The Asia Crime Prevention Philippines, Inc. (ACPPI), in coordination with the Department of the Interior and Local Government, the National Police Commission and the Philippine National Police, will conduct an International Seminar on Urban Crimes at the Manila Hotel on March 10-11, 1994, with the purpose of coming up with a more effective development and implementation of a national crime prevention programme within the context of Philippines 2000.

In this connection, Heads of the DILG, NAPOLCOM, PNP, Department of Justice, Department of Social Welfare and Development as well as other law enforcement agencies, penal institutions, and prosecution offices, are hereby authorized to send two (2) representatives holding key positions in criminal justice and crime prevention to the Seminar on official time with entitlement to transportation expenses and per diems, chargeable against the allotment of their respective offices, subject to the availability thereof and to accounting and auditing requirements. Participants residing or stationed within Metro Manila shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation only.

The DILG, NAPOLCOM and PNP are likewise authorized to shoulder part of the funding requirements of the Seminar out of the regular appropriations of said offices.

The participants shall, within fifteen (15) days thereafter, submit to their respective agency heads, copy furnished the NAPOLCOM, a complete report on their attendance in said activity. Likewise, within thirty (30) days after the Seminar, the organizers shall submit to this Office a general report and evaluation of the seminar, including a duly audited financial report and a list of participants indicating their respective offices, copy furnished the Civil Service Commission and the Department of Budget and Management.

By authority of the President (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, March 7 1994

Source : CDAsia