MALACANANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 18

CLARIFYING EXISTING RULES AND REGULATIONS ON TRAVEL ABROAD OF GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES

WHEREAS, it has been observed that in many instances requests for authority to travel abroad whether on official business or for a private purpose are being submitted barely a few days before the date of departure giving no sufficient time for the Office of the President to evaluate the merit of each request. Moreover, in not a few cases supporting documents are either incomplete or not attached at all; and

WHEREAS, it has also been noticed that requests for authority to travel abroad of those not required to be cleared with this Office pursuant to Executive Order No. 401, series of 1990, and Memorandum Circular No. 7 dated September 30, 1992, are still being submitted despite their being already delegated to heads of offices.

WHEREFORE, all heads of departments, bureaus, offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations and local government units are hereby enjoined to observe the following:

1 Requests for authority to travel abroad of the following government officials shall be submitted to the Office of the President for approval:

(a) Department Secretaries (b) Undersecretaries (c) Assistant Secretaries (d) Other officials of equivalent rank to (a), (b) and (c) (e) Provincial Governors (f) Mayors of highly urbanized cities or independent component cities

2. Such requests shall be submitted at least ten (10) days before the expected date of departure.

3. Heads of government offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations and local government units who are traveling abroad should indicate the officials designated Acting/Officer-in-Charge of the office for the duration of their trip.

4. Requests for authority to travel shall be accompanied by an itemized expenses such as air fare, per diems, hotel accommodation and pre-travel indicating the chargeability thereof.

5. Travel abroad while on leave of absence or for a private purpose shall not exceed ten (10) days. Prolong absences must be properly explained.

This Memorandum Circular takes effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 27th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President (Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE, SR. Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia