MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 60

ESTABLISHING A SYSTEM TO ENSURE SMOOTH FLOW OF TRANSACTIONS IN GOVERNMENT AND PROMPT RESPONSE TO PUBLIC REQUESTS

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the Government to promote and inculcate among government officials and employees norms of conduct expected of civil servants;

WHEREAS, Republic Act 6713, otherwise known as the Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees, provides for the duties and responsibilities of public officials and employees to ensure prompt and responsive delivery of public services;

WHEREAS, the rules implementing the said Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards promulgated by the Civil Service Commission provides for the institution of reforms in the systems and procedures in government, transparency on transactions and access to information and incentives and rewards system for officials and servants who have demonstrated exemplary service and conduct;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 89, series of 1993, reiterates the policy of full public disclosure by directing all heads of executive departments and agencies, including government-owned and -controlled corporations, to implement a policy of accessibility and transparency; and,

WHEREAS, strict adherence to these policies shall be enforced for the Government to best serve the interest of the people.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the laws, do hereby order as follows:

Section 1. In line with the efforts of the Government to establish an efficient, effective and responsive bureaucracy, there is hereby established a system to ensure smooth flow of transactions and prompt action on the problems, complaints, inquiries, requests for assistance from the public and other frontline services.

Section 2. All heads of executive departments, bureaus, instrumentalities, offices and agencies of government, as well as government-owned and -controlled corporations, shall strictly observe the provision of RA 6713 requiring public officials and employees to respond to letters and routinary requests sent by the public within fifteen (15) days from receipt.

Section 3. All heads of offices shall, within thirty (30) days, formulate rules and regulations that shall govern matters requiring administrative decisions in their respective agencies to ensure prompt, adequate and responsive action. The rules and regulations shall:

(a) identify frontline services being delivered by the agency, the flowchart for each service and the prescribed length of time to process them;

(b) establish a system of rewards in recognition of good performance as well as administrative sanctions to enhance compliance with the rules promulgated in the agency, consistent and in compliance with the Civil Service rules and regulations;

(c) institute a system within the agency which shall enforce and monitor compliance with the rules and regulations and determine appropriate work standards and work targets, among others. The monitoring system shall provide for the keeping of records/journal that shall indicate the date of receipt and the action taken on the matter. The journal shall be made available to anyone in line with the government policy of transparency; and,

(d) infuse the culture of courtesy in the office.

Section 4. A senior official, with the rank of Undersecretary or its equivalent, shall be assigned to ensure strict compliance with the promulgated rules and regulations in every department or agency.

Section 5. The Office of the President shall set up a counterpart team which shall assist the Departments/agencies in monitoring compliance with the promulgated rules and regulations.

Section 6. All government agencies shall submit to the Office of the Executive Secretary, through the Presidential Management Staff, the following:

(a) name of the Undersecretary assigned to monitor compliance in the agency;

(b) promulgated rules and regulations on matters requiring administrative decision/action including the list of all frontline services with corresponding flowcharts and the prescribed length of time to process them;

(c) monitoring system to be instituted in the agency to ensure compliance with the rules and regulations.

Section 7. A quarterly monitoring report on compliance with the promulgated rules and regulations shall likewise be submitted to the Office of the Executive Secretary.

Section 8. This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 8th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Reference : List of Frontline Services and Procedures for Processing

Source : CDAsia