MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 55

CONSTITUTING A PHILIPPINE HOST COMMITTEE FOR, AND DIRECTING ALL GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS, AGENCIES AND OFFICES INCLUDING GOVERNMENT-OWNED AND CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS TO SUPPORT, THE 16TH BIENNIAL CONFERENCE ON THE RULE OF LAW IN THE WORLD

WHEREAS, the Philippines has successfully played host to major world conferences and other international events;

WHEREAS, in 1977, the Philippines hosted one of the most prestigious events in the international legal arena, the 8th Biennial Conference on the Rule of Law in the World, which has been considered as the largest, most successful gathering of barristers in the entire history of the World Jurist Association (formerly World Peace Through Law Center);

WHEREAS, after 16 long years, the Philippines will once again play host to the 16th Biennial Conference on the Rule of Law in the World to be held at the Philippine International Convention Center (PICC) from October 24–29, 1993;

WHEREAS, this six-day Conference which will carry the theme Law in a Changing World expects to draw 3,000 foreign participants (mostly dignitaries, ministers of justice and law professors, justices and judges) as well as some 2,000 local participants;

WHEREAS, this world Conference will provide an international forum for all members of the legal field to exchange ideas and views on relevant and current legal issues; to discuss new principles governing the field of law; and to deliberate on problem areas of common global interest and seek their solutions;

WHEREAS, this world event will provide an excellent learning opportunity for our members of the law profession and those in the judiciary and the academe, and will serve as an educational forum where they can participate and understand better the legal system of the world; and

WHEREAS, the holding of such an important event will bring international prestige, publicity, goodwill, and economic benefit to the country.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order the following:

1. A Philippine Host Committee (PHC), composed of representatives from the Department of Tourism (DOT), the Philippine Convention and Visitors Corporation (PCVC), and a coalition of law associations under the umbrella of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines (IBP), and chaired by the Solicitor General, is hereby constituted to oversee and undertake all the necessary preparations for the 16th Biennial Conference on the Rule of Law in the World.

2. All government departments, agencies and offices, including government-owned and controlled corporations, are directed to extend their assistance and support to the Conference to ensure its successful observance.

3. The following specific government entities are directed to actively participate and support the PHC as stated below

Department of Justice/Commission on Immigration and Deportation

To issue a circular authorizing the attendance of government prosecutors and public attorneys to register for the Conference; and

To provide special entry/exit arrangements and services for all Conference participants.

Department of Foreign Affairs

To issue visas for all foreign delegates and on a selective basis even for those coming from restricted countries and those with whom the Philippines does not have diplomatic relations;

To assist in all protocol requirements of the Conference; and

To assist in disseminating information about the event through Embassies and Consulates.

3.3. Department of Trade and Industry

To assist in promoting attendance to the event through its network of foreign field offices.

3.4. Department of Finance/Bureau of Customs

To facilitate the entry and passage of foreign Conference materials, including printed matters, giveaways and other paraphernalia to be used during the Conference.

Department of Transportation and Communications

To issue special Conference car plates, and to provide telecommunication equipment required for the Conference.

3.6. Department of Public Works and Highways

To improve all roads and islands within the airport area and along major thoroughfares leading to the Conference venue; and

To construct and install arches, billboards, and other signages announcing the Conference in the key thoroughfares, and, after the Conference period, to dismantle and clean the said areas of the signages.

3 . Department of the Interior and Local Government/League of City Mayors/Metropolitan Manila Authority

To issue permits for the use of public venues, signage/decor installation and traffic rerouting; and

To maintain and regularly clean-up the major tourist districts and thoroughfares.

3.8. Philippine National Police

To formulate and implement a security plan specifically designed for the Conference, and to provide security arrangements for dignitaries and VIPs throughout the duration of the event;

To assist in the maintenance of local security and crowd control in Conference activities held in public venues; and

To provide manpower support for traffic rerouting and to maintain peace and order as may be required.

3.9. Manila International Airport Authority

To assist the PHC in the facilitation of Conference delegates, the provision of entry passes to authorized PHC representatives, and installation and, after the Conference period, dismantling, of welcome streamers, Conference signages and decor at the Airport premises.

3.10 Central Bank of the Philippines/Philippine International Convention Center

To extend preferential rates for the use of the PICC facilities for the Conferences.

Cultural Center of the Philippines

To provide artists, talents and, when necessary, the CCP facilities, for selected Conference events as may be requested.

3 .12 Duty Free Philippines/Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation/Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office

To provide financial assistance to the PHC in the amount of P1 million each which shall augment the Conference budget to finance selected Conference activities, including, Philippine Night, World Law Day Rites, Closing Reception, attendance promo activities, and Conference paraphernalia.

3.13. Philippine Airlines (PAL)

Aside from its commitment to the World Jurist Association as official carrier, the PAL is requested to extend preferential airfare package rates for all registered local Conference participants; and to assist the PHC in any other matter regarding ticket and joint advertising support.

4. DIRECT the PHC, through the DOT and PCVC, to coordinate the effective implementation of this Circular.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 10 th day of June in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ANTONIO T. CARPIO Chief Presidential Legal Counsel

Source : CDAsia