Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 30

PRESCRIBING GUIDELINES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 1991 LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE (RA 7160) AND EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 503, DATED JANUARY 22, 1992, BY ALL PROVINCIAL GOVERNORS, CITY AND MUNICIPAL MAYORS, MEMBERS OF THE SANGGUNIAN AND OTHERS CONCERNED

To effectively implement the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) and efficiently adopt the provisions of Executive Order 503, dated January 22, 1992, on the transfer of personnel, assets, liabilities, and records of National Government Agencies (NGAs) whose functions are to be devolved to the Local Government Units (LGUs), the following guidelines shall be pursued by all Provincial Governors, City and Municipal Mayors, Members of the Sanggunian, and all others concerned.

1. AGRICULTURAL/FISHERY EXTENSIONS AND ON-SITE RESEARCH

a. Absorb functions, assets, equipment, and personnel

1) Discuss with Provincial/City/Municipal Agricultural Officer (PAO) or concerned DA Officer, the programs, projects, budget, assets, and personnel to be transferred to the Province/City or Municipality

2) Prepare absorption schedule

3) Actually absorb devolved functions, assets, equipment, and personnel

b Absorb site-specific devolved projects

1) Discuss with DA Officer projects to be devolved

2) Prepare absorption schedule

3 Actually absorb devolved projects

c. Finalize Provincial/City/Municipal Operations Plan and scope of agricultural extension and on-site research services

d. Set-up organizational structure and staffing pattern for Provincial/City/Municipal agriculture department

e. Adopt manuals and operating systems as prescribed by the Department of Agriculture

1) Adopt appropriate methods of agricultural extension and on-site research

2) Adopt private enterprise NGO/PO scheme for the delivery of agricultural extension and on-site research services

3) Install linkages for information sharing with the Department of Agriculture

4) Adopt system of augmentation by DA, if basic services and facilities are not provided by the province, city, or municipality

5) Implement standards for the extension of regulatory functions as promulgated by DA

6) Develop mechanism for joint undertaking arrangement with other provinces for agricultural and on-site research services

f. Install LGU monitoring system for agricultural extension and on-site research services

g. Determine training and technical assistance requirements from DA

h. Adopt mechanism for mandatory consultation between the DA and the province/city/municipality

2. ENFORCEMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT LAWS AND IMPLEMENTATION OF MINI-HYDRO-ELECTRIC PROJECTS AND COMMUNITY-BASED FORESTRY PROJECTS

a. Absorb functions, personnel, equipment, and assets

1) Discuss with concerned DENR officer the programs, projects, budgets, assets, and personnel to be transferred to the province/city or municipality as embodied in the memorandum of agreement

2) Prepare absorption schedules

3) Absorb devolved functions, personnel, equipment, and assets

b. Absorb site-specific devolved projects

1) Discuss with concerned DENR officer projects to be devolved

2) Prepare absorption schedules

3) Absorb site-specific devolved projects

c. Finalize provincial/city/municipal operations plan and scope of function pertaining to the enforcement of natural resources and environmental management laws and implementation of mini-hydroelectric projects in case of provinces.

d. Set up corresponding structure or system for provincial/city/municipal environmental resources management.

e. Adopt manuals and operating systems as prescribed by DENR

1) Adopt guidelines and operating systems on the enforcement of natural resources and environmental management laws following DENR guidelines and standards

2) Adopt standards and systems for environmental impact assessment, environmental management, and land reclassification.

3) Adopt guidelines and standards for planning and implementation of mini-hydroelectric projects

4) Adopt guidelines and standards for NGO/PO participation in the performance of devolved functions

5) Install linkages for information sharing with DENR

6) Adopt system of augmentation by DENR, if basic services/facilities for natural resources and environmental management, as well as mini-hydroelectric projects, are not provided by the province/city/municipality.

7) Develop mechanisms for joint undertaking arrangements with other LGUs in the enforcement of natural resources and environmental management laws

f. Install provincial/city/municipal monitoring system for the enforcement of natural resources and environmental management laws.

g. Determine training and technical assistance requirements from DENR

h. Adopt mechanisms for mandatory consultations between DENR and the province, city, or municipality on future programs and projects

3. HOSPITAL SERVICES AND OTHER TERTIARY HEALTH CARE SERVICES

a. Absorb functions, assets, equipment and personnel

Discuss with concerned DOH personnel the programs, projects, assets and personnel to be transferred to the province, city and municipality

2) Prepare absorption schedules

3) Actually absorb devolved functions, assets, equipment and personnel

b. Absorb site-specific devolved projects and facilities

1) Discuss with DOH personnel projects to be devolved

2) Prepare absorption schedules

3) Actually absorb site-specific devolved projects and facilities

c. Finalize provincial/city/municipal operations plan and scope of hospital services and tertiary health care services

d. Set up organizational structure and staffing pattern for provincial/city/municipal health department

e. Adopt manuals and operating systems as prescribed by DOH

1) Adopt operating manuals for the provincial/city/municipal health boards

2) Adopt guidelines and systems for the maintenance of hospitals and laboratories

3) Adopt guidelines and systems for linkage of provincial health care systems with the national health care system

4) Adopt guidelines for private enterprise NGO/PO participation in the delivery of hospital and other tertiary health care services

5) Install linkages for information sharing with DOH

6) Adopt system of augmentation by DOH of hospital and other tertiary health care services not provided by the provincial, city, or municipality

7) Implement standards for the exercise of regulatory functions as prescribed by DOH

8) Develop mechanisms for joint undertaking arrangements with other provinces for hospital and other tertiary health care services

f. Install provincial/city/municipal monitoring system for hospitals and other tertiary health care services.

g. Determine training and technical assistance requirements from DOH

h. Adopt mechanisms for mandatory consultation between DOH and the province/city/municipality on future programs and projects

4. SOCIAL WELFARE SERVICES

a. Absorb functions, assets, equipment and personnel

1) Discuss with concerned DSWD personnel the programs, projects, budget, assets, and personnel transferred/to be transferred to the province, city, and municipality

2) Actually absorb devolved functions, assets, equipment and personnel

b. Absorb site-specific devolved projects

1 Discuss with concerned DSWD personnel projects to be devolved

2) Prepare absorption schedules

3) Actually absorb site-specific devolved projects

c. Finalize operations, plan, and scope of social welfare services

d. Set up organizational structure and staffing pattern for provincial/city/municipal social welfare services department

e. Adopt manuals and operating systems as prescribed by DSWD

1) Adopt guidelines and standards for private enterprise and NGO/PO participation in the delivery of social welfare services, including relief operations and population development services

2) Install linkages for information sharing with DSWD

3) Adopt system of augmentation by DSWD of basic social welfare services not provided by the province/city/municipality

4) Adopt guidelines and standards for the establishment and maintenance of social welfare institutions

5) Develop mechanism for joint undertaking arrangements with other LGUs for social welfare services delivery

f. Install provincial/city/municipal monitoring system for social welfare services delivery

g. Determine training and technical assistance requirements from DSWD

h. Adopt mechanisms for mandatory consultation between DSWD and the province/city/municipality on future programs/projects

These guidelines were recommended by the oversight Committee on the Local Government Code of 1991.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately

(Sgd.) ANTONIO T. CARPIO Chief Presidential Legal COunsel

Manila, February 9, 1993

Source : CDAsia