Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 32

ENJOINING GOVERNMENT AGENCIES CONCERNED TO EXTEND OPTIMUM SUPPORT AND ASSISTANCE TO THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION IN ITS CONDUCT OF CIVIL SERVICE EXAMINATIONS.

The Civil Service Commission is charged with the duty of administering civil service examination which is usually held as often as once a year in different examination centers throughout the country. In order to enable the Commission to undertake its task effectively and efficiently, it is desired that:

a. The Department of Finance, the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, the Department of National Defense, the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Integrated National Police and all offices under these agencies and all other departments, agencies and instrumentalities of the government as may be requested by the Civil Service Commission, are hereby enjoined to extend optimum support and assistance to the Commission to ensure full security and smooth administration of all civil service examinations.

b. The Department of Public Works and Highways, the Department of Transportation and Communications, the Philippine Airlines, the Philippine National Railways, the Philippine Information Agency and the Electronic Data Processing Systems Office of the Sugar Regulatory Administration are likewise enjoined to extend optimum support and assistance relative to the transport of examination materials and personnel, the utilization of communication facilities throughout the country, the dissemination of essential information on the holding of the examinations, and the computer processing of examination papers respectively.

c. The Secretary of National Defense, the Commanding General of the Philippine Air Force Security Command, the Commissioner of Customs are requested to exempt from inspection all classified materials pertinent to the examination.

d. All heads of government agencies whose representatives may be designated by the Chairman/Commissioners or the Regional Directors of the Civil Service Commission, to compose the Regional Examination Committees and the Local Examination Committees to be established in provincial/city capitals where the examinations will be held, are requested to extend optimum support and assistance in all matters relative to the conduct of the examination.

By Authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, May 21, 1987

Source: Malacañang Records Office