Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 139

PRESCRIBING THE GUIDELINES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 398 DATED SEPTEMBER 26, 1991.

The following guidelines are hereby adopted pursuant to Memorandum Order No. 398 dated September 26, 1991 on the Policy on Delivery of Goods and Services to the Countryside.

The following are the operating procedures:

1. Consistent with the needs of public safety, the full and free delivery of goods and services to the countryside by government agencies, non-government and church organizations and private individuals shall not be impeded.

2. Under normal circumstances, government agencies shall follow their standard operating procedures in the delivery of goods and services even to influenced and infiltrated areas.

3. Only in cases of actual tactical operations may control of the movement of non-combatants and the delivery of goods and services be imposed for safety reasons, Provided that in no case should such control lead to the starvation of civilians.

4. The flow of goods and services from government line agencies directly to their field units shall be facilitated and assured.

5. To ensure the prompt, safe and effective delivery of goods and service, there shall be coordination between NGOs, the Chairman of the POC or his duly designated representative, and appropriate line agencies.

6. Any dispute arising from the restriction by any agency of the flow of goods and services shall be resolved by the Peace and Order Council (POC). In the event the POC upholds the temporary restriction of the flow of goods and services because of actual and on-going tactical operations, which restriction, however, should not cause or lead to the starvation of local communities, the POC shall have the responsibility of expediting their release. In no case shall the delivery of goods and services be suspended for more than three (3) days.

Line agencies are hereby directed to disseminate the implementing guidelines to their field units.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Manila, 19 November 1991

Source: Malacañang Records Office