MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 71

PRESCRIBING GUIDELINES FOR CONDUCTING THE FLAG CEREMONY

WHEREAS, the flag is a symbol of the Republic of the Philippines, an emblem of national sovereignty, of national, unity and cohesion;

WHEREAS, the 1987 Constitution, under Section 1, Article XVI thereof, provides that the flag of the Philippines shall be red, white, and blue, with a sun and three stars, as consecrated and honored by the people and recognized by law; and

WHEREAS, the observance of the proper conduct during the flag ceremony reflects our reverence for the Philippine flag.

Accordingly, the following guidelines are hereby promulgated for conducting the flag ceremony in all government offices and institutions:

1. The observance of the flag ceremony shall be simple and dignified and shall include the playing or singing of the Philippine National Anthem;

2. During the flag-raising ceremony, the assembly shall stand in formation facing the flag. At command, everyone in the premises shall come to attention. Those with hats shall uncover. The assembly shall sing the Philippine National Anthem, accompanied by a band, if available, and at the first note, the flag shall be raised briskly. While the flag is being raised, all persons present shall stand at attention and execute a salute by placing their right palms over their left chests. Those in military, scouting and citizens military training uniforms shall give the salute prescribed by their regulations. The salute shall be completed upon the last note of the anthem;

3. During the flag-retreat, the flag should be lowered slowly so that the flag will be down the mast at the sound of the last note of the anthem. Those in the assembly shall observe the same deportment or shall execute the same salute as required of them in the flag raising ceremony;

4. The flag should be handled reverently in hoisting or lowering it and not allowed to touch the ground.

For strict compliance.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

Manila, August 10, 1988

Source: Malacañang Records Office