Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 151

PRESCRIBING GUIDELINES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SECTION 45 CHAPTER 2, TITLE TWO, BOOK I OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE OF 1991 AND OF ARTICLE 83, RULE XIV OF THE RULES AND REGULATIONS IMPLEMENTING THE SAME CODE RELATIVE TO THE APPOINTMENT TO PERMANENT VACANCIES IN THE SANGGUNIAN WHERE THE RULES ON AUTOMATIC SUCCESSION UNDER SECTION 44 DO NOT APPLY

WHEREAS, Subsection (c), Article 83, Rule XIV of the “Rules and Regulations Implementing the Local Government Code of 1991” prescribes that the President, through the Executive Secretary, shall fill by appointment permanent vacancies in (1) the sangguniang panlalawigan; (2) the sangguniang panlungsod of highly urbanized cities and independent component cities; and (3) the sangguniang bayan of the component municipalities of Metropolitan Manila where the rules of automatic succession provided by Section 44, Chapter 2, Title Two, Book I of the same Code do not apply; and

WHEREAS, there exists the need to adopt guidelines on the procedures and requirements for recommendations and appointments to such permanent vacancies;

IN VIEW THEREOF, the following guidelines are hereby prescribed:

SECTION 1. A permanent vacancy arises when an incumbent elective local official fills a higher vacant office, refuses to assume office, fails to qualify, dies, is removed from office, voluntarily resigns, or is otherwise permanently incapacitated to discharge the functions of his office.

SEC. 2. Where a permanent vacancy exists in the sangguniang panlalawigan, the sangguniang panlungsod and the sangguniang bayan involved, such vacancy shall be filled by the appointment of the nominee who belongs to the same political party under which the sanggunian member concerned who caused the last vacancy had been elected.

SEC. 3. The recommendation for the appointment of the nominee shall be effected through the nomination signed by the highest official of the political party concerned. The highest official refers to the national chairman of the political party concerned. The nomination shall be accompanied by the following documents:

a. Certificate of Membership of the nominee in the political party under which the sanggunian member concerned who caused the last vacancy had been elected. Such Certificate of Membership shall also be signed by the highest official of the said political party;

b. Certification from the Election Registrar of the province, city or municipality, as the case may be, as to the political party under which the person who caused the last vacancy had been elected; and

c. Personal data sheet through Civil Service Form No. 212 (Revised 1982).

SEC. 4. The nomination, together with the required documents mentioned in the preceding section, shall be submitted to the concerned Regional Director of the Department of the Interior and Local Government who shall transmit the same within forty-eight (48) hours from receipt thereof, with his certification as to the authenticity of all the documents presented to him, to the Secretary of the Interior and Local Government.

SEC. 5. Upon receipt of all the documents from the Regional Director, the Secretary of the Interior and Local Government shall transmit the same within forty-eight (48) hours from receipt thereof, with his recommendation, to the Office of the President.

SEC. 6. The nominee shall enter upon the discharge of his duties only after having been issued the corresponding appointment and after having taken the requisite oath of office before any of the officers who have the general authority to administer oaths in accordance with the provisions of Section 41, Chapter 10, Book I of the Administrative Code of 1987, as amended by Republic Act No. 6733.

SEC. 7. In case the permanent vacancy is caused by a sanggunian member who does not belong to any political party, the local chief executive shall, upon the recommendation of the sanggunian concerned, appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy.

SEC. 8. In case of vacancy in the representation of the youth and the barangay in the sanggunian, the said vacancy shall be filled automatically by the official next-in-rank of the organization concerned.

SEC. 9. This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

25 March 1992 Manila, Philippines

Source: Malacañang Records Office