Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 48

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT

There is hereby created the Presidential Task Force on Traffic Management with the following membership:

The Heads of the aforementioned agencies shall immediately designate their representatives to the Task Force which shall have these objectives:

1. To review the current traffic situation in Metro Manila.

2. To identify problems affecting the achievement of an efficient and effective traffic management.

3. To formulate strategies, policies, measures, rules and regulations aimed at improving the traffic situation.

4. To develop an overall integrated traffic improvement program aimed at achieving safety, efficiency and economy, including the identification of agencies that would assume the lead roles in the various aspects of the program, supporting and cooperating agencies, manner of participation and responsibilities, schedule of activities, resource requirements, and other pertinent matters.

To ensure the efficient realization of the above objectives, pertinent Technical Committees will be created by the Task Force. The membership and terms of references of these Committees shall be determined by the Task Force.

In consideration of the efforts and time that the Task Force and Technical Committee members will render to said committees, which are expected to be over and above their normal functions, a reasonable honorarium chargeable to the unprogrammed funds of the Office of the President shall be provided to the Task Force and Committee members, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations of the Government.

The following guidelines shall be observed by the Task Force:

1. There is no new office created on account of the establishment of this Task Force.

2. The Task Force shall submit its recommendations to the President not later than 60 days from the date thereof.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

Manila, January 26th 1988.

By Authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office