MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 52

PRESCRIBED UNIFORM RATES AND GUIDELINES IN THE GRANT OF REPRESENTATION, TRANSPORTATION, CLOTHING AND QUARTERS ALLOWANCES, AS WELL AS OVERTIME PAY AND HONORARIA IN LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

In consideration of existing local conditions and the inherent nature of the official functions and responsibilities of local government officials, wherein many local government officials incur representation and transportation expenses in the performance of their official duties and functions which are not reimbursed from local funds in the absence of specific Presidential authority, it is deemed necessary to provide uniform rates, standards and guidelines for the grant of allowances and other benefits payable from local funds without need of further approval or prior authority from the Office of the President or other national Department.

To promote equity, therefore, while complying with the Constitutional mandate on standardization of compensation, the rules and regulations governing allowances, overtime pay and honoraria that may be granted by local governments are hereby prescribed:

SECTION 1. Representation and Transportation Allowances -The Sangguniang Panlalawigan, the Sangguniang Panlungsod, and the Sangguniang Bayan may authorize the following officials of provinces, cities and municipalities, respectively, to collect monthly commutable representation and transportation allowances, payable from the programmed appropriations provided for their respective offices at similar rates not exceeding the maximum rates prescribed below which shall apply to each type of allowance:

MAXIMUM MONTHLY REPRESENTATION OR TRANSPORTATION ALLOWANCES

City Officials

City Budget Officer, City Planning and Development Coordinator

Municipal Officials

Development Coordinator

City of Manila

Cities of Quezon, Pasay and Caloocan

Planning and Development

Coordinator, Civil Registrar,

Veterinarian, Social Services and

Development Officer and General

Services Officer

Municipalities (Metropolitan Manila)

Coordinator and Engineer

Other local officials not specifically enumerated above may also be entitled to commutable monthly representation and transportation allowances if so authorized by the Sanggunian concerned provided that the positions they are occupying are declared or certified by the Joint Commission on Local Government Personnel Administration or by law as equivalent in rank to a provincial, city or municipal chief of office or department head.

The transportation allowances herein authorized, however, shall not be granted to officials who are assigned a. government vehicle or who use government motor transportation in the performance of their official duties and functions,

SECTION 2. Uniform/Clothing Allowance – The Sanggunian, with the approval of the local chief executive may, grant uniform clothing allowances to local government employees at rates not exceeding ₱300 each per annum,

SECTION 3. Housing or Quarters Allowance – Provincial Governors who have no residence in the provincial capital, may be allowed to collect monthly housing or quarters allowances inclusive of light and water consumption in amounts not exceeding 25% of their basic monthly salary; PROVIDED, however, that they are not furnished free quarters by the provincial government, or they are charged only a nominal rate in government-owned buildings used as dormitories or living quarters,

SECTION 4, Overtime Pay – Local Government employees from division chief and below may be allowed overtime services with pay either on meal allowances or hourly basis as directed by the office head concerned subject to the approval of tha local chief executive; to the availability of funds; to all applicable laws, rules and regulations; and to pertinent auditing and accounting requirements. Overtime payment must be within the programmed expenditure of the office concerned.

SECTION 5. Honoraria – Local government officials and employees who are duly assigned by the local chief executive concerned to render service either on full-time or part-time basis to an inter-agency group implementing special projects may, at the discretion of the Joint Commission, be allov/ed to receive honoraria chargeable against project funds at such rates it shall fix Government officials and employees, whether national or local, who are hired as consultants and resource speakers by-local governments because of their expertise in their fields of specialization may be allowed to receive honoraria at such rates authorized under existing laws, rules and regulations.

SECTION 6. Changes in Ra tes of Allowances – The Joint Commission shall automatically revise the rates of allowances herein prescribed in the event of any modification of the corresponding allowances granted to national government employees.

SECTION 7. L imitations – The Sanggunian concerned shall observe the following additional rules in appropriating funds for benefits herein granted:

1. No official, whether national or local, shall be allowed to collect from any local government unit any allowance higher than that granted to the local chief executive.

2. No official, whether national or local, shall be allowed to collect transportation and representation allowances from more than one local government unit.

3. Appropriation of funds for representation and transportation allowances may be allowed only when all statutory and contractual obligations of the local government unit concerned shall have been fully provided for in its current budget and that no fund or cash overdraft is existing or will be incurred as a result of the implementation thereof.

4. The grant by local governments of the allowances, overtime pay find honoraria herein authorized shall not require prior or further approval by the Office of the President or any national Department, Bureau or Office but, in all cases, these shall be subject to the availability of funds as certified by the local treasurer, the usual accounting and auditing requirements and ether applicable laws, rules and regulations.

SECTION 8. Implementing Rules and Regulations – The Joint Commission shall issue the necessary rules and regulations to implement this Memorandum Circular except those provisions which are already covered by existing laws, rules and regulations.

SECTION 9. R epealing Claus e – All circulars, rules and regulations, issuances or directives or part or parts thereof inconsistent with or contrary to the provisions of this Memorandum Circular are hereby revoked, repealed or amended accordingly.

SECTION 10. Effectivity – This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

Manila, March 7, 1988

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office