Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 81

AUTHORIZING LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS, SUBJECT TO CERTAIN CONDITIONS, TO PURCHASE TRANSPORT EQUIPMENT

Governors and City and Municipal Mayors are hereby empowered to authorize the purchase of transport and heavy equipment for their respective provinces, cities and municipalities, provided that such purchases are to be paid from unencumbered local funds, subject to the following conditions:

A. For Service Vehicles for Local Government Officials:

1. For use of Provincial Governors and Mayors of Highly Urbanized Cities: Any four-wheel vehicle with four cylinders and with engine displacement of not more than 2000 cc, including such allowable options as factory-installed airconditioning, magnesium alloy rims, AM-FM radio stereo with tape player, radial tires and seat covers ;

2. For use of Vice Governors and Mayors of Component Cities and Municipalities:

Any four-wheel vehicle with four cylinders and engine displacement of not more than 1600 cc, including such allowable options as factory-installed airconditioning, magnesium alloy rims, AM-FM radio-stereo with tape player, radial tires and seat covers;

3. For use of Offices of Department Heads of Provincial Governments and Highly-Urbanized Cities: Any four-wheel vehicle with four cylinders and engine displacement of not more than 1400 cc; or any four-wheel vehicle with four cylinders, locally-fabricated chassis and body, and an engine displacement of not more than 1600 cc;

B. For Service Vehicles for General Urban use: Any four-wheel vehicle with not more than four cylinders and with an engine displacement of 1400 cc or less, including such allowable options as factory-installed airconditioning, AM-FM radio, radial tires and seat covers; or, any four-wheel vehicle with locally-fabricated chassis and body and with an engine displacement of not more than 1600 cc;

C. For Service Vehicles for Heavy Field use: Any four-wheel vehicle with not more than six cylinders and an engine displacement of not more than 2600 cc, including such allowable options as factory-installed airconditioning, AM-FM radio, radial tires and seat covers; and,

D. For Service Motorcycles: Any motorcycle with two-or four-stroke engine displacing 750 cc or less, including such allowable options as sidecar, windscreen and saddle bags.

It is understood that the price of the vehicle to be purchased shall not exceed that of the lowest-priced model available at the maximum given specifications.

It is further understood that the procurement shall be in accordance with established auditing and accounting rules and regulations.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of October in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office