Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 156

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE ANALYTICAL SURVEY OF 1991 SUPREME COURT DECISIONS

The U.P. Law Center will hold the Analytical Survey of 1991 Supreme Court Decisions from June 20 to August 14, 1992 at 9:00 A.M. to 12:00 noon at the Bocobo Hall, U.P. Law Center, Diliman, Quezon City.

The program is designed particularly to enable legal officers in the government to benefit from the analysis of recent jurisprudence by leading experts. It aims to help legal officers update their knowledge and provide them with an in-depth study of new jurisprudence as they affect and/or relate to the discharge of their duties and responsibilities.

In view departments of the importance of the program, heads of departments, bureaus offices, and agencies of the national government, including government-owned or controlled corporations are hereby authorized to send three of its concerned senior legal officers and court officers to participate in the discussion of the Survey on official time with the reasonable expenses for transportation, per diem and registration fee of the ₱500.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices. Provinces, cities and first class municipalities may send one representative each with the expenses as herein authorized. It is understood that participants residing or stationed within the Metropolitan Manila area shall be entitled only to registration fee.

Participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance and shall, within a reasonable period thereafter, echo the seminar to key personnel in their respective offices. Likewise, the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the seminar, copy furnished the Department of Budget and Management, including a certificate of participants indicating their respective offices.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Manila, June 23, 1992

Source: Malacañang Records Office