Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 34

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE THIRD NATIONAL CONFERENCE AND ECHO CONFERENCES ON PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AT THE REGIONAL LEVEL

The College of Public Administration, University of the Philippines, its Alumni Association, the Philippine Society for Public Administration, the Association of Schools of Public Administration in the Philippines, and the U.P. Public Administration Research and extension Services Foundation, Inc. will jointly hold the Third National Conference on Public Administration in Manila from September 28-30, 1987, and Echo Conferences in the regions sometime in 1988.

The Conference, which shall have as its theme “Public Administration and Redemocratization,” aims to, among other things, provide an opportunity for professional discussions of the problems and prospects of public administration and redemocratization under the present dispensation.

All government officials, employees and faculty members of academic institutions who hold degree/s in Public Administration/Public Management or Educational Administration/Management in the graduate level, and/or graduates of the Career Executive Service Development Program (CESDP), the Philippine Executive Academy (PEA), Local Administration Development Program (LADP), the National Defense College of the Philippines (NDCP), the Executive Leadership Management Program (ELM), and such other officials of government deemed by their respective Heads of Agencies as qualified to participate, are authorized to attend the conference on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a conference fee of ₱600.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated 26 November 1973 as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, or such applicable laws, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

With regard to the echo conferences, it is understood that the participants residing or stationed within the Metropolitan Manila area, as well as those in the regions, shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and conference fees only.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a report of their attendance in the conference within thirty days after the conference. Likewise, within the same period, the organizers shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the conference, copy furnished the Department of Budget and Management, including a list of participants and observers indicating their respective offices. The report shall include a financial statement of income and expenses duly audited by a Certified Public Accountant not connected with the organizers.

By Authority of the President: (Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Manila, August 20, 1987

Source: Malacañang Records Office