Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 72

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE THIRD NATIONAL CONVENTION ON PRODUCTIVITY IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND PROVIDING GUIDELINES THEREON.

In line with the objectives of Proclamation No. 305 dated August 10, 1988, declaring the month of October of every year as National Productivity Improvement Month, the Government Productivity Improvement Program (GPIP) will hold its Third National Convention on Productivity in the Public Service in Manila on October 6 and 7, 1988 for the purpose of (a) promoting productivity consciousness towards efficient and effective delivery of services to the public; (b) updating government officials and employees of the development and progress of the GPIP; (c) showcasing specific productivity improvement efforts in the government; and (d) providing a venue for interaction between the government and target private sector clientele for improvement in the delivery of frontline services.

In view thereof, the attendance of representatives of national government agencies and corporations in the Third National Convention on Productivity on official time and at government expense is hereby authorized.

Participation shall be limited to not more than three (3) participants from each government office, agency, or corporation. Agency delegates shall be division chiefs or higher officials who are actively involved as Productivity Improvement Committee (PIC) Officers or can considerably influence productivity improvement and related activities in their respective offices.

A convention fee of not more than ₱400.00 per participant is hereby authorized, chargeable against the appropriations of the agencies concerned, subject to the usual accounting and auditing procedures, to be paid not later than registration period. Participants stationed outside Metro Manila shall be entitled, in addition to the Convention Fee, to travelling allowance provided for under the Joint DBM-COA General Circular No. 86-1.

Participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance/participation to the Convention within a week after the activity. The GPIP Council shall immediately submit to the Office of the President a report on Convention proceedings and outputs.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 10th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office