Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 88

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SYMPOSIUM-CONVENTION SPONSORED BY THE PHILIPPINE ASSOCIATION OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE PARTICIPANTS (PATAP).

The Philippine Association of Technical Assistance Participants (PATAP), the alumni organization of beneficiaries of overseas scholarships, fellowships or training grants under various bilateral and multilateral technical assistance programs extended by foreign countries and international institutions to the Philippine Government, will hold a two-day symposium-convention on February.10 and 11, 1989 in Metropolitan Manila on the theme “Reform and Renewal in the Government Service.”

The symposium-convention aims to, among other things, provide the opportunity for members of the PATAP to reexamine and appreciate their vital role as active participants in the Administration’s current campaign for reform and renewal in the government service. The interaction and sharing of expertise among them is expected to produce positive steps that organizations should take in support of the government’s above-mentioned project.

All government officials and employees who are PATAP members or who qualify under the above description are hereby authorized to attend the symposium-convention on official business with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a convention fee of ₱500.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriation of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

It is understood that the participants residing or stationed within the Metropolitan Manila area shall be entitled only to reasonable expenses for transportation and convention fees.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a report of their attendance in the conference within thirty days after the conference. Likewise, within the same period, the organizers shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the conference, copy furnished the Department of Budget and Management, including a list of participants indicating their respective offices. The report shall include a financial statement of income and expenses duly audited by a Certified Public Accountant not connected with the organizers.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, December 9, 1988

Source: Malacañang Records Office