Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 44

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SYMPOSIUM-CONVENT ION SPONSORED BY THE PHILIPPINE ASSOCIATION OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE PARTICIPANTS (PATAP)

The Philippine Association of Technical Assistance Participants (PATAP), the alumni, organization of beneficiaries of overseas scholarships, fellowships or training grants under various bilateral and multilateral technical assistance programs extended by foreign countries and international institutions to the Philippine Government, will hold a two-day symposium-convention on February 19 and 20, .1988 at the Philamlife Auditorium, U.N. Avenue, Manila, on the theme “Professionalism and Careerism in the Public Sector,” with the Philippine-American Life Insurance Company as co-sponsor.

The symposium-convention aims to, among other things, provide the opportunity for members of the PATAP to reexamine and appreciate their vital role as career professionals in the public service. Additionally, the interface among members who have not met in a general assembly since 1978 should surface and firm up positive action steps that organizations should take in support of the Administration’s major programs of government.

All government officials and employees who have been recipients of overseas fellowship, scholarship, study or training grants under various bilateral or multilateral training assistance programs extended by foreign countries and international institutions to the Philippine Government, particularly PATAP members, are authorized to attend the symposium-convention on official business with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a convention fee of ₱500.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriation of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated 26 November 1973 as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, or such applicable laws, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting arid auditing requirements.

It is understood that the participants residing or stationed within the Metropolitan Manila area shall be entitled only to reasonable expenses for transportation and convention fees.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a report of their attendance in the conference within thirty days after the conference. Likewise, the same period, the organizers shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the conference, copy furnished the Department of Budget and Management, including a list of participants and observers indicating their respective offices. The report shall include a financial statement of income and expenses duly audited by a Certified Public Accountant not connected with the organizers.

By authority of the Presient: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, December 7, 1987

Source: Malacañang Records Office