Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 133

CREATING THE COMMITTEE ON THE PRESIDENT’S URGENT SERVICES FOR HOUSING

WHEREAS , the provision of housing remains a priority thrust of the present administration;

WHEREAS, despite increased housing assistance, the problem of decent housing for the urban poor, particularly squatters remains;

WHEREAS, due to the magnitude of urban poor concerns, there is a need to institutionalize inter-agency cooperation and generate support from non-government and community organizations;

WHEREAS, the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council is tasked with ensuring the successful implementation of the government’s National Shelter Program,

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. A Committee on the President’s Urgent Services for Housing in the Office of the President is hereby created to provide a forum to fast-track urgent requests of the urban poor for housing. The Committee shall be composed of the Deputy Executive Secretary and. Head, Presidential Management staff as Chairman, the representative of the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating council as Co-Chairman, and representatives from the National Housing Authority, Home Insurance and Guaranty Corporation, Metro Manila Authority, Department of Public Works and Highways, Presidential Commission for the Urban Poor and the KABISIG National Secretariat as members.

SECTION 2. The Committee shall have the following functions:

a. To receive, evaluate and prioritize requests for urgent housing services from urban communities:

b. To categorize requests according to those which are covered and not as yet covered by existing/on-going government programs;

c. To refer requests covered by existing government programs to appropriate agencies, monitor progress/actions taken and inform requesting party;

d. To coordinate with non-government and community organizations on requests/complaints falling outside the purview of government agencies, for appropriate housing solutions;

e. Submit regular reports to the Executive Secretary and the President;

f. Perform such other functions as may be vested by the President and the Executive Secretary.

SECTION 3. The Committee shall be assisted by a Secretariat to be provided by and based at the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council.

SECTION 4. The Committee is authorized to call upon by department, bureau, office, agency or any instrumentality of government, including government owned and controlled corporations, for assistance as it may need in discharging its roles and responsibilities.

In view thereof, all agencies and offices named as members are hereby directed to convene immediately.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, this seventh day of May, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-One.

By Authority of the President: (Sgd.) OSCAR M. ORBOS Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office