Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 114

DIRECTING MEASURES TO CONSERVE ELECTRIC POWER FOR GOVERNMENT OFFICES IN METROPOLITAN MANILA

WHEREAS, due to power plant repairs and the extended drought, the Luzon grid is unable to produce enough electricity to meet industrial, commercial and residential requirements in Metropolitan Manila and the rest of Luzon;

WHEREAS, the business and industrial groups have reached a consensus on the need to conserve electric power in an equitable manner based on essentiality;

WHEREAS, the business and industrial sectors have conceived a program which calls for government and private commercial firms to voluntarily halt their respective operations once a week in exchange for continuous power supply for four consecutive days;

IN VIEW THEREOF, the following measures for government offices in Metropolitan Manila are hereby directed:

1. The government offices identified by the Task Force on Power, Joint Government-Business Sector Initiatives Program, with 100 KW load capacity demand shall not use electric power derived from the Manila Electric Company on the following five (5) days: April 23; May 7; 14; 21 and 28 1990.

2. The heads of the offices affected during the aforesaid five (5) Mondays shall have the following options:

(a) The offices may continue to perform their respective services and operations during the said five (5) Mondays: Provided, That no electric power derived from the Manila Electric Company shall be used;

(b) The offices may partially or totally cancel their respective services and operations during the said five (5) Mondays: Provided, That the employees affected by the partial or total cancellation of the services and operations shall be considered on forced leave in accordance with the provisions of Executive Order No. 1077, S. of 1986; or

(c) For every work day cancelled during the said five (5) Mondays, the offices may compensate such non-working day by holding work on any day when electric power service has normalized, the date to be determined by their respective heads.

For purposes of this Memorandum Circular, the heads of offices shall refer to the Secretaries of the departments, heads of government owned or controlled corporations, and heads of the local government units in Metropolitan Manila.

3. The Presidential Management Staff shall monitor compliance with this Memorandum Circular.

4. This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, 18 April 1990

Source: Malacañang Records Office