MALACAÑANG

RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 536

DECLARING SEPTEMBER 30, 1958, AS PHILIPPINE-AUSTRALIAN DAY

WHEREAS, it is in the highest interest of both the Philippines and Australia and of the Pacific Area as a whole that there be increasingly more intimate relations, mutual understanding, and lasting cooperation between Filipinos and Australians;

WHEREAS, the visit of an impressive group of 1,200 Australian tourists on the SS Orcades last year, for which the first Philippine-Australian Day was proclaimed, has since generated a rapidly growing volume of tourists traffic and tremendous goodwill between the Philippines and Australia;

WHEREAS, as a result another large group of 1,300 Australian tourists is due to arrive on the SS Orsuva on September 30, 1958, which is but one of a number of large Pacific area tourist ships now regularly scheduled to call at Manila; and

WHEREAS, it is the desire of our nation and government that our Australian guests fully enjoy utmost courtesy, friendly attention, and Philippine hospitality at its best during their sojourn in Manila and its environs;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare September 30, 1958, as Philippine-Australian Day, during which Filipinos and Australians shall get together to mark the significant growth of closer association and unity between our two nations. I call upon our people and all Australians residing within Philippine territory, together with common friends, particularly those in the City of Manila, to help render observance of this date memorable through appropriate means of welcoming our Australian visitors and making them feel at home on our soil. I especially call on all business, civic, and service organizations, as well as schools, both public and private, to do whatever may be within their means to bring about mutual understanding and to enhance the practical significance of wider intercourse between the nationals of our two countries and of greater mutual helpfulness between the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the Commonwealth of Australia. It would be most fitting that our educational institutions devote this day to exercises calculated to advance knowledge and wider appreciation of the value of the Philippine-Australian relations and of the benefits that may be derived from them.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President: MARIANO R. LOGARTA Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library