MALACAÑANG RESIDENCE OF THE PHILIPPINES OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 757

DESIGNATING THE PERIOD FROM JULY 1 TO AUGUST 15, 1961, FOR THE NATIONAL FUND CAMPAIGN OF THE BOY SCOUTS OF THE PHILIPPINES.

WHEREAS, the Boy Scouts of the Philippines has more than amply demonstrated that it merits the continued moral encouragement and material support of our people and that there is a great need for this organization to make the Scouting Program available to boys all over the country;

WHEREAS, this organization is in need of funds to carry out its operations effectively, to intensify its nation-wide training and recruiting program so that the great number of boys of Scout age seeking admission into the organization may be served, to plan and promote other programs of activity for the greater benefit of its members and to meet its obligations as member of the Boy Scouts International Bureau; and

WHEREAS, the annual campaign, aside from offering us an opportunity to give tangible expression of our appreciation for the good work being done by the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, affords a means by which we can meet a civic obligation by helping this organization train and mould every boy in the land to be a patriotic, God-fearing, upright, clean and responsible citizen;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CARLOS P. GARCIA, President of the Philippines, do hereby designate the period from July 1 to August 15, 1961 for the Boy Scouts of the Philippines to conduct its 1961 national fund campaign, for the purpose of raising funds for the attainment of its avowed aims and purposes. I call upon all government officials and employees and all citizens and residents of the Philippines to assist in this campaign and to give it their entire support so that the Boy Scouts of the Philippines may be assured of funds that will enable it to carry its work and administer its program to as many of our boys of Scout age as possible. I authorize all national authorities and teachers to accept, in behalf of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, fund-raising responsibilities and urge them to give active support and leadership in their respective communities.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifteenth.

(SGD.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) NATALIO CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library