MALACAÑANG

RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 678

DESIGNATING THE PERIOD FROM JUNE 13 TO NOVEMBER 19, 1960, FOR THE NEPA NATIONAL PRODUCTS CONTESTS

WHEREAS, the National Economic Protectionism Association (NEPA) has planned to launch varied national products contests for all school children and students of both public and private schools throughout the country; and

WHEREAS, the objectives of the said contests are to .arouse and instill in the minds of the youth of the land the love of things Philippine and the necessity of patronizing the products of local industries; to encourage the school children and students to engage in scientific research and create new products from local raw materials; to encourage them to produce or invent more efficient, satisfactory, and suitable tools, machineries, and equipment so as to facilitate faster, cheaper, and more economical process of production; and to improve the design, workmanship, quality, and finish of existing products and articles so as to make them appear more beautiful, attractive, and appealing.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, do hereby designate the period from June 13 to November 19, 1960, for the Nepa National Products Contest. I enjoin all school children and students enrolled in both public and private schools to participate in the said contests, and all teachers and public officials, individuals, and social, civic, business, and other organizations throughout the country to extend their active support to the NEPA movement. For this purpose I hereby designate the National. Economic Protectionism Association (NEPA) to take charge of the various contests in collaboration with the Bureau of Public Schools and the Bureau of Private Schools, with the NEPA providing all prizes to be given as incentives to the contestants.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of June, in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty, and of the independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library