MALACA ÑANG MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 28

DIRECTING THE FORMULATION OF THE NATIONAL ACTION AGENDA FOR PRODUCTIVITY 2000-2004

WHEREAS , sustainable economic growth could greatly contribute to the Estrada Administration’s vision of reducing the incidence of poverty in our country and improving the quality of life of our people;

WHEREAS , sustaining economic growth requires enhancing total factor productivity and increasing our industries’ competitiveness in a globalized trade and investment order;

WHEREAS , there is need to formulate specific productivity enhancing policies and action plans in our industry, agriculture, services, and public sectors to enhance their competitiveness in the global market;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1 . Preparation of the Medium-Term National Action Agenda for Productivity . A National Action Agenda for Productivity (NAAP) 2000-2004 shall be formulated to flesh out more specific policies, programs, and strategies to enhance productivity in line with the directions set out in the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan (MTPDP), 1999-2004.

The NAAP 2000-2004 which shall focus on the vision of sustaining economic growth with social equity, shall contain the guiding principles for productivity improvement, and the productivity action agenda for the agriculture, industry, services and public sectors.

Regional Action Agenda for Productivity 2000-2004 shall also be formulated by the Regional Productivity Committees, in coordination with the concerned local government units.

Section 2 . Lead Coordinator . The Philippine Council for Productivity (PCP), created pursuant to EO 395, s. 1997, shall take the lead in the preparation of NAAP 2000-2004. As the Lead Coordinator, the PCP is authorized to create appropriate committees, as may be necessary, to ensure the efficient discharge of its functions.

Section 3 . Consultations with Concerned Agencies and Sectors . The NAAP 2000-2004 shall be formulated in close collaboration and consultation with other agencies of the national government, the LGUs, private sector, non-government organizations and other social partners. All departments, agencies, government-owned and/or controlled corporations shall participate in the formulation of the NAAP through the technical working groups, or through the consultation process.

Section 4 . Planning Guidelines . The PCP shall formulate the guidelines that shall be used in the formulation of the NAAP. These guidelines shall be disseminated to all agencies and private institutions involved in the planning process.

Section 5 . Funding . The PCP, in coordination with the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), shall determine the funds needed for the formulation of the NAAP. Thereafter, the DBM shall provide the needed funds for the purpose. The use of these funds shall be subject to the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

Section 6 . Effectivity . This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila this 08 th day of April in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) RAMON B. CARDENAS Seinior Deputy Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia