MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 7

DIRECTING THE FORMULATION OF THE MEDIUM-TERM PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN, 1999-2004

WHEREAS , Article XII, Section 9 of the 1987 Constitution mandates the economic and development planning agency of the government to implement continuing integrated and coordinated programs and policies for national development after consultations with the appropriate public agencies, various private sectors, and local government units;

WHEREAS , the vision of the Estrada Administration calls for poverty reduction through sustained growth and effective targetted support programs for the poor and vulnerable sectors of society;

WHEREAS , there is a need to translate the vision of the Estrada Administration into specific policies, programs, and targets, as well as define the enabling legislation that will support such undertaking;

WHEREAS , in line with the objective of government to rationalize government spending and ensure effective governance, the development plan to be formulated shall be the basis of the three-year expenditure framework which specifies the resource allocation of the national government, as well as the sectoral plans of the various agencies;

WHEREAS , there is a need to ensure that the development plan to be formulated reflect the aspirations of all sectors of the Philippine society, including the marginalized sectors and communities, the private sector, civil society, and the government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order that:

SECTION 1 . Lead Coordinator . The National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) shall coordinate the preparation of the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan, 1999-2004 which shall focus on attaining the vision of a more prosperous, equitable, and peaceful society through sustained growth, efficient and targetted programs to support the poor and vulnerable sectors of society, and effective governance particularly the pursuit of peace and order. As the Lead Coordinator, NEDA is hereby authorized to create the appropriate committees, as may be necessary, to ensure the efficient discharge of its functions.

SECTION 2 . Components of the Plan . The Plan shall contain at least the following basic elements:

a. Development goals and objectives; b. Strategy and policy framework to attain the goals and objectives; and c. Priority sectoral activities including programs and projects, measurable targets, and the legislative agenda supportive of the development objectives.

SECTION 3 . Consultations with Concerned Agencies and Sectors . The Plan shall be formulated in close collaboration and consultation with other agencies of the executive branch, the legislative branch, the local government units, and the private/non-government sectors. All departments, agencies and government-owned-and/or-controlled corporations shall participate in the formulation of the Plan through the planning committees that will be organized, or through the consultation process. For this purpose, they shall draw inputs from their regional offices, which in turn shall consider regional development goals and strategies, as well as the physical framework for the regions and local needs.

SECTION 4 . Planning Guidelines . The process to be followed in the formulation of the Plan shall be in accordance with the planning guidelines to be prepared by the NEDA Secretariat.

SECTION 5 . Funding . The Department of Budget and Management shall provide the funds necessary for the attainment of the objectives of this Circular, subject to the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

SECTION 6 . Effectivity . This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila this 11th day of August in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia