MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 14

DIRECTING PROVINCIAL GOVERNORS AND CITY MAYORS TO DESIGN AND IMPLEMENT THE PROYEKTONG PABAHAY SA PULIS IN EVERY PROVINCE AND CITY

WHEREAS, Section 9, Article II of the Constitution states that “The State shall promote a just and dynamic social order that will ensure the prosperity and independence of the nation and free the people from poverty through policies that provide adequate social services, promote full employment, raise standard of living, and an improved quality of life;

WHEREAS, consistent with this State policy there is a need to accelerate the upliftment and life conditions of the members of the Philippine National Police that is primarily charged with the responsibility to protect the rights, security and property of individuals and communities, as well as, ensure peace and order to sustain an environment conducive for progress and development;

WHEREAS, a continuing and basic concern of the members of the Philippine National Police is the alleviation and improvement of their economic standing and quality of life of by providing them decent and affordable housing units.

WHEREAS, in recognition of housing as catalyst of economic growth and development, the State, as provided for under the Urban Development and Housing Act of 1992 (UDHA), established the continuing program of urban land reform and housing to make available, at affordable cost, decent housing and basic services to the underprivileged and homeless citizens including low-income groups;

WHEREAS, Section 39, Article X of the Urban Development and Housing Act of 1992 mandated (charged) the local government units with the implementation of this Act in their respective localities, in coordination with the HUDCC and other government agencies, the Presidential Commission for the Urban Poor, the private sector and other non-government organizations;

WHEREAS, Sections 17b3(viii), 17b4 and 20 of the Local Government Code of 1991 specifically defined the functions and powers devolved to the provinces and cities in relation to low-cost housing and land use planning;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. All Provincial and City Governments shall develop and implement a Projektong Pabahay sa mga Pulis for local police operating in their jurisdiction, in support of the national program of providing decent and affordable housing units to members of the Philippine National Police, and accordingly, identify available lands of the government to be used for the local PNP housing program.

Section 2. Provincial governors and city mayors shall be authorized to define the implementing guidelines for awarding housing units to the members of the police force in their respective province or city, in close coordination with the National Police Commission (NAPOLCOM), and subject to guidelines and procedures as prescribed by the DILG.

Section 3. The Department of Environment and Natural Resources and all the concerned government housing agencies including the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council shall assist the Provincial and City Governments in the formulation and implementation of the Projektong Pabahay sa mga Pulis. All other government agencies shall henceforth extend the necessary technical assistance and service delivery components to ensure a well developed and livable communities for the target beneficiaries of the program.

Section 4. This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30 th day of September in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia