PROCLAMATION NO. 64

RESERVING FOR LAND SETTLEMENT PURPOSES UNDER THE ADMINISTRATION AND DISPOSITION OF THE NATIONAL RESETTLEMENT AND REHABILITATION ADMINISTRATION (NARRA) CERTAIN PARCELS OF THE PUBLIC DOMAIN SITUATED IN THE MUNICIPALITIES OF LILOY AND SINDANGAN, PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL NORTE, ISLAND OF MINDANAO, PHILIPPINES

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources and pursuant to the provisions of Section 83 of Commonwealth Act No. 141, as amended, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, do hereby reserve for resettlement and development purposes, under the administration and control of the National Resettlement and Rehabilitation Administration (NARRA), subject to private rights, if any there be, and to future classification and final survey, and to the conditions that the areas covered by public land applications or already patented be excluded and that the timber and other forest products therein, as well as the use and occupancy of the area indicated as timber land or forest reserve, shall remain under the administration and control of the Bureau of Forestry in accordance with the Forest Law and Regulations, a parcel of the public domain, situated in the Municipalities of Liloy and Sindangan, Province of Zamboanga del Norte Island of Mindanao and more particularly described as follows:

Beginning at a point marked “1” on attached sketch plan, which is identical to corner “1” of Block III, of Project 25, classified as Alienable and Disposable, described in LC Map No. 1679, which is also identical to corner “9” of Block II of Project 14-B, classified as Alienable and Disposable, described in LC Map No. 1013, along the Municipal Boundaries of Liloy and Labason;

thence in a general southeasterly direction, following the northern boundary of Block III of Project 25, approximately 12,760 meters to point “2”, which is identical to corner “23” of Block III of Project 25 described in LC Map No. 1670 of the Bureau of Forestry;

thence in a general northeasterly direction, following the southern boundary of Block A, Project 25, classified as Timber Land, approximately 5,500 meters to point “3”, which is identical to corner “60” of Block I of Project 25, classified as Alienable and Disposable, described in LC Map No. 1679 of the Bureau of Forestry;

thence in a general northeasterly direction, following the western boundary of Block I, Project 25, approximately 15,800 meters to point “4”, which is identical to corner “6” of Block I, Project 25, classified as Alienable and Disposable, described in LC Map No. 1679 of the Bureau of Forestry, which is also identical to corner “214” of Project No. 16, classified as Alienable and Disposable, described in LC Map No. 549 of the Bureau of Forestry;

thence in a general southeasterly direction following the southern boundary of Project No. 16, classified as Alienable and Disposable, approximately 13,200 meters to point “5”, which is identical to corner “185” of Project No. 16, described in LC Map No. 549 of the Bureau of Forestry;

thence in a general easterly-northerly direction, following the southern boundaries of Project No. 25-A, classified at timberland and Block B of Project No. 16-D, classified as timberland, approximately 4,200 meters to point “6”, which is identical to corner “33” of Block I, Project No. 16-D, classified as Alienable and Disposable, described in LC Map No. 1738 of the Bureau of Forestry;

thence in a general northwesterly direction, following the western boundary of Block II, Project No. 16-D, approximately 4,200 meters to point “7”, which is identical to corner “1” of Block II, Project 16-D, classified as Alienable and Disposable by the Bureau of Forestry, which is also identical to corner “176” of Project No. 16, described in LC Map No. 549;

thence following the northern and eastern boundary of Block II, Project No. 16-D, approximately 12,800 meters to point “8”, which is identical to corner “27” of Block II, Project No. 16-D, classified as Alienable and Disposable, described in LC Map No. 1738 of the Bureau of Forestry;

thence approximately S. 11 deg. W., 16,300 meters to point “9”, which is the intersection of the Municipal boundaries of Liloy and Sindangan with the Municipal boundaries at Sindangan and Kabasalan in the Province of Zamboanga del Norte;

thence in a general westerly direction, following the Municipal boundaries of Liloy and Kabasalan, approximately 27,000 meters to point “10”, which is the intersection of the Municipal boundaries of Liloy and Kabasalan with the Municipal boundaries of Liloy and Kabason;

thence in a general northerly direction, following the Municipal boundaries of Liloy and Labason, approximately 12,000 meters to the point of beginning;

containing an approximate area of THIRTY-FIVE THOUSAND (35,000) hectares.

Bounded on the North by Project No. 16, classified as Alienable and Disposable; on the East by Public Forest; on the South by the Municipality of Kabasalan; and on the West by the Municipality of Labason.

All points referred to are indicated on the plan and are marked on the ground as described in LC Map Nos. 549, 1013, 1679 & 1738 of the Bureau of Forestry.

NOTE: All data are approximate and subject to change to conform with the final survey as verified by the Director of Lands.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-two.

Source : CDAsia