Address of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines On the signing of the Solid Waste Management Law

[ Delivered at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang, January 26, 2001 ]

THE SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ACT: ADDRESSING THE GARBAGE CRISIS

When I spoke to our people after my oath taking at the EDSA Shrine, I said that the world of the 21st century that our youth will inherit is truly a new economy, where relentless forces such as capital market flows and advances in information and communications technology create both peril and opportunity. I said that to address the perils, we must give a social bias to our economic development. And these are embodied in safety nets for sectors affected by globalization and safeguards for our environment. That was in my oath-taking speech.

And it is with distinct pleasure today, that the first piece of legislation that I will be signing as President is one of those safeguards for our environment. Indeed, the new law that we are signing today symbolizes the reforms we would like to implement. These reforms must produce as much as possible immediate and concrete benefits in the daily lives of our people, because there are so many expectations and so little time. Republic Act 9003, otherwise known as the Solid Waste Management Act, deals with the increasing garbage that results from our rapid urbanization and economic activities.

I am glad to sign this landmark legislation that seeks to address the alarming problems we have over our solid wastes. By instituting mechanisms of waste minimization, resource recovery, appropriate collection and transport services, and environmentally-sound treatment and disposal, the new law seeks to address the major causes of the current garbage crisis in Metro Manila, and to arrest similar problems throughout the country.

Indeed, the past years have been replete with destructive effects of poor refuse management in a highly-urbanized center. Uncollected garbage thrown into esteros, rivers and other waterways, or even dumped in streets, or in open areas, which become a constant nuisance.

The tragedy at Payatas last year taught us this painful lesson. Even more tragic is the fact that the persons most vulnerable to environmental disasters are the poor who are exposed to pollution, the unhealthy become ill more easily and more seriously. Their inability to access medical care and medicines multiplies their problems. When viewed in this light, environmental abuse becomes an issue of justice and equity.

Environmentalism promotes just and equitable access to resources. It safeguards the Constitutional right of our citizens to a healthy ecology and to live in harmony with nature.

The Solid Waste Management Act or R.A. 9003 highlights features, which lend better hope on how we should address our problems on solid waste. These are some of the features:

First, it stresses the importance of environmentally sound techniques of waste minimization, such as but not limited to resource conservation, segregation at source, recycling, resource recovery, reuse and composting;

Second, it provides for the mandatory segregation of waste at the household level, with collection vehicles to have the appropriate compartments of sorted wastes or separate collection schedules for specific types of wastes;

Third, it prohibits the open dumping of solid wastes and the establishment of sanitary landfills for final disposal;

Fourth, it mandates the establishment of recycling centers at every barangay nationwide;

Fifth, it calls for the integration of solid waste management concerns in the school curriculum, starting at the elementary, high school and up to the tertiary level;

Sixth, it directs an inventory of existing markets for recycled materials and compost;

And, seventh, it requires the preparation of ten-year solid waste management plans by all local government units.

This law also empowers local government units to effectively pursue their respective solid waste management systems in their area of jurisdiction, by providing them the needed policy and technical support. This includes the establishment of the Solid Waste Management Fund – I hope not another unfunded law, and the National Ecology Center, to provide fiscal incentives and funding assistance. I am thinking of our 190 billion-peso budget deficit, as well as training, consulting information training and networking services on solid waste management.

The implementation of this law is expected to significantly reduce the volume of waste residual for final disposal and thus, alleviate the pressures on the capacity of our sanitary landfill. It shall address major negative aspects of solid wastes, which will discourage a community’s hosting of a landfill.

I am told that no other country in the world has adapted this integrated ecological approach – the solid waste management. Thus, I congratulate our Lady and Gentlemen in the head table, the authors and sponsors, and the other members of the legislature, as well as the national and local sectoral agencies, the non-government organizations (NGOs) and the concerned individuals who committed themselves to ecological waste management for pushing for the passage of the Solid Waste Management Act.

Through the National Solid Waste Management Commission, which this law creates, to be chaired by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources and with members from various government agencies, NGOs, the private sector and the media, I urge all of you to hasten the laws’ urgent implementation.

Once again, I extend our gratitude to all members of Congress for their dedication and hard work. Indeed, our signing today augurs well I hope, for good relations between the executive and the legislative branches of government. I feel this relationship is very important for the Administration to cultivate, for the Legislature is an important stakeholder in our people’s victory along with other strategic sectors like civil society, the basic sectors and the business community.

My past good relations with Congress have allowed me to observe the hard work and dedication of many individual congressmen and senators. Some of them are high profile, many are low profile especially, congressmen from the farther parts of the Philippines. But nonetheless, I have seen their work to be substantive. This is why I have named several of them to the Cabinet for instance, Senator Raul Roco who will be the Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports, is well known to all of us and certainly, is not of the mold that is derisively called “trapo”. Congressman Simeon Datumanong and Pantaleon Alvarez of Mindanao – who I see here today – who will be Secretaries respectively of Public Works, and Transportation and Communication, apparently have raised some eyebrows among leaders of the business community. But I believe that is because they are new faces, relatively unknown in the centers of financial power. But isn’t that what we are also all about? We need new faces, and we need the face of Mindanao in the Cabinet. This has been the clamor of that long-neglected island, and they don’t want token positions in the Cabinet. They want positions that really count – and for Mindanao, the positions that really count are the infrastructure agencies.

Let me say then, that even if there are questions as there are questions raised about them in Makati, largely because they are relatively unknown entities, there is grand euphoria in Mindanao because finally, Mindanao is in the mainstream of the Cabinet, in fact, in the very heart of the Cabinet.

I have not yet named my Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources and that is because for agencies like this, there are many sectors that need to be consulted, more departments like NEDA – you know, which is not so crucially and immediately important to the basic sectors. And so, I am making haste slowly because, when finally the Secretary of Environment is appointed, I want the approval to be almost universal.

In fact, up to yesterday, the approval of my other Cabinet members was almost universal. It was only yesterday when I started getting the criticisms about so many congressmen in the Cabinet, and that’s why I felt it was because of Sim Datumanong and Bebot Alvarez. And that is why I am making a special appeal: please give Mindanao a chance.

And so, I am very happy that even as I raid Congress and bring out of Congress these two gentlemen and several others that I have appointed in the past, let me say that I am very grateful to Congress for the laws such as this that they have enacted, and I look forward to other bill-signing ceremonies that will realize our dream for a better life for the Filipino people.

Let us work together to improve the quality of life not only of ourselves in this generation, but of our future generations. And only if we stay united in instituting the needed reforms in our society will we succeed in giving our people what they have long deserve.

Thank you.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library