Arrival Address of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines

[Delivered on October 22, 2001]

Vice President Guingona and the other cabinet members who stayed up so late just to wait for me; Secretary Romulo welcome back, the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces and the major commanders, and the Chief of the PNP, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, mga minamahal kong kababayan:

Just before I took off from Shanghai a few hours ago, I had a meeting with our gracious host President Jiang Zemin. I was not scheduled to meet with him bilaterally because I am making a state visit next week. But he asked for a meeting and he expressed his warm felicitations to our country and people. Our meeting was congenial and constructive and he thanked me that the hostage crisis involving the chinese national Zhonyi has finally ended. I assured him that in the future we will try our best to ensure the safety of Chinese nationals working on important projects in the Philippines.

My trip to Shanghai to attend the APEC summit is a forerunner of my state visit to China which will start next week. In the next four weeks in fact, I will travel from one end of the pacific rim to the other. From China, I shall return home for all saints day, then pack up for Brunei for the ASEAN summit. Soon after I will go on another state visit to Indonesia, then to a visit to the United States and Mexico. All these trips are tied together by the common thread of our national interest for I consider it an urgent responsibility to consolidate our foreign relations during this period of conflict, crisis and uncertainty as the global economy continues to take retarded coarse in the face of an escalating war against terrorism. At this moment, the world faces the dual imperative of heightened vigilance on one hand and of economic revitalization on the other. The APEC meeting in Shanghai defined the paths we now have to take in the face of these challenges, greater security in the face of the terrorist threat, promoting sustainable growth, sharing the benefits of globalization in the new economy, and supporting the multilateral trading system. These paths are amplified in two historic documents that came out of the meeting: the APEC Leaders’ declaration, entitled ‘meeting new challenges in the new century’, and the APEC Economic Leaders’ statement on counter terrorism which is considered to be the first political statement made by this world body since its inception. These statements signal the urgency of the moment which has been captured by the APEC summit. In our meetings with 20 leaders, we discussed terrorism in the light of the future of the open market, the macro economic horizon and the human capacity building that has to be collectively mustered, both in defense of the global economy from current instabilities and in propelling it in the course of the new century. In behalf of our people, I carried the message to APEC that while we stand foresquare behind the united nations and the international coalition against terrorism, we must now take active security measures to secure the ramparts of economic cooperation from further degradation. Most of these measures are obvious: those designed to combat money laundering and terrorist funds’ movement, as well as to improve aviation and port security, cyber security, energy security, and customs’ enforcement, among others. The less obvious yet equally vital measures relate to the security of our communities where the majority of our small and medium businesses, family farms and family life operations are based. We will further enable these operations, bring them into the regional and global economy and shore up their capacity to cope with economic shocks and to harness new technologies. The summit was also an occasion for me to make a strong pitch for a regional initiative to bolster the international coalition against terrorism. In this light our government will continue discussions within our immediate neighborhood, with Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand on closer exchanges of information and intelligence. The focus is on tightening security cooperation, an initiative that could move to a higher level during the ASEAN summit next month. I took the opportunity to call for meaningful steps to ensure that the continuing penetration of cultures in the global milieu is rendered impervious to the influences of political and religious extremism. I explained to our APEC neighbors that our country has institutionalized the tools of autonomy, consensus and inter-faith dialogue to serve this end. I told them that our anti-poverty program is also closely focused on the communities vulnerable to fanaticism and irrational violence.

Traversing the multilateral meetings of the summit, I drove home the message that while our economy is prepared for a full and fair engagement with the world, we shall continue to support several key imperative.

First the next round of negotiations of the World Trade Organization or WTO must push through launching a new round of negotiations important to install global business confidence and momentum in the wake of the September 11 attacks. It is also a way to ensure that the WTO maintains its stature and credibility at this crucial time.

Second to ensure the itself does not lose credibility at this crucial time, our top priority is to ensure that the new round is truly a development round. The trade regime as a whole must accord developing countries sufficient flexibility to pursue vital development goals such as poverty alleviation, reinforce by human capacity building and technical assistance from the WTO.

Third our small and medium industries must be empowered by information and communication technology. Our rural entrepreneurs and urban business must be placed on-line. We cannot leave any sector out from agriculture to energy, from health to financial services, we need to integrate e-business and e-commerce technologies to streamline operations, access the global marketplace and increase productivity and efficiency.

Fourth we have to develop an integrated regional market in ASEAN plus-three to create economies of scale because the market demand in the US, Japan and Europe is suffering from steady decline.

In the sidelines of the summit, i had the opportunity to preside over the signing of an agreement, among others between the government and Microsoft corporation towards strengthening our electronic monitoring system in relation to the commitments contained in my first state of the nation address before congress. Microsoft and bill gates visited me at a hotel just to demonstrate this, is coming to the Philippines to provide e-learning, especially certification programs for programmers and bringing xml into our country. We also had the opportunity to discuss matters of mutual interest during our bilateral meeting with president Kin Dae-Jung of Korea, President Richard Lagos of Chile and Prime Minister Jean Chretien. On separate occasions, I met the leaders of ASEAN, addressed the APEC advisory council and the APEC CEO summit and presided over the inauguration of metro bank Shanghai, the First Philippine bank in China. Before I left home, I also met with the Filipino community in shanghai and I am glad to bring home their message of affection and concern for our people. A long road to consolidation lies ahead and I thank our people for their unremitting support for and faith in the presidency, Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Arrival Address. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212636/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8749&Itemid=38