I am honored to arrive from my official working visit to Japan in time to join our brother Bicolanos in commemorating our devotion to Our Lady of Peñafrancia. It cannot be denied that the beloved Mother is the one Bicolanos pray to for everything in their lives, while she continues to lead everyone towards the heart of our Creator. In this time of global terrorism, we are blessed because we have a Mother who watches over us and continues to serve as a guide.

As your President, you can rely on me to do everything in my power to work with leaders in various countries to find a solution to the problems arising from the very unfortunate event last Tuesday.

During my trip to Japan, Prime Minister Koizumi and I jointly condemned the act of terrorism in the United States. We are united in grief and indignation with the United States and Japan, and other mourning nations, because innocent Filipinos, Americans, Japanese and other nationalities perished from the senseless violence.

As strategic allies of the United States, Prime Minister Koizumi and I confirmed our readiness to extend utmost assistance. And very importantly too, as charter members of the united nations and as part of the international coalition against terrorism, we must actively implement united nations’ security council resolution number 1368 na pinasa unanimously noong September 12. Let me refer to specific paragraphs of said resolution.

Paragraph 3 calls on all states to work together urgently to bring to justice the perpetrators, organizers, and sponsors of these terrorist attacks, and stresses that those responsible for aiding, supporting or harboring the perpetrators, organizers and sponsors of this act, will be held accountable. Paragraph 4 calls also on the international community to redouble their efforts to prevent and suppress terrorist acts.

We must take any possible executive actions against money laundering immediately related to this. Money laundering has moved into a new category. Last week it was an economic and commercial issue. From now on, it is an international political issue. It has moved from being a question of financial corruption, and has become a question of abetting terrorists. Let us not make the world believe that the Philippines is a haven for terrorists’ money, and that the terrorists themselves are not far behind.

This perception will affect not only new investments, but also existing investments. We must get a credible money laundering bill passed by September 30th. Money is now linked in the investment community’s mind to terrorism.

Before the Tuesday attacks, OECD sanctions would have hurt the Philippines with foreign investors for commercial reasons. Now it has moved far beyond that. We must not let financial sanctions group the Philippines with countries who are not fighting terrorism.

Prime Minister Koizumi and I noted the stabilizing presence of the United States in the Asia Pacific region. We confirmed that our respective alliances with the U.S. have contributed to this effort. I told the prime minister that a strong U.S.-Japan security cooperation would contribute to the continued peace and stability in the region.

As between the Philippines and Japan, the Prime Minister and I confirmed our two countries’ resolve to continue the close relations between us, and to elevate our cooperation into a higher level of partnership. We reaffirmed the need to immediately schedule the first politico security talks between our two countries as yet another forum to enhance dialogue between us. This politico security relationship elevates our cooperation beyond our current level of partnership, which even, as of now , is excellent; with Japan being our biggest source of Official Development Assistance, or ODA, our second largest investor, and host to a large number of Filipino workers and seamen. As our biggest source of ODA, the Japanese officials were gratified that my administration has maximized our capacity to utilize Japanese ODA. They congratulated us for bringing up the rate of disbursement on yen loan projects to 94 percent of target. This is the highest ratio in the history of ODA from Japan, and it is probably the highest in the region today.

We are encouraged by the response of Japan to our efforts and initiatives. Because even if Japan is now reducing its worldwide ODA by 10 percent in yen terms and 20 percent in dollar terms as a result of its economic difficulties, it seems that the level of its assistance to the Philippines will not be adversely affected by that global cut.

Among the projects we endorsed to JICA is a proposed resettlement project to Mt. Mayon evacuees. Among the candidate projects under the Obuchi Fund is the proposed engineering equipment project for local governments, which is strongly being pushed by the chairman of the league of governors, Camarines Sur governor Luis Villafuerte.

Japan is a major contributor to the world, which is considering the proposed Bicol river basin development project. And ongoing is the third elementary education project co-financed by the World Bank and the Japanese bank for international cooperation which involve the construction of school buildings in Bicol. Inspite of the world economic slow down, major investments from Japan to the Philippines are forthcoming.

Sankyu Seiki will increase its investments in the Philippines by (US)200 million within three years. Sumitomo leads a consortium that will set up a nickel processing plant costing about (US)150 million with an expected foreign exchange revenue of (US)54 million every year.

Camabarra will expand its shipbuilding capability by (US)45 million. Honda will open a transmission plant in may next year to export 40,000 units per year to other ASEAN countries.

And as a female leader of our country, I am gratified that Prime Minister Koizumi acknowledged the issue of comfort women. He said that the Japanese government recognizes that the issue has affected the honor and dignity of former comfort women. He said that the Japanese government has provided atonement money and letters of apology from the prime minister. And I would read part of that letter as follows. And I quote: ” on the occasion that the ASEAN women’s fund, in cooperation with the government and people of Japan, offers atonement from the Japanese people to the former wartime comfort women, I wish to express my feelings as well. The issue of comfort women with an involvement of the Japanese military authorities at that time was a great affront to the honor and dignity of large numbers of women. As prime minister of Japan, i just extend anew my most sincere apology and remorse to all the women who underwent immeasurable and painful experiences and suffered incurable physical and psychological wounds as comfort women. We must not evade the weight of the past or should we evade our responsibilities for the future. I believe that our country, painfully aware of its moral responsibility with feelings of apology and remorse, should face up squarely to its past history and accurately convey it to future generations.”

Prime Minister Koizumi said, that the government will continue to put concern on this issue. And now that the ASEAN women’s fund project will be finished at the end of the year, I suggested to him that our 2 countries should think of innovative ways to extend support to the surviving comfort women.

I thank over 240,000 compatriots in Japan for their help in keeping our economy afloat and stable. Twenty-five percent of our sailors are aboard Japanese ships. And twenty-five percent of our remittances also come from our sailors. Our overseas Filipinos in Japan generally contributed P650,000 for our poverty alleviation program.

My visit to Japan was also a sentimental journey because it gave me a chance to have a reunion with their majesties, the emperor and empress of Japan. Their majesties were guest of my father, President Diosdado Macapagal when they were still crown prince and princess in 1962. Now as President, I had a chance to renew our friendship of 40 years, a friendship not only between families, but a friendship between our peoples.

It is fitting that in this new century, my visit to Japan paved the way for an enhanced strategic partnership between our two countries and peoples appropriate to the Asia-Pacific of the 21st century.

I thank you for all your support and prayers.

I have declared tomorrow as a national day of prayer and solidarity against terrorism in deep sympathy with the American people and all humanity. Tomorrow, let us take up again the torch of freedom as we assert our determination to conquer the forces of terrorism. Believing that the path to peace is through prayers, I call on all our countrymen to go to their churches, mosques and other places of worship tomorrow, Sunday, September 16, to pray to the almighty for the victims and help the world end this scourge of terrorism.

Nuestra Señora de Penafrancia, our lady of sorrows , pray for us, who have recourse to thee. Amen. Dios mabalos, saindo gabos.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Arrival Speech from Japan. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212824/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8713&Itemid=38