Departure speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines For her participation at the High Level Segment of the 15th Conference of Parties (COP-15) to the U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change in Copenhagen, Denmark

Our country answers the challenge of the global economic storm, but a more ferocious storm faces us: the devastation of Mother Nature accelerated by the mistreatment of the fragile environment by human beings all over the world.

The long-term security and prosperity of our nation and, indeed, the world, relies on coming to grips with the man made devastation that is warming our planet. Everyday we delay is a day the glaciers melt, the waters rise, food supplies are threatened and the poor suffer. That is why the Global Warming Summit in Copenhagen is vital for our nation, for the future of our children and for the fate of the world. Let us pray that progress will be made at the Summit.

Several months ago, hopes for Copenhagen were fading. But today, developed and developing nations alike seem closer to assuming their burden and doing something positive about solving one of the great issues of our time.

In recent weeks, we have been meeting with our Global Warming Task Force in preparation for the talks in Copenhagen. We want to make inroads in Denmark based on science that shows that our nation is being battered by global warming even if we ourselves have a very good carbon footprint. In fact, with my meeting with the multilaterals the other day, the World Bank country representative pointed out that, in fact, we are where we want the rest of the world to be. But our carbon footprint is already there. We are doing our part for the environment. And yet, while we are not a climate maker — because we are not a source of climate change — we are a climate taker.

The typhoons are becoming more horrific; the rains more violent; the seas more savage. Global warming is affecting our agriculture, our fishing stocks, our forests and our cities. We need to work with all of humanity to share the burden, make difficult decisions, and change direction to save Mother Nature and thus, save the world.

We will go to Copenhagen with proof of how global climate change negatively affects the Philippines. As we have said many times, the greatest human tragedy that will arise from climate change will be the migration that will be forced by sinking coastlines and in some cases, such as Tuvalu and the Maldives, sinking countries. As more and more sites are rendered inhospitable to human life and economic activity, it is estimated that as many as one billion people may be affected globally. Half of them will come from Asia. As families scatter to higher ground in different parts of the world, climate change will spawn global change. This is something that needs to be addressed collectively by the countries of the world. As a country with over seven thousand islands, this is a major concern for the Philippines. We need to clarify this to the world as well.

It is time for the countries of the world to own our responsibilities as I said the Philippines is already owning ours that is why our carbon footprint is good. Our job is to promote and defend the interests of the Philippines. Solving this problem will take many years, but we want to ensure that we start the process now, so that those who follow can continue to help our country now and in the coming years.

This is all the more important because in times of economic hardship, the pressures are greatest to abandon the obligation to the environment or to loosen the rules and put economic objectives above environmental interests. This is precisely why at this point in time we must call on the world community to be even more vigilant in advancing efforts to tackle the global challenge of climate change.

For the Philippines, we will not go to Copenhagen looking for a handout. We will go to join hands with other nations to band together to solve this problem imposed by man. We always say that for a fair result, it is essential for developed countries to lead in reducing emissions, in accordance with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. A financial mechanism must also be established to meet the costs of adaptation for developing countries and for an effective development and transfer of technology.

But while wealthier countries have greater responsibility and burden, that is not a reason for developing countries to avoid their responsibility. We all need to do our part and that is our goal for our summit in Copenhagen.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s departure speech for her participation at the high level segment of the 15th Conference of Parties (COP-15) to the U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change in Copenhagen, Denmark. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133653/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27142&Itemid=38