Departure Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines For Brunei Darussalam and Singapore

[Delivered at NAIA, August 22, 2001]

Senate president Franklin Drilon, speaker de Venecia, the ASEAN ambassadors, members of the cabinet, the chief of staff of the armed forces and the commanding generals, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, my countrymen.

Today, I am once again embarking on a journey to strengthen and reinvigorate existing fraternal ties with our ASEAN neighbors. This time with Negara Brunei Darussalam, and immediately thereafter, Singapore – my second and third state visits as President of the Philippines.

A feature of foreign relations is the universal practice of exchanging state and official visits. Generally, state visits are those made by heads of state and government. While official visits are those made by other officials. If circumstances do not warrant a formal state visit, visiting heads of state or government are accord of the courtesies given in official visits.

State visits are not primarily working trips, but are designed primarily to promote goodwill. In general, state visits are vehicles for improved or closer relations and better understanding between the nations concerned.

In making state visits, it is expected that the head of state assure the domestic conditions justify her travel abroad. Thus, I did not schedule any state visit during my first six months as president because we were still in the period of consolidation after EDSA II.

When I made my first state visit in this month to Malaysia, I had to satisfy myself that domestic situation justified our departure for abroad. Indication of a satisfactory local situation was the fact that we had started peace talks with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and the National Democratic Front; our may elections were peaceful and its results validated the unity of the mainstream; Congress gave bilateral support to the power sector reform or law; and our program of government had been launched in my State of the Nation Address.

I intend to keep my state visits to a minimum, because I believe that my homework will not permit me to leave the country often. However, it is essential that I make state or official visits to, at least, the original ASEAN countries.

In Brunei, where I am visiting upon the invitation of his majesty the sultan, I will place particular emphasis on the intensification of activities in southern Philippines which forms part of the BIMP-EAGA.

The sultan of Brunei has been a leader in this sub-regional grouping. I will call for the reinvigoration of the BIMP-EAGA through collaborative projects which I hope to flesh out in the state visit.

I will also have meetings with regard to possible investments of Brunei in the Philippine petrochemical industry. I will discuss issues of defense in order to ensure a conducive security environment as is expected of the ASEAN community of nations.

After my state visit to Negara Brunei Darussalam, I will immediately proceed to Singapore, upon the invitation of his Excellency President S. R. Nathan.

The last time I visited Singapore as vice president, the prime minister go was enthusiastic about cooperation between our two countries with regard to information and communication technology. This will be the theme of my state visit to Singapore.

During the visit, we will also enter into a tourism twinning arrangement with Singapore, wherein Singapore will help us promote tourism to the Philippines, not only among Singaporeans but also among 3rd country tourists, as a package with visits to Singapore. To facilitate the expected increase in tourism traffic, the Philippines has decided to permit a larger sitting capacity for Singapore-manila flights.

I look forward to meeting with the members of the Filipino community both in Brunei and in Singapore. We have a strong presence of about 20,000 Filipinos in Brunei, many of whom are employed in skilled and semi-skilled industries.

In Singapore, with more than 100,000 overseas Filipino worker-investors, I will inaugurate a 28-room bayanihan center where they can upgrade their skills, to remain competitive and to prepare them for eventual reintegration into the Philippine work force upon their return.

I will bring our overseas countrymen encouragement from back home. As well as housing benefits to include them in the 100,000 economic low cost housing that they want to build every year.

I ask for your prayers and blessings and look forward to returning with meaningful results.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Departure Speech for Brunei Darussalam and Singapore. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409213010/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8701&Itemid=38