Departure Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines For Malaysia

[Delivered at the Villamor Air Base, August 7, 2001]

The most important realities that characterize our country’s international and regional environment to which we have to respond in order to achieve our goal. First, more and more Philippine foreign policy decisions have to be made in the context of ASEAN. Second, the international Islamic community will continue to be important for the Philippines. Third, the country’s economic growth will continue to involve direct foreign investments. Fourth, a country, like the Philippines, can benefit most quickly from international tourism. And fifth, overseas Filipinos will continue to create a critical role in the country’s economic and social stability. Let me elaborate on each of these …

On ASEAN: the commitment to ASEAN remains a cornerstone of Philippine foreign policy. The Philippines will remain firm in implementing its commitment in ASEAN as a strategy to achieve global competitiveness towards attaining sustainable growth and development. As charter members of ASEAN, the Philippines and Malaysia share a common task and look forward to a common future.

In our state visit, we will discuss with our Malaysian friends how we can put back on track the east ASEAN growth area and thus, make Mindanao – the most vulnerable of our regions – our gateway to ASEAN.

On the Islamic community: the Islamic community of nations is extremely important in the search for lasting peace and broad-based development in southern Philippines. The Philippines and Malaysia are specially, organically intertwined. We are not only the closest of neighbors, we are ethnic cognate with deep … language culture and religion. Recognizing Malaysia’s role both as an ASEAN neighbor and as an Islamic brother, my state visit is a journey for security and stability. While in Kuala Lumpur, I shall express appreciation to Prime Minister Mahathir Mohammad for Malaysia’s assistance in fostering political stability in Mindanao.

My delegation will join hands, as well, with our Malaysian counterparts to collectively address the insidious threat of terrorism and piracy that lay siege to our common…

On investment: in an increasingly integrated global economy, foreign capital and technology and market are important for the development of the Philippines. While in Kuala Lumpur, I shall solicit Malaysia’s cooperation in my administration’s efforts to stimulate economic growth in the Philippines, especially southern Philippines. With industrialists and businessmen, my program for foreign investors is what we shall strive to communicate.

On tourism: the tourism industry which is a labor intensive, broad-based, geographically diffused sector that quick returns, will be made the top of our development priorities. In order to help achieve this, I shall propose intensification of cooperation in tourism, particularly in … arrangement whereby Malaysia will encourage the tourists who go there to come to the Philippines as well. And the Philippines will encourage tourists who come here to go to Malaysia as well.

On overseas Filipinos: the Philippine economy will, for the perceived future, continue to be heavily dependent on overseas worker remittances. On the basis of this, and of the nation’s humanitarian responsibility to its people – wherever they are – our government will work doubly hard to strengthen overseas workers’ protection. We will strengthen bilateral relationships with countries hosting large numbers of Filipinos – including Malaysia. With the 600,000 strong Filipino community in Malaysia, I shall convey the gratitude of our people for their personal sacrifices and support of the economy of our nation.

I leave for Kuala Lumpur filled with hope that this visit will reinvigorate the precious ties of friendship between our two peoples and kay our bilateral relations on even firmer ground. It is a journey for peace and development, as my administration seeks to strengthen and broaden mutually supportive arrangements with Kuala Lumpur to advance reconciliation and secure abiding prosperity in southern Philippines.

In pursuit of these objectives, I shall endeavor to deepen the friendship and spirit of cooperation that I have been privileged to share with Prime Minister Mahathir since my days as vice president of our country.

While in Kuala Lumpur, I shall extend the fraternal greetings of our people to his Majesty, the young one agong.

Have already laid the groundwork within the last six months, no less than ten high-level emissaries … to Malaysia – Vice President Teofisto Guingona, former President Fidel Ramos, Finance Secretary Jose Camacho, Tourism Secretary Richard Gordon, Labor Secretary Patricia Sto. Tomas, Senior Presidential Adviser Alberto Romulo, Special Presidential Envoy Paul Dominguez, Presidential Adviser Eduardo Ermita, Presidential Adviser Norberto Gonzales and Presidential Adviser Farank Hussein.

With the 21st century mode of teleconferencing, I have also personally addressed the Malaysian people on two occasions – the opening ceremony of the Kuala Lumpur Central Station and the world’s Economic Development Congress.

All these undertakings had one common purpose – to convey to the government and the people of Malaysia our ardent appreciation for the work that pervades our relations.

Indeed, Malaysia plays a vital role in our development as a nation. Intimately linked as friendly neighbors, cultural brothers and regional allies, it is to our mutual interest to continually broaden and deepen our common connections.

Towards this end, I have adapted as the theme for my visit the vision of making the Philippines and Malaysia partners for peace and prosperity.

I seek the assistance of all involved to make this vision a reality in our time.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Departure Speech for Malaysia. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409213347/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8709&Itemid=38