Keynote Address of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the 11th Asian Investment Conference “Modernization, Investing in the Future”

[Delivered at the Main Ballroom of Conrad International Hotel, Hong Kong, March 31, 2008]

2007 was the best year for the Philippine economy in over 30 years. Economic growth was 7.3 percent; a million new jobs were created; and foreign investments have been steady and strong. We have been cited by London as the “offshore destination of the year” and by the International Data Corporation as the top global outsourcing destination after India.

Our billion-dollar investment club includes Texas Instruments with its new 1.6 billion-dollar wafer fabrication facility under construction and two shipyards of Hanjin, one up and one coming up costing 3.7 billion-dollar total which makes us the fourth biggest shipbuilder in the world. In addition, Marubeni, and AES have each invested billions of dollars in our power sector. They have joined the ranks of Shell and Proctor and Gamble, to name but a few of our major investors.

We will continue to be increasingly strong in manufacturing, high technology, services across the board from outsourcing to aircraft maintenance, as well as tourism and real estate. We see many, many opportunities for investors; the Philippines one of the best values in Asia. We hope you all find out why.

Just this month, the International Monetary Fund lauded our economic growth, the substantial reduction in our budget deficit, low inflation and the improvement in investor confidence.

The IMF executive directors highlighted, in particular, our fine central bank for smoothening foreign exchange fluctuations as the peso touched an eight-year high against the U.S. dollar in recent months. During this same time, the country’s foreign exchange reserves reached a record high.

2008 holds real promise for a different reason. Not only do we expect continued strong growth, but as a result of our total economic overhaul, we are well-positioned to weather a global economic slowdown which, unfortunately, will affect all of us.

The real story for 2008 is that our macroeconomic fundamentals are stronger than ever due to tough choices we have made on boosting revenues, cracking down on tax cheats, bringing reform to our revenue collection and modernizing our banking and financial sector.

We have reformed our budget to be in balance ahead of the medium- term plan schedule of 2010.

Last year, our deficit was only P12.4 billion, the lowest in ten years and far below the ceiling of P63 billion. Revenues were up 16 percent from 2006. Seven years ago, no one thought we could do it, but we have. There will be no rest. We are continuing the pace of progress that has succeeded in strengthening our economy.

Tax revenues in 2008 aren’t stagnant: they are up 17% over 2007. They will continue to improve with more money for enforcement, modernization and computerization and closing of loopholes.

This maturity in our economy has brought with it a new confidence that forms the foundation of sustained economic growth moving forward. We are at a tipping point. I’m confident that the Philippines will tip forward in pursuit of reaching the threshold of first-world nation within a generation.

Our strengthened economic fortunes come none too soon, for as we are all very aware, there are clouds on the economic horizon that we must guard against. The global economy is facing significant challenges. The slowing of the economies in North America and Europe is top of mind in our calculations to protect our own economy. To that end, we have developed a program that includes: first, to ensure a surge in investments in people and infrastructure; second, to ensure that we continue to pursue anti-corruption initiatives and to cut red tape; and third, to blunt the global rise in the cost of energy and rice by providing targeted relief to the poorest amongst us who suffer the most from the high global price of energy and food.

These global forces are putting more strain on our working poor as prices for commodities like rice and fuel increase. We are a price-sensitive nation. So while our macroeconomics are strong, the benefits are still working their way down more slowly than we want to lift up our citizens who live and work paycheck to paycheck. We need a strong middle class to become a strong modern nation. Our middle class made up of the families of the overseas Filipino workers. We are working to mitigate the impact of the movement of the peso on them. We are working to soften the blow from the current global economic challenges to those working hardest to make it into the middle class.

The best thing we can do in the short term is provide responsible, targeted relief to those most in need.

The political environment will not force us to do anything we do not think is in the best interests of the nation. The economic environment, however, will dictate that we provide a buffer, as much as prudently possible, to the poorest who suffer most from rapidly rising prices. We will continue on the path of reform and economic discipline; the near-term pain will provide long-term gain for our nation. It may not be popular, but it is setting the nation on a new course. Within our existing budget, we will frontload investments to stimulate the economy and we will provide additional funds to help cushion the high price of fuel and food.

The best thing we can do for the remainder of my term until I step down in 2010 is to stay focused on further economic reforms while providing peace, order and stability. Most importantly, my last two years will be dedicated to one main objective: to invest, invest and invest some more in our nation.

The national budget which I signed a few weeks ago provides a roadmap for realizing our priorities in 2008 and for the remainder of my term. It should provide you with a sense of our priorities.

First, the budget reflects our values and policy priorities for investing in our people. This budget invests in what we call the three ‘E’s,’ the essential building blocks of our nation, namely, the economy, education and the environment. Every Filipino wants a good job, food on the table, sound education for their children and a healthy environment with clean air, clean water and clean land.

Second, our budget represents another important step in the economic development of the Philippines – namely, fiscal discipline. We have the strongest economy in over thirty years as a result of the tough reforms.

We have been able to strike the appropriate balance since coming to office between the competing objectives of spending more on much-needed social programs and public investment and keeping the fiscal deficit low.

Part of the plan includes a march toward a balanced budget for the first time in many years.

Lastly, this budget proves once again that members of Congress from both the House and the Senate and all parties can come together to work with the executive branch to get things done for the nation. Political noise need not interfere with economic progress and reform.

Our budget provides a buffer to mitigate the pain of a deteriorating global economy and the accompanying rise in prices which affects food and transportation the most. It is a budget dedicated to investing in the vital physical and human infrastructure to continue to modernize our nation. Roads, bridges and ports along with education and healthcare build up the foundation of the nation and make us more competitive.

Let me also address head-on the issue of corruption. It is an issue we take seriously. As an economist, I know that first and foremost, a strong economy is an economy that is transparent and free from corruption. We are freeing ourselves of the shackles of corruption evidenced by our growing economy – which is increasingly free of corruption and inefficiency. Our budget invests more and more to clean up the culture of corruption. It pumps billions of pesos into the country’s investigative arm to weed out corruption.

We have called on Congress to pass a comprehensive anti-corruption reform act in 2008. We will hold officials accountable if they are found to be corrupt. For our part, any allegations of wrong doing go straight to the independent Ombudsman. We will let the chips fall where they may as investigations are concluded and friend and foe alike are brought to account for their actions.

While we have accomplished much, much more remains to be done. We plan on working hard the next two years until the day our term ends in 2010 to fulfill our Philippine reform agenda.

This includes legislative efforts to continue to improve our banking and finance system; to strengthen our tax collections and to continue to broaden our tax payer base; and crack down on corruption and reduce red tape. We will balance needed investments in our people and infrastructure with a prudent eye toward fiscal discipline. We will invest most where the country will benefit most: in the economy, education and the environment.

We must and we will press forward with more reforms. We will fight for the economy, education and the environment. We will fight to feed the poor, improve job creation and do everything in our power to mitigate the global forces increasing the price of commodities like oil and rice.

Overall, we remain bullish on our economy, optimistic about our future and deeply committed to being a force for good in our nation and in our region.

Thank you for your interest in the Philippines and for a strong, united Asia.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Keynote address at the 11th Asian Investment Conference “Modernization, Investing in the Future”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412122300/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1054&Itemid=38