Keynote Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines On the occasion of ABAC’s 10th anniversary

[Delivered in Cebu City, August 12, 2006]

Happy 10th anniversary to ABAC! Your jubilee comes at an exciting time in a dynamic world. The Philippines is moving in the right direction. The ASEAN regional community moves closer every passing day to meaningful integration. East Asia is consolidating along shared ideals of trade and security.

You are the leaders who translate these trends into actual transactions. In the era of rapid globalization. Or as Tom Friedman calls it, the flat earth, the role of the marketplace and the private sector is most influential in moving the nations of the world towards integration.

The course I have charted for the Philippines is based on market-driven economics, private enterprise and a desire for full, equitable participation of our country, our private sector and our people in the global economy. It will take the private sector, both domestic and foreign, working together with government, to create the jobs we need to build a strong middle class and a modern, first world nation.

We have been a strong, vocal and visible player on the regional and international stage. I have wanted to restore the place of the Philippines in the region and the world. I believe we have done so. We are not shy about global engagement. It enhances our national security and improves our economic performance and competitiveness.

Central to global engagement is our membership in ASEAN. More and more, Philippine foreign policy decisions are made in the context of ASEAN.

I am proud to say that the Philippines is the Chair of ASEAN this year and host to the East Asian Summit in December. This underscores our commitment that it is in the interest of the Philippines to be regionally and globally engaged politically, economically and diplomatically.

ASEAN has provided important lessons in regional interaction, namely the importance of sensible and peaceful management of inter-state disputes, and the value of a partnership between government and business. ASEAN brought this culture of consensus to APEC.

By fostering, through dialogue and mutual reinforcement, the notion that liberalization and facilitation, supported by capacity building, are keys to economic prosperity, APEC members have undertaken voluntary actions to free their markets from restrictions. This has resulted in unprecedented trade expansion.

For the Philippines, APEC still provides the ideal forum for managing and enhancing our trans-Pacific engagement. We will continue to support the attainment of the Bogor Goals. We will work to enhance the capacity-building aspects of APEC. We will use APEC as the primary vehicle for promoting greater ease of doing business in the region.

Trans-Pacific political and economic engagement will remain an important part of our foreign policy agenda. The United States, China and Japan and their relationships will be the determining influence in the security situation and economic evolution of East Asia.

Although I see APEC continuing to play a crucial role in promoting regional economic cooperation, new realities have emerged that require pragmatic responses. The first reality involves the rise of China, India s awakening and the deepening of economic interaction within the region.

The second reality is the trans-boundary nature of the growing threats to human security in the region from terrorism, epidemics and natural disasters and to the security of supply for resources particularly energy and minerals.

We cannot deal with the threats alone. We must work with other countries and international institutions if we are determined to successfully address and eliminate them.

By pushing for a convention on counterterrorism, we will advance teamwork in the fight against evil. By engaging our neighboring region the Shanghai Cooperation Council nations we will widen our reach.

Our leadership in ASEAN this year carries the theme of “One Caring and Sharing Community.”

We will push for initiatives that will make ASEAN a shining institution that cares for its peoples, for its environment, and one that truly shares resources for uplifting the disadvantaged, integrating the marginalized and realizing the common good.

Energy security has clearly assumed grave importance.

While difficult in the near term, particularly for the poor, the high price of energy is actually an opportunity that we have seized in order to take our energy future into our own hands. We have declared a war of independence from oil, and aspire to be like Brazil, becoming self sufficient in bio fuels within a decade.

I draw my inspiration for this initiative from our experience in the development of the use of bio-fuels, specifically of ethanol.

Parked right outside this conference room is a vehicle that uses this technology. The Ford Focus Flexi-car has an engine that can run either on conventional gasoline or on gasoline blended with ethanol. Ford will be producing such engines here in the Philippines.

This is the future of commerce and this is the future of our self-reliance on alternative fuels like thermal, wind and solar. In the meantime, we have clamped down on price gouging and have secured a steady supply of fuel for our people.

We must rally our region to the cause of energy independence. The proposed East Asian Summit initiative on renewable and alternative energy development will require true public-private partnership, where we Governments create an environment conducive for the private sector to develop and invest in renewable and alternative sources of energy.

Another development that has profound implications on all participants to the East Asia Summit and one that will require us to draw up a collective response is the suspension of the Doha Round negotiations and the increasing likelihood that it will end in failure.

The economy makes the world go round; politics increasingly makes the world stop, as the WTO debacle has shown, and as a possible escalation of the Middle East crisis might likewise demonstrate.

The people in this room will do more for peace by tearing down economic barriers through the dynamism of the marketplace.

I cannot over emphasize the role that you the business sector must play. A great deal of work still needs to be done. The time for the meat of the work is now, on your tenth anniversary. Welcome to the Philippines!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Keynote Speech on the Occasion of ABAC’s 10th Anniversary. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212158/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2882&Itemid=38