Keynote Address of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines Before the Joint Regional Merger of Lakas CMD and KAMPI

A great change in the history of countries is made when honorable men and women unite for a noble cause.

(We can create big changes in the country when distinguished men and women come together for a noble cause.)

Through the unity of strength of LAKAS-CMD and KAMPI, the two powerful parties in the Philippines, we will advance and steer our country towards FIRST WORLD status with progressive countries when the children of today reach the right age.

(The merging of the strength of the two biggest political parties in the Philippines – LAKAS-CMD and Kampi – will lead the country towards First World status by the time newly born Filipinos reach the age of majority.)

Each one, LAKAS-CMD and KAMPI, are the main and powerful political parties in the country. If they unite, we will further extend our main role in politics and improving the nation, and steer our country towards a progressive economy.

(Both the LAKAS-CMD and the Kampi are the strongest political parties in the land. United, the more we could extend our foremost roles in the politics and progress of the nation, and direct our country towards a progressive economy.)

After all, there is no significant difference in the ideology of our platforms. For LAKAS-CMD and KAMPI, the strong party is at the center of political stability together with the keys to a stable, democratic and progressive country supported by a strengthened citizenry.

(In the end, there is no real difference in the ideology of our platforms. For both the LAKAS and Kampi, a strong party is the centrepiece of political stability which is one of the keys towards a stable, democratic and progressive nation that is supported by a strengthened citizenry.)

Through the unity of strength of LAKAS-CMD and KAMPI, the two powerful parties in the Philippines, we will advance and steer our country towards FIRST WORLD status with progressive countries when the children of today reach the right age.

(The merging of the strength of LAKAS-CMD and Kampi, the two biggest political parties in the Philippines, will bring and lead the country towards the First World status of progressive nations by the time newly born Filipinos reach the age of majority.)

However, we will continue to listen to our constituents.

(Even then, we continue to listen to our fellow party members.)

We are in an uncertain era, navigating uncharted waters.

National food self-sufficiency and national fuel conservation are now entrenched among the first principles of statecraft.

As we ponder these issues, the first imperative is to listen.

To listen to the cry of our people for succor and support. To ponder the call of well-meaning sectors for longstanding policies to be reviewed. To lend our ears to one another’s insights, united by a singular wish to ease the pains and address the concerns of the ordinary Filipino.

We have been listening, pondering, lending our ears, taking action, harnessing all our resources.

We heard our people burdened by soaring rice prices, and we responded positively and decisively…. In India, rice is P95 per kilo; Thailand, P56 per kilo; Vietnam, P67; Singapore, P45. Our rice is now P35 (?). We have kept rice for the poor at P18.25 per kilo, at a cost of P8 billion and still counting. Indonesia’s subsidized rice is P25.30 and Malaysia’s is P27.

For jeepney drivers and commuters squeezed by the quadrupling of the cost of diesel, we have fought kotong and colorum to boost the income of drivers, while keeping fare increases to P1, the cost of one text message.

Balancing the budget this year would be a laudable milestone in our fiscal turnaround, but not if it puts a millstone around our necks. Thus, even before we heard the call to review our policies, we already did so. Months ago we said that we may need to defer a balanced budget in the challenging global environment. We declared our willingness to allocate as much as P75 billion on social spending. And if things improve next year, we will return to our target.

In short, we hear and feel the complaints and calls of the ordinary Filipino, and we will respond, using the coffers of the nation.

The global crises did not catch us unprepared or without reserves, thank God and Congress.

You and I made hard decisions – hard on our people, unpopular with big business, but good for the country, as events have shown.

Our preparations shield our nation from the worst effects of the worldwide food and fuel crises.

We spent the last two years preparing for such world crises in two ways: first, by increasing food productivity, second, by increasing the ability to buy the food with bigger incomes and smaller income tax bites.

Starting this month, those earning P200,000 a year or less don’t have to pay income tax, thanks to our partymates in Congress. That’s an extra P12 billion of disposable worker income.

With the 0 percent tariff on oil from last month, our pump prices are even lower than that of many neighbors. Philippine diesel is P55.90. Thailand, P60. New Zealand, P67. Hong Kong, P71. US, P60.

Our bold fiscal reforms have also raised more billions for development without relying on outside loans, as in decades past. With our own resources, we are building more roads, bridges, ports and other infrastructure. They open wider areas and more opportunities for new wealth and new jobs, all towards a self-sufficient, self-reliant, strong republic.

We can also spend billions more on health and education, and to train and retrain our workforce.

So we remain committed to the course we have taken. The best solution is one that has worked.

We have come too far, made too many sacrifices on the hard but wiser road taken, to reverse now and give up enduring strengths for popular but counterproductive short-term gains.

In deliberating on the best solutions to our people’s travails, we won’t agree on everything.

It is easy to understand why many would want to see taxes on oil and electricity removed. But we have to carefully address some hard questions.

If VAT on oil and power is lifted, how do we replace about P80 billion in revenues, mostly used for the poor?

VAT boosted investor confidence. Interest rates for 91-day treasury bills went down from 7.7 percent to 2.92 percent. From P56.50 to $1, the peso strengthened to P40.20 before bad world economic news brought it back to P45(?). Wouldn’t lifting VAT erode confidence, and accelerate the rise in interest and exchange rates, raising the cost of living even more?

Won’t scrapping the VAT on energy benefit mainly the well-to-do, who consume 84 percent of oil and 90 percent of power, while depriving the poor of billions in programs now funded by VAT? Wouldn’t it strip the vast majority of our people of the means to ride out the world food and energy crises?

Wherever our discourse leads, let us assure our people of one thing: our administration will continue to harness all the resources at our command to help ordinary Filipino families pressured by cost and calamity, while still pursuing needed investments in people and infrastructure.

Surely the day will come when poverty will be eradicated in our country, and all our countrymen will unite in a productive workforce in our naturally, progressive and expandable country.

(I assure you that the day will come when poverty will finally be wiped out from our nation, and all Filipinos could join the productive workforce of a peaceful and progressive country that we could be proud of.)

This day arrives through the combined efforts of the members of LAKAS and KAMPI.

(The dreamed-of day of progress will surely come because of the combined efforts of the Lakas and Kampi.)

We, the members of the party, are ready for this day. Let us continue to improve and strengthen the mission and vision of our party for the coming years.

(We, members of the party, are ready for that day. We will continue to improve and strengthen our mission and vision to prepare for that coming day.)

This is a time for serious reflection. The leaders of the two largest parties must come together to determine how to strengthen the order of politics.

(It is time for deep reflection, thus the need for the leaders of the two biggest political parties to come together to find the best way to strengthen political stability.)

A decision has been made in Lakas and KAMPI here in the Cordillera, and you are welcome to the decision. Support the decision. Let us improve the strength and dynamism of the LAKAS–KAMPI party.

(The CAR LAKAS and Kampi have decided, and I bless your decision. You have arrived at a decision. Let us strengthen the merged party, LAKAS-Kampi.)

We will strive to work for a stronger economy, strengthen education and environmental care. We will help to provide food for every table and jobs for every Filipino.

(Let us do our best in working for a stronger economy, let us strengthen educational reforms and environmental protection. Let us help each other to provide food and job for each and every Filipino.)

We, the members of the party, are ready for this day. Let us continue to improve and strengthen the mission and vision of our party for the coming years.

(We, members of the party, are ready for that day. Let us continue to improve and strengthen our mission and vision for the coming years.)

Long live LAKAS CMD and KAMPI!

(Mabuhay, LAKAS CMD and Kampi!)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). Keynote Address of President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo Joint Regional Merger of Lakas CMD & KAMPI. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412115849/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1603&Itemid=38