Keynote Address of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the 16th East Asia Economic Summit

[Delivered at the Hong Kong, October 29, 2001]

It is my honor to have the chance once again to address the East Asia Economic Summit held under the auspices of the World Economic Forum. The forum is the foremost global community of business, political, intellectual and civil society leaders.

We are now traversing challenging and uncertain times.

The events of September 11, coming as they were in the face of a slowdown, have pushed the global economy to the brink of full-blown recession.

If the world does go over the edge, this could to further loss of lives over and above the result of terrorist bombs or the reaction to terrorism, aggravated by the inability of governments to provide for their people if the global economy contracts. The World Bank estimates that as much as 100,000 human lives will be lost as a result of starvation and diseases should there be a full-blown recession.

A coalition is being built to eradicate terrorism. A coalition can also be formed to lift the global economy out of its lethargy.

After September 11, we realized just how closely global political and economic security have become interwined, and how we must address both political and economic security. This renewed sense of global community could be the key to early recovery.

Dealing with terrorism is our most urgent priority.

Given the impact of terrorism on the global economy, our first challenge is to deal with it and make this a safe and secure world.

Directly after the attacks on New York and Washington, I assured President Bush that the Philippines stands behind American efforts to eradicate terrorism. Our decision to join the American fight against terrorism was not an emotional one – it was a strategic decision. The fight against terrorism is a global fight – it touches each and every one of our nations and indeed we in the Philippines have first hand experience.

Soon after the attacks in the U.S., we in the Philippines took steps to carry out six specific measures, in support of U.N. Security Council resolution no. 1368, to combat terrorism:

-To join the international counter terrorist coalition and to work with the United Nations;

-To work closely with the United States on intelligence and security matters concerning terrorism;

-To make available our air space and facilities when required as transit or staging points;

-To contribute logistical support in the form of food supply, medicines and medical personnel;

-To provide, with Congress’s consent, combat troops if there is an international call for such troops; and

-To step up our offensive against and prevent the flow of funds to terrorist groups in the Philippines by more aggressive military action and passing and implementing legislation against money laundering.

Coupled with our participation in global efforts to stamp out terrorism, we are also working to promote cohesion and cooperation at the regional level. For example, we initiated an effort to create a tri-nation anti-terrorist coalition between the Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia. Through this coalition, we will work to share intelligence on terrorist activities, tighten border patrols and when necessary partake in joint peacekeeping operations. We are looking to do more at the ASEAN Summit meeting in Brunei.

We are pursuing broader inter-faith dialogues to promote Christian and Muslim solidarity. Terrorists wish to instigate a religious war. We must make this an opportunity to for religious understanding, ecumenism and solidarity.

At the recent concluded APEC Leaders’ meeting in Shanghai, we agreed to take a strong stance against terrorism and discussed ways of prioritizing APEC’s work to meet these challenges including money laundering, aviation and port safety and security, and cyber crime.

These unprecedented cooperation and coalition building at the national, regional and global level to ensure security and safety could work equally well to ensure economic security which globalization has both provided and at the same time threatened.

The challenge we face today is the same challenge that generations earlier have faced – to bring about stability, prosperity and progress in the world. However, we do so now under vastly different circumstances brought about by the increasing pace of globalization and the rapid advances in the information and communications technology. The September 11 tragedies add an additional and dangerous side to globalization but in a sense reinforce the message that events outside one’s border – be they economic or political- cannot now be treated as something that only affects them, not us.

The rapid export-led recovery from the 1997 financial crisis lulled us into a false sense of security that we have already mastered the challenge of adapting to globalization. Then, in just a short period of time, export markets collapsed and exposed fundamental weaknesses in many economies. Many of the antidotes to a repeat of the 1997 financial crisis have not yet been administered. It is time that they do before it becomes too late.

It is time that internal systems, structures and institutions required to manage and ensure maximum benefits from global economic integration are in place.

It is time that the appropriate reform and strengthening of the institutions and regulatory systems that are supposed to handle international flows, particularly capital flows, it is time to reform financial sectors.

It is time to recapitalize crisis-affected banks, quickly resolve problem accounts as well as insolvent institutions and otherwise strengthen the financial system.

Given the fact that global business conditions are uncertain, we have to rely on our respective domestic efforts to stimulate economic growth and provide social safety nets. In the Philippines we have also taken steps to make the Philippines a safe and desirable location for foreign investment and trade.

Many lessons have been learned by both governments and international organizations which could prove to be valuable in dealing with the current crisis. One of them is the importance of cooperation and concerned action.

The efforts of the major economies—U.S., Japan, Europe—to stimulate their domestic economies will have far reaching consequences for the global economy. They current situation provides the right conditions to take the bitter pills of oft-postponed reforms. In our region, hundreds of millions look to Japan to resumes its traditional role as the engine for growth in the Asian region.

We in ASEAN also have responsibility to contribute to global economic security. We have to make a reality not in some distant future but in the next few years.

We have a rare opportunity to discuss the current global trading environment at the W.T.O. Ministerial meeting in Doha. It may well be the defining moment on how we face the issue of globalization. We have seen more and more mass actions against globalization is not driven by people meeting in Seattle, Genoa, or even Shanghai, but by developments in technology and markets. But it is in these meeting that we can address the concerns of those affected by globalizations and find ways to make sure that the policies we put in place will lead to sustainable development and the alleviation of poverty. Some quarters have dubbed the rounds as a development round, and I hope that this does not turn out to be a marketing gimmick to get developing countries to sign on. I think we should have a new round but we must make sure that we have a balanced agenda that benefits all participants.

The following can make the Doha round truly a development round:

As the financial crisis has demonstrated, we can maximize the benefits of globalization and minimize its adverse effects, if we have greater coherence in how we respond to its many dimensions—trade, investment, capital, and labor.

The events of September 11 were both shocking and horrifying for observers around the world. These events put us all on an uncharted course, both in terms of political and economic security and personal safety, and increased our sense of vulnerability and uncertainly.

This is one more manifestation of globalization and presents us with an added challenge. But these events also presented us with an opportunity to work together and come out stronger on a variety of fronts.

The coalition that has been built and the relationships that have been fortified in our collective response to terrorism can and must extend to global, regional and bilateral economic relations.

We face a rocky road ahead, that is certain, but the global economy can, and will, pull through if we approach our economic uncertainties with the same cooperative and integrated approach that we have applied to anti-terrorism.

The Philippines stands ready to work with its friends and neighbors to meet this challenge.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Keynote Address at the 16th East Asia Economic Summit. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212609/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8746&Itemid=38