Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, to the Barangay Consultative Assembly with the officials of the barangays of the City of Manila

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much to Mayor Lito Atienza for your continued support, Lito, thank you very much.

Thank you very much to Madame Beng Atienza. Thank you very much to Congressman Miles Roces. Thank you very much to Kim Atienza. Thank you very much to our president, Caloy Castañeda. Almost ninety percent of all officials of Metro Manila are here, all the barangay captains and barangay officials. Thank you very much for your large attendance.

I am thankful to Lito, to Beng, to all of you because Lito and Beng love me very much, and you love those whom Lito and Beng love, so thank you all very much.

Despite the many noises in politics, I want to assure you that we are not stopping our reforms. Reforms to improve governance, reforms to uplift the lives of the poor. I will give you a scoop – because of course you are candidates, it is important to you to know about the COMELEC – I want to announce to you, to report to you that I have requested the presiding justice of the Court of Appeals, Justice Brawner, to be the next Commissioner of the COMELEC.

This is the statement… yesterday, I wanted to inform you that there is a new six hundred million pesos for microfinance in Land Bank and National Development Company. Many of you, don't you engage in microfinance? There are ten conduits that the PCFC has, are you using those ten conduits? Or perhaps the DSWD, Lito’s social worker, because there is… the DSWD can be a conduit, the DSWD of Lito can be used so that the DSWD can borrow from the Land Bank and National Development Company, six hundred million pesos. Surely the poor will feel this large amount, so get organized on how to borrow from this fund for the improvement of your livelihoods.

Manila youth, thank you very much. You have been supporting me for a long time. Thank you for your continued support. Everything I do is for the betterment of your future.

So thank you, Lito, for the opportunity. Thank you for this meeting. May I expect the barangays of Manila?

Thank you all very much.

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat.

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Remarks during the Barangay Consultative Assembly with Barangay Officials of the City of Manila. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412080325/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5100&Itemid=38