Send-off Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Sagip-Tulong ni PGMA Caravan

Recent widespread flooding and heavy rains have severely damaged crops and infrastructure in several regions of the country, especially V and VIII.

We thank everyone involved in this “Sagip-Tulong” Caravan for calamity victims in Samar, who will be in the eastern seaboard of Region VIII for one week and return to Manila via Region V.

I also thank all our countrymen who unite and strengthen the spirits of the victims of the calamity. Thank you for showing that the spirit of compassion and heroism inherent in us Filipinos continues.

When I visited Eastern Samar last month, we brought goods for almost 35,000 people. Each victim municipality also received a share of the 500 kilos of seaweed seed-stock worth P75 million to help the victims back on their feet.

We have also ordered the line agencies to effect as soon as possible the rehabilitation of all the provinces on the Eastern Seaboard hit by the heavy rains, especially the repair of roads and other infrastructure needed to return normalcy.

Our country prone to natural calamities such as flooding, landslides and earthquakes, caused in large part by climate change and global warming. The Philippines is a climate taker rather than a climate maker because we are to be blamed for less than 1% of the total global bas emissions to the environment. While climate change is a global issue outside the control of government, we have nevertheless taken and will continue to take actions to mitigate the pain on our people.

Protecting the environment is one of our top priorities. An example of our efforts to preserve the “Green Philippines” is our support for the Samar Island protected area, the Southern Leyte ecosystem and the Bicol River Basin. These are initiatives that week to protect the fragile ecosystems in Central Philippines, as part of the responsibility of the Philippines to future generations.

On a broader scale, we have also begun the Green Philippines plan, a blueprint for mapping our environment and economic policies that will allow for sustainable development that does not fall on the backs of the poor or erode our environment. There is a cost of make the Green Philippines come to life. For instance, the enforcement against logging in the Samar Island protected area, the relocation of the Ginsaungon, Southern Leyte families to a new community and the P250 million budget this year for the Bicol River Basin. But the cost is greater without the plan and the investment in our people and our environment.

We are striving to create a strong and growing economy to help ensure peace, order and stability in our country. This is why we rise every day to work hard and focus like a laser beam to fix our economy. We made difficult and unpopular decisions to raise taxes and arrest tax evaders so that we can invest in our infrastructure and our people.

When we bring in investments like surfing tourism in Guian, Eastern Samar, and create jobs, our people have a more stable and predictable life. With more investments, including more taxes that can be invested in schools, roads and bridges like those we are rebuilding in Eastern Samar and Bicol, as well as care for health, education and the environment. The time will come when everyone will benefit.

However, we know that even as things improve on the surface, many of our people continue to struggle. We are very aware that many hardworking people work every day just to put food on their tables and provide adequate shelter for their families.

We are giving primary attention to those who have been victims of the calamity.

The government has responded quickly, digging into calamity funds and harnessing agencies to accelerate assistance to hard-hit communities and bring back normalcy.

We are very grateful to the local governments that are helping to alleviate the suffering of Samar, Leyte and Bicol. Thank you also to other LGUs that recognize the rule of law as the key to prosperity.

To all partners in the Eastern Seaboard caravan, to those who continue to support our development efforts and to all Filipinos who continue to strive for development and peace — thank you very much!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s send-off speech during the Sagip-Tulong ni PGMA Caravan. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123128/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1070&Itemid=38