Thank you very much Secretary Reyes for your very kind introduction.

Troop commander give ‘Tikas Pahinga.’

Senator Rodolfo Biazon, former PMA Superintendent; General Diomedio Villanueva; Major General Rufo de Veyra and the other officials of the Philippine Military Academy; Chairman Carlos Agustin and the other alumni of PMA; major service commanders; Congressman Maurice Domogan and Mayor Bernardo Vergara and the other officials of Baguio; Governor Raul Molintas and the other officials of Benguet; the other officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; members of the diplomatic corps; other Presidential Appointees who are here; distinguished guests; Ladies and Gentlemen:

I extend another warm greeting now to the one hundred thirty-eight members of class ‘Banyuhay’ on your graduation today. And I wholeheartedly welcome you formally into the Armed Forces of the Philippines. I also congratulate your families who were very enthusiastic earlier in applauding you, for they worked hard to support your studies here at the excellent school, the Philippine Military Academy.

The name of your class is unique. Because it is not a common word in Tagalog. Your class name ‘Banyuhay’ comes from bagong anyo ng buhay, which means therefore a new form of life — it heralds your coming into the new century.

There are many dimensions of change that we must face in this new century. There is a change in the substance and style of governance under my leadership. There is a change in the character of the PMA over the last decade. For instance, now PMA has female cadets and graduates. PMA has produced a female topnotcher, and this year PMA produced a female Tarzan of the class. And this year PMA has produced a new method of privilege for the goat. And for his very unusual expression of his privilege I am going I understand he has been dying to go to the Southernmost part of the Philippines. So I’m asking General Villanueva to send him immediately to Lantawan in Basilan.

Many changes indeed, and speaking of Lantawan, speaking of Basilan, there is also a change in the way we are fighting war. There is a change in the way we are fighting poverty. There is a change in the way we are conducting war and waging the peace. All these changes are sweeping the political, social and economic landscape. In all these, the Filipino soldier is involved, both as participant and vanguard.

You must be involved in good governance, in propagating and exemplifying the values of honesty, duty and conscience throughout the entire breadth of the military and civil service.

Your must lead in the fight against poverty, by tempering the martial role of the soldier with the will and compassion to fight ignorance, disease and social injustice.

You must be warriors and peacemakers, steely fighters in meeting enemy fire, and at the same time agents of national reconciliation and solidarity in waging a just and honorable peace with former foes.

These myriad roles play a profound challenge upon the intellectual, moral and spiritual resources of the Filipino solder.

I am confident, however, that the academy has prepared you well for these roles. I have faith in your versatility and courage to fight and win the battles in the horizon, whether these be in the field of fire or in the building of our nation.

There is more to the Filipino soldier’s role in this century especially after September 11 that we must all deeply understand. It is the reality that in war and in peace, we are faced with the growing challenge of fighting alongside international allies.

The war against terrorism and poverty is the most vivid example of this. We see this in Basilan, and we must see that it is much, much more than a shooting war. It is a joining of soldiers for peace, for rebuilding communities, for strengthening the bridges of understanding and common ideals.

The war against terrorism has molded the world’s soldiery into one. Today, the name of the game is multilateral coalitions.

As the U.S. mops up the Al Qaeda in Afghanistan, British and European forces have moved in for peacekeeping. And what used to be a lonely fight for us in Southern Philippines became a global fight since September 11, and now we are joined by American forces in training and civic action. We are also joined by Malaysian and Indonesian intelligence in combating terrorism and other transnational crimes in our common seas.

The byword today is inter-operability. This is necessary because of the transient and rapidly shifting threat of terrorism. Terrorism is a transnational threat that needs transnational counteraction. As terrorism moves from place to place, we must move to consolidate with our allies. This is the only way we can achieve meaningful if not permanent victory.

You, the graduates of class 2002, are now thrust into this new paradigm of war, and i trust that you will carry out your mission accordingly. Doctrines have to be changed and refined in this new millennium. The spirit and substance of operational manuals have to be revised in line with the transnational imperatives of conflict management and development.

I have already instructed the armed forces to work on this. We must have a military that can shake off the conservative values of the past and be more forward-looking, proactive and infused with a global outlook.

This global involvement and outlook does not mean a diminution of sovereignty or constitutional integrity. The armed forces is a constitutional instrument. It defends democracy and protects human rights. It holds unconditional allegiance to civilian authority and to the unity of command. It adheres to a code of discipline and absolute fealty to the constitution.

There are those who sweepingly accuse that our joint military training exercises in Basilan have been occasioned by violations of human rights.

This sweeping accusation is an insult to our armed forces and our allies, it is an insult to our people. Our soldiers have sacrificed so much by holding their fire to keep civilians from harm’s way. They had been ambushed while doing civic action work, while bringing food and medicine to hapless communities. They had been shot in the middle of humanitarian missions.

The worst violator of human rights in the world is not soldiers, it is terrorism. The enemy is not our Filipino soldiers, the enemy is terrorism. In the fight against terrorism, more than 200 officers and enlisted personnel had been wounded or killed in action since January 2001. And I consider it the height of misrepresentation for anyone to characterize the great Filipino soldier as a violator of human rights when so many of our soldiers have made the supreme sacrifice of death to protect our people from terrorism.

Looking ahead, the 21st century is a new world dominated, not just by this war against terrorism but even beyond that, even when we have been able to win the battle against terrorism this new world will be dominated by technology and the knowledge economy. The internet has irreversibly changed the way we do business, work, think, live and play. Advances in I.C.T. have unleashed forces that create both perils and opportunities for us.

To tap the opportunities, we must uphold our economic philosophy of transparency and free enterprise to be globally competitive. To avoid the perils we must extend our opportunities to the rural countryside through a socially equitable modernized agricultural sector. And we must give a social bias for the disadvantaged to balance our economic development.

And to protect the opportunities and reduce the security hazards, we shall rely on the armed forces and our police forces to remain steadfast in your mission.

In the past few years, PMAyers have become I.C.T.-ready. Your curriculum already incorporates I.C.T. courses. It is my policy to encourage schools to tap information and communications technology to prepare students, including and especially PMAyers, for the future. You must be always keeping a broad perspective of the nation and the world.

But even as we embrace myriad changes and complexities of modern life, our aspirations as a nation are steadfast — peace and justice, freedom and progress. Even as we enter a millennium of change, the soldier’s mission is unchanged — it is the defense of our flag, our constitution and everything that we, as one nation hold dear. Every PMAyer is expected to be true to this creed.

“Integrity, Courage and Loyalty” — these are what you have pledged to follow. They have been instilled in your minds and hearts from the very first day in the academy. These words have moved PMAyers to win countless battles and make the supreme sacrifice when necessary. These words inspired our soldiers to remove dictatorial rule in 1986, and then again to turn away from plunderous leadership in 2001.

“Integrity, Courage and Loyalty” — these words have made the academy truly a cradle of heroes deserving of the monument that was unveiled today.

We know of countless examples of PMAyers who sacrificed treasure and honor in the face of battle, fierce in combat but gentle in peace. I trust that you, the graduates of batch 2002, will be like these heroes before you. These heroes are the treasures of our nation.

The willingness to fight for what is right, the discipline to stay on course and the steel to overcome the enemy, the will to wage peace all take root from the ability to discern good from evil.

Ultimately, this is what the academy teaches every PMAyer. This is what it has taught for the last 104 years. For the PMA is not merely a school for weaponry and military strategy, it is a bedrock of character and values. It is a bastion of human excellence, a symbol of Filipino heroism in all its forms. A covenant to liberty and a training ground for the great Filipino soldier.

I have no doubts about class Banyuhay’s determination to serve. As I said earlier, the class goat who hails from the north wants to see action in our southernmost provinces. And the only female member of the top ten, who is from Baliwag, from Bulacan has a muslim mother and desires to serve her fellow Muslims. Such expressions of human courage and preparedness are heartwarming, heartwarming to our people.

All of you are expected to show utmost commitment in performing your tasks in support of our strategy for peace and progress — security, socio-economic development and political stability through dialogue and consensus.

I have said on countless occasions that poverty is our worst enemy. The fight against terrorists is also a fight against poverty, so is the fight against injustice and ignorance. So is our campaign for high moral standards in society, and our quest for good governance. These are weapons to defeat poverty.

It is now class Banyuhay’s turn to show that you can live up to the exacting legacy that past generations of PMAyers have built.

You had been given a great gift, a chance to work for peace and justice, freedom and development. I trust that you will use it well. That your will will be that you will not simply walk in the shadow of heroes. But instead that you will live to be heroes yourselves.

My warmest congratulations to everyone who received awards of distinction today. We especially expect you to gather more awards in the future. And to all the members of class Banyuhay my best wishes. And let me say that the battlefield awaits you. But more important, the people you must serve await you.

But before i send you to your battlefield, where for our goat it will be Lantawan in Basilan. Actually that’s not a reward, actually that’s punishment for giving us a surprise. That surprised even your superintendent and the secretary of national defense. So except for the goat, I have a message for everyone else, and that is, in keeping with tradition, in observance of the time honored tradition of the Philippine Military Academy, and on the occasion of my official visit to the academy I, Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Republic of the Philippines and Commander-in-Chief Armed Forces of the Philippines hereby pardon all outstanding punishment of the cadet corps as of this day.

Let me sign this except for the fellow we are sending to Lantawan immediately.

Class of 2002, we thank you for choosing to become professional soldiers. Go to your battlefields. Go also to your civic action. Go to your fight against poverty. Go and serve the people.

Congratulations, good luck and thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Philippine Military Academy (PMA) “Banyuhay” Class of 2002 Commencement Exercises. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230159/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7623&Itemid=38