Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the meeting with the World Islamic Call Society (WICS)

[Delivered in WICS compound, Tripoli, Libya, July 17, 2006]

Thank you very much, Secretary Romulo for your introduction.

Dr. Sheriff, thank you very much also for inviting me to be here with you today and all the scholars who are associated and who are friends of your society; the students, Filipino students who are here especially and the recent graduates; ladies and gentlemen.

It’s my pleasure to be with all of you today, and I appreciate the opportunity to speak with the leaders, members and friends of the World Islamic Call Society that has done so much for our Muslim brothers and sisters in the Philippines.

You’re a wellspring of hope and optimism and I’d like to thank you for participating in the 2003 National Conference of Dialogues of Culture Among Major Faiths that was held in the Philippines.

I would also like to thank the Islamic Call Society for establishing a Philippine office in 2003.

And I am proud that the Philippine office is but one of many examples to show that we and Libya, Libya and the Philippines, have been friends long before the recent and welcome reconciliation of Libya with the United States and other members of the international community.

In fact, Dr. Sheriff has talked about the 1976 Tripoli agreement many times in his welcome remarks. And my trip to Libya at this time is in fact the 30th anniversary celebration of the 1976 Tripoli agreement. It is the 30th anniversary celebration of the support that Libya has given the Philippines since the Tripoli Agreement of 1976. As Dr. Sherif said the Tripoli Agreement of 1976 was facilitated by the leader and it started the peace process with the Moro National Liberation Front in Mindanao in Southern Philippines, culminating in the final peace agreement of 1996.

I also came to Libya to thank the leader not only for his support for the peace process but also for his support for my administration’s war against terrorism since I became president in 2001. He has supported us even before the 9/11 attack on the World Trade Center. Because in May of 2001, when the Abu Sayaff terrorist group hostaged a group of tourists in Dos Palmas in Southern Philippines, I was able to talk on the phone to ask the help of Colonel Gaddafi. Because I wanted to fight the Abu Sayaff rather than pay ransom and the leader helped me. He denounced the Abu Sayaff and with his help and the help of other friends in the international community, the Philippine Army was able to defeat the Abu Sayaff.

Today, even as we thank Libya for helping us win the peace, we look at the world around us and we see that peace is not yet with us in the whole world. Today, therefore, the Philippines joins the international community in seeking for the peaceful resolution of the Israel-Lebanon conflict. The volatile situation in that part of the Middle East all the more makes us appreciate the friendship and support of Libya for the last 30 years since the Tripoli Agreement.

The leader has also been helping me with my peace efforts with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front. And hopefully just as the 1976 Tripoli Agreement resulted in the final peace agreement of 1996, hopefully, the Tripoli Agreement that was signed in 2001 with the MILF will also finally bring about lasting peace in Mindanao.

I am very gratified that after an initial agreement with the MILF that was signed in Tripoli in 2001, we have reached an advanced state in our peace talks with the MILF and we are grateful that since the MILF called for a ceasefire in 2001, which the Philippine government reciprocated, Libya and two other Muslim countries have actively participated in the international monitoring team that has successfully held the peace in Mindanao for the past three years.

Libya is also to this day an active member of the ministerial committee of the eight of the Organization of the Islamic Conference or OIC which monitors the implementation of the 1996 peace agreement.

We are committed to the full implementation of the Tripoli agreement of 1976 and the final MNLF peace agreement of 1996, which ended the MNLF rebellion and brought the MNLF to the mainstream of Philippine governance. Just to personify the mainstreaming of the MNLF in Philippine governance, today we have with us in the Philippine delegation a former MNLF commander who is now the elected deputy speaker of the House of Representatives, Deputy Speaker Gerry Salapuddin. And it is not only Deputy Speaker Gerry Salapuddin who is here with us from the MNLF, another former MNLF commander is now the mayor of the Islamic City of Marawi. He is with us in this delegation, Mayor Omar Ali and among the other Muslims in the mainstream of Philippine political leadership who are with us today, we have the brother of another MNLF commander who is now the governor of the Muslim province of Sulu, Governor Ben Loong. Well, she is not MNLF but she is the congresswoman of Lanao Del Sur. We also have with us Congresswoman Faysah Dumarpa, another Muslim in the mainstream of Philippine leadership. And we have a Muslim governor in a Christian province, the governor of Sultan Kudarat, Datu Pax Mangudadatu. I’m very happy that they are all here with us in this delegation to join us in thanking Libya for all of your support for our peace process.

Parallel to our political peace efforts, the Philippine government is also implementing significant socioeconomic programs for Muslim Filipinos. This is a major effort to stamp out poverty, disease, illiteracy and injustice.

And on this note, I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude for the work that the World Islamic Call Society has done in the Philippines, particularly your willingness to participate and contribute to our local interfaith initiatives. Interfaith initiatives are very important to the Philippines. Like many members of the OIC, the Philippines is a pluralistic nation with various religious and cultural communities, the biggest of which are the Roman Catholics and the Muslims. And this is why we are grateful also to Libya, for in addition to all the other support that I have already mentioned earlier, Libya is also the most ardent advocate for observer status for the Philippine government in the OIC.

Interfaith dialogue is an integral part of our six-year Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan as an official framework for the conduct of healing and reconciliation programs.

The role of interfaith dialogue in restoring peace in Southern Philippines is an experience that we like to share with the world. In Mindanao, we have a network of non-governmental organizations that strive for interfaith understanding, pioneered by the Bishops-Ulama Conference which is composed of Roman Catholic bishops in Mindanao, protestant bishops and Muslim religious leaders as well as those from the indigenous peoples sector. The Bishops-Ulama Conference has yielded improved and mutual understanding and reconciliation between Christians and Muslims.

By communicating with each other, we are encouraged to keep our minds and hearts open through meaningful dialogue and we are able to engage each other to establish trust and harmony.

We must always strive to find the common thread through which differences may be bridged, and the shared values such as that of love for peace, justice and respect for human dignity that they can be perpetuated through interfaith dialogue.

Philippine initiatives on interfaith dialogue are well-entrenched in the United Nations. The interfaith dialogue in the United Nations stems from a Philippine initiative, a Philippine resolution that was unanimously approved by the U.N. General Assembly on interfaith dialogue in November 2004. It continued with the holding of the Tripartite Conference on Interfaith Cooperation for Peace, chaired by the Philippines by Secretary Romulo at the U.N. in New York on June 22nd of 2005.

Also in 2005, the Philippines steered the security council to pass Resolution 1624 which institutionalized interfaith dialogue as a mechanism for international cooperation.

Resolution 1624 called upon all states “to continue international efforts to enhance dialogue and broaden understanding among civilizations, in an effort to prevent the indiscriminate targeting of different religions and cultures.”

And also in 2005 during the 60th anniversary summit of the United Nations in September, I chaired the informal meeting of leaders on interfaith dialogue and cooperation for peace.

And early this year, we had the Asia-Pacific Interfaith Dialogue in Manila. The Philippines also successfully hosted the Cebu dialogue on regional interfaith cooperation for peace, development and human dignity with the Philippines, Indonesia, Australia and New Zealand as co-chairs.

In all of these things that we are doing, interfaith dialogue within the Philippines especially in Mindanao, interfaith dialogue all over the world, I reiterate my gratitude to the World Islamic Call Society because you have been supporting the interfaith initiative of the Philippines.

And so on this note, I wish you all the best, Dr. Sheriff. May you continue the good work that you are doing here in Libya among the many countries represented in this forum today and of course in the Philippines.

Thank you and good day.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the meeting with the World Islamic Call Society (WICS). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212506/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2827&Itemid=38