Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the commissioning and blessing of the newly acquired Cyclone Class Navy Vessel, BRP General Mariano Alvarez (PS38)

[Delivered at the Philippine Navy Headquarters, Roxas Blvd., Manila, March 8, 2004]

Thank you very much, Secretary Ed Ermita. Thank you.

Vice Admiral Ernie De Leon, happy first anniversary of being FOIC; General Narciso Abaya; our major service commanders who are here today: General Santillan and General Abu; Honorable Mussomeli, Chief… Charge d Affaires of the United States and the other members of the diplomatic corps who are here this afternoon with us; the family of General Mariano Alvarez; Captain Edgardo Abogado, the Commanding Officer of PS38; our congressmen: Congressman James Gordon and Congressman Solis. I must add that Congressman Gordon is the brother of my senatorial candidate Dick Gordon; officers, men and women of the Philippine Navy; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.

This is a very important day for me, for us. Not just because its the first anniversary of Admiral de Leon, whom we must remember as the man who brought down Abu Sabaya. But because as Charge d Affaires Mussomeli said, today we bear fruit, maybe the single most dramatic fruit of the good defense relationship between the Philippines and the U.S., which in turn is one of two aspects of the good relationship within our two countries — one being security and the other being defense.

Yes, 2001 November, I visited Washington. Before I went to Washington… In fact, when I first became president, I inherited a military commitment of the United States of 1.8 million dollars. This boat alone is worth 30 million U.S. dollars. In other words, from 1.8 million dollars, as I entered the presidency, our security relationship with the United States today is worth about 400 million dollars and still counting.

Still counting because we are now a major non-NATO ally of the U.S. and other assistance and priorities go with that. Still counting because as we do our own reforms in our armed forces, there is a commitment from the United States to give their appropriate counterpart.

As far as our fundamental reforms of the armed forces are concerned, we have two main documents to serve as our guide. One is the joint defense assessment with the U.S. Armed Forces, and I have Presidential assistant Ernie Carolina, who is here working with me to make sure that that is carried out. The other is the finding of the Feliciano Commission. And I have with me also — though she’s not here today — Presidential Adviser Carolina Hernandez to make sure that those reforms are carried out.

That would be the next installment of our modernization and increasing professionalization of our Armed Forces.

But today is a great day, because today we have the most modern and capable boat in our Philippine Navy. This boat is our fastest naval boat and also it has the most accurate gun power. It also has a rubber auxiliary boat that can deploy our swag very quickly to their area of assigned operation.

Truly, this will go a long way in increasing the fighting and even rescuing capability of our Philippine Navy.

I congratulate the Philippine Navy for all the work that they have done all these years even before this increase capability came about. I mentioned the bringing down of Abu Sabaya. Today, we had the award to our naval forces who helped in the rescue and now the recovery of the victims of the Super Ferry tragedy.

I remember getting a text message from some of the families of the missing and they said, please ask the Balikatan to help look for our relatives or at least their remains. and I could send a text back to them, I said, even before you ask for my help, Balikatan has already been there helping out. and that is part of the blessings of our good relationship with the United States.

The other side of our relationship with the United States, the bigger side in fact, is the economic relationship — the official development assistance and the investments coming from American companies. I am very happy that next week I will be inaugurating a 330-million dollar investment from Sunpower, an American company who also made its commitment to invest in the Philippines during my last state visit to the United States.

This 330-million dollar investment is only a part of the six-billion dollar economic relationship that we now enjoy with the United States.

And so, ladies and gentlemen of the Philippine Navy, the Philippine Armed Forces, the defense establishments, our friends from the United States, our friends from the international community. I am here not only to welcome a new modern fast boat, I’m here to celebrate the blessings of a correct foreign policy and I hope that we will have a chance to make sure that this foreign policy in the years to come will bring about the deep reforms in our armed forces, the deep reforms in our economic investment climate that will truly help the ordinary Filipino overcome the age-old problem of mass poverty in our country.

And now, by the power vested in me, as president of the Republic of the Philippines and as Commander in Chief of all Armed Forces, I hereby Commission Barko ng Republika ng Pilipinas, General Mariano Alvarez, into the naval service and designate her with bough number PS38.

And may I give, and having been said that, may I give my special respect to the family of the late General Mariano Alvarez who are here with us today.

To you, congratulations! To all of us, congratulations! And thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Commissioning and Blessing of the Newly Acquired Cyclone Class Navy Vessel, BRP General Mariano Alvarez (PS38). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090408/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5660&Itemid=38