Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Dr. Espie Cabral, Secretary of Social Welfare and Development.

Secretary Alabastro, Chairman Puno, President Juaneza, the other officials of the College of Physicians, physicians, ladies and gentlemen.

I was really looking forward to coming to this convention. It’s a special convention for me because it is an opportunity for me and for us to celebrate the excellence, compassion and heroism of our physicians. And more personally for me it is an opportunity to acknowledge once again the admirable proficiency of our doctors such as those doctors who saved the life of my husband. That night when he was undergoing surgery and I was in the chapel, I didn’t know whether in a few hour’s time I might be a widow. But that trial has reinforced my deep pride, and not only my deep pride because my husband… Because his case was very well-covered in the media, it has reinforced the deep pride of all Filipinos in the Filipino physician.

It has proven and it showed once again how world class our Filipino doctors are. Congratulations to all of you! World class in all fields of medicine and also in caring.

And as I thank the doctors who saved my husband’s life, I also thank the doctors who saved the life of so many Filipinos and even foreigners all over the country, all over the world for that matter. And I thank you all for your commitment, not only for your commitment, for your initiating the Health Education Reform Order or HERO which through your support, not only through your support, but through your recommendation was launched through the Executive Order 595.

I was looking at this memorandum of agreement on HERO and it says here that the PCP and PMA help commit to orient teaching personnel of public schools all over the country on preventive health care based on current morbidity and mortality trends, help implement a yearly nationwide medical and dental check up for elementary and high school students as well as teaching and non-teaching personnel of public schools all over the country.

Through this program, we will be able to reach out or continue to reach out to thousands, not thousands, we have half a million teachers and millions of schoolchildren who will hopefully make preventive medicine a way of life for all. And if we are successful in preventive medicine this will spare the government from the burden of dealing with common ailments clogging up our secondary and tertiary health facilities. In fact, if we talk about primary, secondary and tertiary hospitals, one of the reforms we have to make in our country is to really make the division of labor proper between primary, secondary and tertiary.

My understanding is primary health care you do more of the preventive medical attention and primary health care. And then for secondary then you have the simple surgery and delivery and things like that. And then of course the tertiary will be the more specialized services. But what has been happening is that secondary hospitals or the national hospitals continue to deal with primary cases simply because of the demand and the need.

So, what we are doing is we are allocating a very big portion of our budget, DOH budget, to assist the provincial hospitals — who should be primary hospitals — to become secondary hospitals to be able to perform ordinary surgery, to be able to perform deliveries so that tertiary hospitals or national hospitals will take care of the more specialized cases. And then also in these cases the provincial hospitals become more of secondary hospitals then we should really have the community take care of preventive medicine. And HERO is going to do that with the help of our physicians.

By refocusing on prevention rather than cure, by moving from “sick” care to “health” care, by managing illness by actually avoiding it, we can dramatically improve well-being indices across all sectors. The prevention of sickness is a hallmark of our vigilance against deadly diseases.

And I trust in the leadership of our College of Physicians, and I trust in the leadership of our DepEd, our DOH, our CHED, our DOST, our DSWD to help achieve the objective of HERO within the remaining three years of my administration.

We have 19 million students. We have half a million teachers so for us to be able to do what PCP and PMA says that you will do in this memorandum of agreement, we will be needing every willing pair of hands to ensure success and to institutionalize our goals. Thousands of lives continue to be at risk because of ignorance. And it is you who can help make them aware of what they need to do in order to avoid illness.

Health means wealth for a nation aspiring to be economically strong, politically stable and socially responsive. And that is what we are trying to say in this coming election. This coming election is about our future and whether we want to continue on a path of economic reform; clean up our environment so that our people won’t get sick; invest in education so that they will be more aware of what they should do with their own bodies and their health; create good jobs so that they will have the wherewithal to avoid sickness; and of course provide better health care.

But in any case, on my part, I will stay focused on my job.

I’m optimistic about the future of the nation and the well-being of our people. Our national agenda is designed to move the nation forward toward greater political stability, economic prosperity and peace and order.

Our economic reforms are in the frontline in our campaign to reduce poverty, because poverty reduction is our overarching goal. And we will continue to focus on it in the remainder of my term.

We worked hard in this first part of my term to reduce the budget deficit but that’s just the first step. Over the next three years, we will translate the positive results of our reforms to real benefits for the people. We will increase investment in our country and our people to:

First, improve our infrastructure in order to create an environment in which businesses feel confident to expand and employ more people, because more jobs means less poverty including I hope investing in more private hospitals and health care clinics;

Second, improve social services such as not only the primary, secondary and tertiary hospitals but also health insurance subsidies for indigent families and food-for-school programs so that our children won’t go hungry and their families won’t go hungry either when we give them a kilo of rice whenever they go to school;

Third, boost educational support in our efforts to reduce poverty by investing in better school buildings, new textbooks and teaching materials, and training programs for teachers and school administrators including health educators, doctors and nurses;

And fourth, cutting red tape and continuing to eliminate corruption from the system.

And, of course, we will continue to fight against terrorism and work to bring peace and prosperity to Mindanao. And may I give a special thanks to the doctors who do public health services and even private health services in the far reaches of Mindanao.

In short, I believe in the Philippines. I believe in its hardworking people. And I believe in the physicians of the Philippines.

And I ask you, physicians, let’s work hard together until my term ends to make economic prosperity, social justice, and peace and security a reality for a new modernizing Philippines.

HERO is one way by which we can do it. Working to improve the services of our provincial hospitals is another way to do it. Working together to make health insurance more efficient and cover more services is still another way to do it, and the way to do that is to be able to use our taxes properly.

And so, there are so many things that we can do together. But you are such world class physicians, I have no doubt you will also be world class citizens and servants of the people.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Ceremonies of the 37th Annual Convention of the Philippine College of Physicians. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412150631/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2015&Itemid=38