Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During a Luncheon hosted by Governor Benjamin Cayetano and Mrs. Vicky Cayetano

[Delivered at the Formal Dining Room, Washington Place, Honolulu, Hawaii, October 24, 2002]

Mrs. Cayetano; Admiral and Mrs. Fargo; Honorable Senator; Congressman; State Senators; Supreme Court Justices and Judges; Former Governors; Madame Vice Governor; Ladies and Gentlemen; Leaders of the Hawaiian Political scene who are partly Filipino:

I’m really very happy to be here today and I’m glad to have the chance to spend some time with fellow Filipinos. Tonight with the bigger community and today with those who run the state but are of Philippine origin.

And I’m very happy to realize how close we are to each other. Ambassador Del Rosario took 17 hours to come here from Washington but I only took 10 hours to come here from Manila. So, actually Hawaii is closer to the Philippines than to Washington geographically.

And no wonder then that there are Filipinos in Hawaii. But of course, we know the history of Filipinos here. Ben Cayetano’s father is an example of the story, the saga of the first Filipinos who came to Hawaii. He was not here in 1906, he came in 1928, but the story was quite similar.

We know about the first Filipinos who came to live in Hawaii who started here working in the sugar plantations. But today, all of you in this hall are testimony to how important the Philippine community has become. You are such king makers that you have made a governor. And in a federal country like the United States, the governor is the president of his own state. In a unitary country like the Philippines, the senators usually produced a president like in my case. But here in the United States because you have a federal form of government many of the presidents come from the ranks of the governors — that is how important a governor is. And that is why we Filipinos are so proud to have a governor who is a Filipino, and that is the governor of Hawaii.

And so, therefore, it is my honor to come then to give you the greetings of the Filipino people, to let you know how proud they are of you. And how proud they are of the many Filipinos who are here in this hall who are in great positions of authority in the State of Hawaii and even in the federal government of the United States.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during a Luncheon Hosted by Governor Benjamin Cayetano and Mrs. Vicky Cayetano. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210819/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8408&Itemid=38