Thank you very much.

Thank you, Dr. Vea; Ambassador Yuchengco, thank you for this wonderful honor. But more than that, thank you for bringing honor to our country because when you were ambassador to the United Nations, my Ambassador to the United Nations, you were the one who got our votes to get into the U.N. Security Council of 2004; Mrs. Helen Dee, thank you, too; Prime Minister Virata; Secretary Navarro; Dr. Torres; Mr. Lim Sim; Mr. Santos; Dr. Biglete; Dr. Valisno; deans and officers of the administration; parents; graduates; ladies and gentlemen:

I am happy to be here with the Mapua of the 21st century. Mapua has long been synonymous with quality engineering. It is among the institutions that has done us Filipinos proud. Aside from being the choice of Ambassador Yuchengco for his educational innovations for the 21st century, Mapua is also the alma mater of Dado Nanatao, the Filipino Bill Gates.

And so it is fitting today that among the many graduating students of Mapua that we congratulate, we also congratulate the first batch of computer science graduates. May there be more Dado Banataos among you. And may there be Alfonso Yuchengcos among you also in the future.

I congratulate you for graduating. There are many young people, other young people who are unable to graduate. Perhaps among your underclassmen, some are at risk of not graduating. Not because they lack intelligence, but perhaps they lack funds. Many are even forced to stop studying, just when they are about to finish, due to a lack of money.

In my going around among the people, I have found that many students and their families spend time and money for college, especially a good private college like Mapua, only to run out of resources on the final lap. For the average Filipino, basic family needs must be met first, such as food and other expenses. That's why it's often difficult to finance college studies, especially when funds are dwindling.

I understand this problem. It is the history of my father, former President Diosdado Macapagal. By the way, Diosdado Macapagal was a close friend of Don Alfonso Yuchengco. Every fifth jubilee of my father, Ambassador Yuchengco would give a dinner, a birthday dinner in his honor. For example, 65th birthday, 70th birthday, 75th birthday, 80th birthday. Once, I made a mistake, I told Dr. Yuchengco that my father would be eighty five years old. So, he gave him a dinner. He was only eighty four years old, I made a mistake. But it was providential, he gave a dinner on his 84th birthday but on the 85th birthday of my father, he was already too sick to have been the guest of honor in yet another jubilee celebration. And so it was providential. And I’m very grateful that on the last possible birthday my father could celebrate physically, Ambassador Yuchengco was his host.

Let me talk about my father. He started studying law. Like many of you, he studied and finished a degree. He started in law, he was poor so he was a working student. But because he was poor, his body was weak. A working student, working, studying, walking from school to work or work to school to home. He contracted tuberculosis. His doctor said, “You need to stop working or stop studying. You can’t do both.” But how could he study if he stopped working because they were poor? There was no more tuition money, so he stopped working, he also stopped studying. Fortunately, there was Don Honorio Ventura, a wealthy but unmarried man. He learned of his situation, paid for his continued studies. That's why he became a bar topnotcher and achieved his success through his perseverance in finishing his studies.

But not all students who are short on funds find their Don Honorio Ventura. Nor do all find their Don Alfonso Yuchengco. That's why I decided to take action to solve the problems of students like these.

I learned that there is a scholarship program and a student loan program at CHED, but it doesn't reach all those we want to help. Perhaps some of you have been helped, I don't know because I know there are 400,000 students helped by the scholarship. In addition, what CHED provides is not enough to cover all the expenses of a college education. You might be able to pay the tuition, but you might not be able to pay the other miscellaneous fees. But now in the 2004 budget, because we have been able to manage our budget deficit ceiling, we’ve been able to do appropriate fiscal policy, we’ve been able to generate more revenues than we targetted, the 2004 budget will give the biggest funding support for the education of deserving students.

Now in 2004, through an interest-free student loan program, those who are short on funds in their 3rd year, 4th year and graduating students will no longer worry about where to get the funds for their studies. Because a student can borrow per semester when short on funds up to 8,000 pesos, and this will begin to be paid two years after graduation. If the debt is less than 4,000 pesos it is payable within five years. If the debt is more than 4,000 pesos up to 8,000 pesos it is ten years to pay.

And I have already released the initial 200 million pesos for the student loan program. Eto ang tunay na “Study Now, Pay Later.” get your degree, get a job within two years, then repay your loan. This is an important component of our fight for education for the average Filipino.

We Filipinos have always valued education. I’m sure the parents here are testimony to that. I’m sure many of your parents have sacrificed so that you can be in this hall today graduating. And thanks to your parents concern. Thanks for the value that the average Filipino gives to education, our country is ranked very highly. It is ranked number one in terms of the number of knowledge workers being produced. Many of these knowledge workers involved engineering, many of them involved information technology. And I congratulate Mapua under the leadership of Ambassador Yuchengco for this thrust of strengthening engineering but also computer science and information technology. Thus, the Mapua of the 21st century occupies a pivotal role in the knowledge society that our country is becoming known for. Information technology and its related industries, they are the growth sector of our future.

We have invested in the infrastructure here. During my administration, we were able to improve the bandwidth in the interconnectivity. So that today, it is only one-third of the cost of what it used to be before i was president.

And with Mapua producing graduates as what we are honoring today, we are also working on the human resources. Thus, we are producing the infrastructure and the human resources necessary for the development of information technology as the growth sector of our future.

Call centers and other back office operations which are — if you talk about I.T. in the range of skills, where on the one hand, you have software development at the highest range, and you have call centers at you would say relatively the lowest requirement of skills.

Let’s talk about call centers alone and back office operations. They grew from 2,000 jobs before I became president to now unexpected 40,000 jobs this year in 2004. And these jobs are growing every year.

This is not by accident. At the start of my tenure, I declared that technology will be the basis of our development. And it is becoming true in such a short tenure of my presidency. We can make technology work for and serve the average Filipino.

And I am very proud to be here and honored to be here to acknowledge that Mapua is playing a leading role in creating a modern and progressive Philippines.

To you, the fortunate products of Mapua, and its role in the knowledge society of the 21st century, congratulations!

Congratulations to this great institution. And congratulations to you, our graduates — the hope of the Philippines for the 21st century.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 117th Commencement Exercises of the Mapua Institute of Technology and the 3rd Commencement Exercises of the Mapua Information Technology Center. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090954/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5483&Itemid=38