Thank you very much, Secretary Gilbert Teodoro for your very kind introduction of me. And I’m also very proud to have you as my Secretary of National Defense. (applause)

Congresswoman Nikki Teodoro, Gilbert and Nikki, on the occasion of your wedding anniversary, congratulations! Happy Anniversary! (applause)

Our cabinet members who are here with us today; officials of Tarlac headed by Governor Victor Yap and including his father, Apeng Yap and also Jesli Lapus; kareng aliwa kung cabalen a Capampangan queti king Tarlac; (applause) dagiti kakailyak nga Ilocano, naimbag nga malem yo amin Apo; (applause) mayap gatpanapon kekongan.

And first and foremost… ah, Bishop Senense. Very happy to have you here (applause); and Mayor Felipe and all the other mayors and board members who are here with us today, and the barangay captains, teachers, everybody, our military and police officials, members of the Cojuangco-Teodoro family, members of the Lopez-Prieto family, all of you, Merry Christmas to all of you because this is a Christmas party as well. (applause)

First of all, Nikki, thank you for AMOR Village. It’s such a wonderful Christmas gift to the needy children of your district and province. And the name is so appropriate — Amor. It’s appropriate because we’re celebrating the amor of Nikki and Gilbert. (laughter/applause)

In fact, Nikki calls Gilbert “Amor”. (applause) Amor because Christmas is a time of love and AMOR which stands for Accelerating Minors’ Opportunity for Recovery. And that expresses the commitment of its sponsors, and Nikki tells me there are so many sponsors, not only DSWD and Espie, and everybody here from DSWD but also our various NGOs.

It shows their commitment to love and nurture the children under their care. And it reminds us that the spirit of Christmas is all about love for others, it’s all about AMOR.

It is a day that we must extend our hands to those who are suffering and the unfortunate among us, especially during Christmas. We must work to provide a path to economic stability and dignity for every Filipino man, woman and child during this time of name, love and faith. (applause)

The choice of Anao for the AMOR Village is very fitting. In AMOR, it is known as one of the Most Child-Friendly Municipalities in the region, (applause) so we commend the local government and the people. Congratulations! To Anao. (applause)

Thank you, Nikki for acknowledging Anao as a very child-friendly municipality even though, as Victor Yap confirmed, it is the smallest municipality of Tarlac. And thank you, Nikki for continuing the advocacy you started for children while you were still a congressional spouse. Children all over the country have benefited, not just in Tarlac. Because today Congress has a permanent committee that looks after matters and issues relating to the welfare of Filipino children and that is chaired by no less than Congresswoman Nikki Prieto Teodoro. (applause)

It is just right that we are holding this occasion, because tomorrow is the sixtieth anniversary of the U.N. Declaration of Human Rights. So tomorrow and today I call on the nation to focus our combined strength on strengthening and expanding the human rights of Filipino children, our children. (applause)

There are four categories included in the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child regarding the rights of children:

1. Survival. The right of the child to life. This means ensuring that the child is provided with food, health services, shelter and clothing.

2. Development. The right of the child to reach his or her full potential. This includes education, the right to rest and play, to participate in spiritual activities, and to receive care.

3. Protection. The right regarding protection covers safeguarding against physical abuse, and we congratulate Nikki for filing the bill. And as chairwoman of the committee, she will be the one to move it forward until it passes before 2009 ends, the bill against Corporal Punishment of Children. (applause)

But Nikki said that the law will not only cover those who are physically harmed or whipped, also verbal abuse in schools because part of the rights of children is protection against mental abuse and also against sexual abuse. And it also includes protection against neglect and exploitation of children. We need to provide more support to children in this category. So to Nikki, for being a champion of the protection of children, with this AMOR Village as symbol but also with your work in your committee in Congress, congratulations! and thank you. (applause)

4. The fourth human right of children – Participation. This ensures that the child is given the right to say what they think or feel and to participate in the activities of their peers. This includes the right to be given a name and to belong to a country and the right to be recognized as a member of a family, a community or society.

Amin dagitoy ket maysa nga rason no apay nga patuloy nga ag-invest tayo maipanggep ti salung-at, panagadal ken social services. Inikkan tayo iti ad-adu nga atensyon iti salun-at ken panagadal iti ubbing. AMOR Village and similar other children shelters assist government in looking after the mental health and emotional rehabilitation of handicapped children or those who were abandoned and victims of domestic abuse. These are the neediest ones. They should always receive our preferential attention and care. Tatta nga papaserrek ti Pasko, rebbeng nga agyaman tayo amin dagiti grasya.

Let us stand and see in the future more names and stories and optimism.

The people should come together this Christmas season to celebrate our faith in God and the unity of families. Our celebration now is just right. (applause) AMOR, Love of Christmas because it’s a Christmas party, Love for the children because of AMOR Village, and the Love of Gilbert and Nikki. We also love them both. (applause)

Dios ti agngina kadakayo amin, Apo. Thank you. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the inauguration of AMOR Village. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609062628/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=14683&Itemid=38