Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Rotary International Presidential Celebration on Poverty Alleviation

[Delivered at the Rizal Ballroom,Shangri-la Hotel, Makati City, January 31, 2004]

Thank you very much.

Thank you Undersecretary Joc-joc Bolante for you introduction.

Welcome to the Philippines, President of Rotary International Jonathan Majiyagbe

And I would like to greet the icons of rotary in the Philippines – Herman Gamboa, Paen Hechanova, Mr. John Thorne welcome also. Other international and local rotary delegates, guests, ladies and gentlemen.

What a great honor for the Philippines to be one of only fifteen rotary areas to have this “Presidential celebration”. A hundred sixty Rotary clubs all over the world, fifteen are hosting this presidential celebration. Thank you rotary international for giving the Philippines the honor.

And I congratulate Rotary International Jonathan for this big idea and I welcome all Rotarians who are championing it.

When I was coming down the aisle or at the aisle, Jonathan notices that I greeted so many people by their first names. And he said. “Do you remember all the Rotarians by their first names?” I said, a lot of them because before I became a Senator or Vice President or President fighting for poverty alleviation. I was a Rotarian fighting for poverty alleviation. And I am happy to be able to see many of those Rotarians that we used to work together with here in this hall today.

And because, I was a very active Rotarian President, My husband was a multi-awarded Rotary Club President. Rotary has also become a partner of my administration in fighting for change for the average Filipino in fighting for poverty alleviation. In my moving around the country and talking to the average Filipino, I can see that the change wished for indeed is in terms of poverty alleviation. In terms of a better life such as jobs, prices, livelihood, food on every table, shelter security, health, education.

On jobs, the strength of my foreign policy gives confidence to nations to invest in our nation. And because I was a Rotarian before I became a public official, rotary international has come to comprise that part of the international relationships I have developed as an economist. Senator, trade official and President, to run this country and attract huge investments needed to modernize our nation.

I have many beautiful memories of attending international rotary conferences with our Club in Makati Central. With the other Rotarians, with the Rotarians, I remember being in Taiwan, being Osaka, being in Florida together bonding with my club members and their…..But also getting to know and developing that international network that have been able to help the Philippines attain this stature of being a welcoming place for investments.

The people to people international network that I have been able to develop – thanks to Rotary International – is also paralleled by our relationship on the official level with the us and other developed countries that is also part of the network of international relationships. For instance, our strong relationship with the U.S. has resulted during the short time that I have been President in and economic and security relationship worth 6 billion dollars, including American investments like Intel, which has expanded to 1 billion dollars during my administration. Sunpower Solar Cells 330 million dollars investment. Texas instruments about 70 million dollars and a Car Assemble Plant of Ford 50 million dollars, and numerous Call Centers and other business process outsourcing investments that are becoming the growth sector of our future. Call Centers and business process outsourcing employment in the Philippines have grown from 2,000 seats before I became President to a projected 40,000 seats this year. And doubling every year.

On May here, I called up the Administrator of the Economic Zone Lilia De Lima because I wanted to check with her the figure of Texas instruments. And she said, I also like to add that this January, Lilia said, in the economic zones we approved almost 10 billion pesos worth of investments compared to only 1.8 billion in January last year.

We want of course, to make the Philippines a safe place for investments, for the average Filipino. For the poor Filipino who has no means to provide to pay for his own security. And even on the security relationship, with the U.S. for instance when I first became President, I inherited a military assistance commitment from the United States worth 1.9 million dollars and counting. Including a giant naval cyclone boat that is arriving of February 23rd worth 30 million dollars just for one naval ship.

In terms of this assistance, military assistance, the Philippines is NO. 1 in East Asia. No. 4 worldwide, with more to come because we have been declared a major non-NATO ally of the U.S.

Last year we increase foreign investment in the Philippines by about 23 percent. In fact, in the short period of my Presidency we created more than 3 million jobs, compared to only 1 million created in the previous 3 years.

I have been talking about investments because the best way to fight poverty is to create jobs, spread wealth which rotary does a lot and give the peoples the tools they need to succeed, which rotary also does a lot of.

Many decades age, when my father was President of the Philippines, we were one of Asia’s most progressive economies. But after that, when the other economies around the Philippines were growing double digit during the East Asian economic miracle. Somehow the Philippines failed to fight for the fundamental reforms we needed to sustain our growth and our place in that community of economies in Southeast Asia.

That is why, I have started to fight for these fundamental reforms that we should have done a long time ago.

The result stability and robust economy—among Asia’s best performers a far as growth is concerned. For 2003, GNP grew 5.5 percent compared to an average of 2.9 percent in the three years before I became President. These has defied all expectations and a 3.1 percent inflation rate is the lowest in a generation. Again, this is just a down payment.

I will fight for an unprecedented change that makes us more secure. Strengthen out families, stamps our corruption because these are what we need to fight poverty. I will fight to change the culture of corruption, stop the scourge of drugs and wipe out terrorism because we need an environment that does not have these things in order to fight poverty. And directly for poverty alleviation, I will expand health coverage to all, bring more housing, expand property rights and create more jobs that attract higher wages. We will have clean water and clean government.

I am aware that you Rotarians share many of the same goals and values I cherish. Your programs to promote micro lending to improve farm productivity, your Gawad Kalinga program with the couples for Christ. All of these attest to your commitment to positive social change.

And so I ask you to fight with me, to fight for a change, to be the average Filipinos champion.

Earlier I mentioned, we would have clean water and clean government. A symbol of governance and essential services. You know how to fight for a clean government because you are leaders in the community, you a re active in electoral exercises, you are active as watchdogs of the community. And in your weekly rotary meetings, you make public officials accountable to you, to the people with their explanations of what they are doing to serve the people. Your polio class is a very important contribution to the health of the nation which you served. Clean water is also crucial for health.

I specifically mention clean water because I have found in going around the people and even going around Metro Manila that, that still a crying need. In 2003, I did a survey of how many families in Metro Manila have access to clean water and have to go out and buy very expensive water, a 160,000 families in Rizal, I did a survey, a similar survey. 50,000 families. And in the countryside, because Rizal we don’t really considered that countryside anymore, it’s very urban. In the countryside, more than a hundred municipalities still don’t have access to clean water.

This is a major poverty alleviation effort that I am seeking, I am fighting to address. And I am very happy that my project manager for this is a Rotarian, Ram Agoncillo.

And so I ask you Rotarians, if there is something you would like to add that special for the year 2004. Yes! Go on fighting for clean government because we have elections coming up. But help me too, to fight for clean water, an essential element in poverty alleviation.

I thank you all for having helped me before I became President, before I became politician, and helping me even today. And to all our Rotarians from all over the world, thank you for helping your communities and thank you too for helping the Philippines in the international brotherhood of Rotary.

Thank you and welcome once again and to all of you, and Mabuhay.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Rotary International Presidential Celebration on Poverty Alleviation. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090944/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5476&Itemid=38