RALLYING FOR ST. BERNARD

First and foremost, the government is focused on the rescue of any survivors that may have escaped the initial tragedy but we need assistance.

Secondly… Thirdly, we all have to work together in order to give relief to our brothers and to help them rehabilitate their lives afterwards. So we have to help them build their new homes and to have a new tomorrow. All the places in our country, and this is what I’ve been saying earlier, that may be considered in danger because of the strong rains, we’ll need to have a mechanism for preparedness in order to be saved from what happened and if necessary, as Secretary Nonong Cruz said, we are… We must be prepared to evacuate them from their places if these rains are considered dangerous because of the rains and the coming—well, it’s already here—of La Niña.

These relief operations are not only terribly sad but also dangerous for survivors and relief workers alike, as Secretary Cabral gave an example of. With the continuing likelihood of more rain and soft hillsides, we must take caution and be prepared, at times decelerated since last night when wisely the rescue operations were stopped for a few hours, and having to confront the prospect of more landslides. Vigilance is called for like in places like Caraga and in Antipolo and maybe you ought to have to tell us where else. We must expect that other slides could occur. We have to be sure that this other landslides will not result in the same tragedy.

We’d like to thank the lord that now we have revenues in our treasury to spend on the infrastructure in this time of crisis. For too long before we had our reforms, the nation has been weakened by lack of investment in vital infrastructure that might help alleviate this kind of tragedy through stronger houses, better roads and better engineering.

This is an opportunity and we should all be able to… This is an opportune time because we now have the revenues, we should all work together. We should be united in order to mobilize our capability, that ability to ensure that this type of tragedy is already a thing of the past.

I would like to greet and thank all of those who have worked on this effort so greatly—the police, the soldiers, the government workers—they were so braved in answering this tragedy. And I also thank the thousands of average citizens who volunteered to help in the relief efforts. Permit me also to thank our friends from the international community from different parts of the world that even as we speak are already sending their resources to help us.

These are time of trial for our souls. The country should be united, should be together, should embrace and help all of those who lost their loved ones and all of those who survived and treat them like family.

We are one nation. We will rise as one in the middle of all these trials. These trials will show the strength of character of the Filipino and the Filipino nation. We will not rest until all the last remains of our beloved countrymen, countrywomen and children will be recovered and be given the proper and dignified burial.

I’m really very sad to think of the children, especially the schoolchildren whose innocence and hope were snuffed out in such a tragic way by what happened here— kagimbal-gimbal na trahedya.

I’m calling on every Filipino to pray for the victims and all of the survivors. We must rally around as a people and a nation in this moment of grief. We know that a better day is coming, although it’s hard to imagine at this point in time when there is a very, very great tragedy that is breaking our hearts and souls.

I’ve called on Executive Secretary Ermita to establish a multi-agency task force to provide a full investigation and accounting of the tragedy so that we can learn what steps each community and the nation can take to minimize if not eliminate this type of tragedy from occurring again.

I call on every Filipino of every political party, of every religious affiliation and of every economic circumstance, to embrace the better angels of our nature and unite in compassion for the victims and survivors of this tragic event.

Let’s go on with our work and help and most of all with our prayers for our countrymen in Southern Leyte and the entire Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].