Thank you very much, Secretary Reyes, you are truly a soldier. But Secretary Reyes is here not as a soldier, he is our Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources, and we have many trades and investments from China in our mines. There are three Cabinet members with me now. Secretary Arty Yap of Agriculture is also here, and Secretary Toting Bbunye, our Press Secretary, is also here.

We have a large Philippine delegation here on this visit to Fujian, the homeland of many Filipino-Chinese, so I will introduce them to all of you. You all know the former governor of Pampanga, now, he is our senator, Lito Lapid. Our congressmen from Palawan, Tony Alvarez; from Negros Occidental, my brother-in-law, Ignacio Arroyo; from Pampanga, my son, Mikey Arroyo; from Laguna, Dan Bueser; our Deputy Majority Floor Leader and he is from Iloilo, Art Defensor; also here from Lanao Del Sur, Jun Macarambon; from Sultan Kudarat, Teng Mangudadatu; from Isabela, Anthony Miranda; from Bulacan, Pedro Pancho; from Negros… Bacolod City, I mean, Monico Puentevella; from Pangasinan, Gener Tulagan; and from Mindoro Occidental, Girlie Villarosa. Is there any congressperson that I didn't mention? Because when the delegation is large, someone is often overlooked.

We also have many governors and city mayors here now: from Bohol, Governor Rico Aumentado, he is also the president of the Union of Local Authorities of the Philippines; from Eastern Samar, Ben Evardone; from Cebu, Gwen Garcia; from Laguna, Ningning Lazaro; from Zambales, Vic Magsaysay; from Agusan Del Sur, Eddie Bong Plaza. Was Leo Ocampos not able to come? Okay. But he knew, he knew that he was invited. Okay. Anyway, our city mayors from Valenzuela, Win Gatchalian; from Butuan, Boy Plaza; from San Carlos City, Jolly Resuello, there you go!; And from Calbayog, Mel Sarmiento. These are our elected officials who are with us here in our delegation.

And of course, our ‘Cream of the Crop’ of the Filipino-Chinese business community are from Fujian, so our business delegation is large. Some are here, only a few were able to enter because if we included the entire Filipino… The entire business delegation there would be no room for our overseas Filipinos here, there are so many of them. Anyway, can we have the Filipino-Chinese and the Filipino business community stand up to be acknowledged — at least those who were able to enter the room because there are so many of them. And of course, we also want to greet our officials here in China, our Ambassador, Ambassador Sonia Brady, and our new Consul General, not yet one year here, Consul General Lee Pineda. Also here is Undersecretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs, Frank Benedicto, also of Chinese descent.

And you know, because China is so large, imagine one-fourth of the world is China, one-fourth of our personnel should be here from our foreign service. But of course, that is not possible, so we appointed several honorary special envoys to help with our work here. And from what I saw who entered this room, I saw Fred Yao, one of our special envoys to expand our trade here in China.

I am here because first of all, there is something important to celebrate in Nanning in the coming days. All of the ASEAN leaders are traveling to China to celebrate a very important — there! Tagbilaran City Mayor Danny Lim. Thank you — a very important milestone for ASEAN, the region and the world — that is the 15 years of ASEAN-China collaboration. It is a great honor for the Philippines because the Philippines is the co-chair with China here in the Commemorative Summit of our very important anniversary. But on this occasion, I made sure to have the opportunity to meet and talk with our overseas Filipinos. Because every time I go on official trips abroad, I always enjoy being with our compatriots.

In Saudi Arabia, of course, there are one-and-a-half million of them. Here, you are about 500, but still I want to be with you today. Thank you for being here even during work hours. Thank you to those who traveled for three hours. Thank you very much for coming here. How are you all doing here in Xiamen, in Fujian, in China? Very good. Our Capampangan friends? Hey, how are you all? There’s a relative of my mother’s sibling here, Ilocano, good evening to all of you. Any Bisaya? Good afternoon to all of you. From the Visayas and Mindanao, is there anyone related to my husband who is Ilonggo? Good afternoon to all of you. And do we have any Bicolanos here? None. There! One. Good afternoon. And do we have any Waray people here like Mel and Ben Evardone? None. No Waray. There! One. How is that? Good evening.

Here in Xiamen and its surrounding areas, I am pleased that even though you are few, only five hundred, you are actually very, very highly regarded by the people of China — there’s another one. Ha! Another one, Aro Mendoza of Tarlac City. There, okay — because the few Filipinos who are here, as Consul General said, are engaged in professional or technical work. So your situation here is very good. I’m very proud of the status and reputation of Filipinos in this part of China. Congratulations to all of you!

As Consul General Pineda said, the spirit of the Filipino is everywhere, truly. And I see the spirit of Filipino… Of the enterprising Filipino everywhere I go. Wow! You even have an SM here, right? Do you also shop at SM? Very good. Didn’t Tessie Sy tell me, I hope I can see it because it’s like the malls in the Philippines. When you’re there at SM, it’s like you’re in the Philippines too. And there’s even a Rizal Shrine in Jinjiang that we will visit tomorrow.

There are many monuments honoring Jose Rizal. There is one in Spain, and we also saw one in Cuba. Statues of Rizal can be found in different parts of the world, but I think the monument here in China, in Fujian, is one of the most unique and meaningful, because it was built in a place believed by experts to be the origin of Rizal’s ancestor, Ke Nan. So that’s his hometown.

The Chinese roots of our national hero underscore the racial and blood ties that Filipinos have with the Chinese, especially from this area of Southern China. So earlier I was looking at some of you here, some of you are very obviously professionals here, but others are Filipino-Chinese. I want to thank our Filipino community, those who contributed to Gawad Kalinga, these are houses for our poor. A house is only 50 or 60,000 pesos, so about 1,000 dollars. So I want to thank, first of all, on behalf of the Philippine community, your president, Engineer Go. Oh, no, no, Celso Halap. Thank you very much, Celso. And also Engineer and Mrs. Go, the owners of the international school. And also Sotero Baluyot-Lee. You know, I asked him, what are you to Sotero Baluyot? He said he was his godfather. The reason I asked who Sotero Baluyot was, he was a former Secretary of Public Works. He was my godfather when I was baptized, so we are siblings.

Anyway, although only thirty-one years have passed since the formal friendship between the Philippines and China, the friendship and exchange of trade between Filipinos and Chinese have lasted for thousands of years. And now, especially in the last five years, our relationship has grown even stronger because the Philippines and China are embarking on a stage of relationship that President Hu Jintao calls “The Golden Age of Partnership.” And you Filipinos here are part of this partnership.

Relations between China and the Philippines are at an all-time high. They are based on mutual respect. I suppose you can feel the respect of the Chinese for you, right, Filipinos here? Our nation’s relationship with China is among the most important ties of our country. Philippine relations with China are now more confident, mature, comprehensive, punctuated with substantial and important projects aimed at deepening exchanges in a number of areas, including economics, trade and investment, and even defense, and even people-to-people exchange. Our experts are here, like you, and they are also in different parts of China.

I remember when I visited China in September 2004 and President Hu Jintao visited Manila in April 2005. Because last year was the 30th year of our anniversary of our relations, so Hu Jintao visited there. And what was the message of my visit here in Beijing and his visit there in Manila? The message was: “To underscore the growing maturity of our relationship and the commitment our two countries share to strengthen our ties.”

The Philippines and China made an agreement, called the Early Harvest Program. Through an MOU or Memorandum of Understanding signed when President Hu visited Manila. This means that about two hundred trade products between each other can enter each other’s country without tariff or duty. And because of this, our trade has grown a lot. China’s trade with Southeast Asia is growing rapidly, but in all of Southeast Asia, its trade with the Philippines has grown the fastest. So our relationship is very special. Arty Yap, the Secretary of Agriculture, is here, one reason is because agricultural trade is very extensive between the Philippines and China. And this has expanded even more when we had this Memorandum of Understanding with China in 2005. Agricultural trade increased with the conclusion of the Philippine-China Memorandum of Understanding.

In the Philippines, this is where Fujian is located; we have a large amount of trade in electronics. We sell electronics to them, and they sell electronics to us. Because electronics… The way that it’s happening in the world today is not that one piece is made entirely in one country. One piece is made there, sent here to be fabricated. One piece is made here, sent there to be assembled. And the benefit of our trade with China is that we have a very, very large market for our electronics industry. Because the electronics industry in the Philippines is number one in exports.

In the past, almost all of our exports of electronics — not all, but a large amount — went to America. But I remember in 2001, when I was just a new president, the electronics industry in America weakened. I said, oh no! Disaster, that’s a large… Our number one export, 70 percent of the Philippines’ exports are electronics. I was still a new president, our exports would fall, our economy would fall, they might think I was unlucky. But that didn’t happen because as the American market weakened, the China market strengthened. And in these times — because America weakened and they have to spread their risks, they went outside Southeast Asia and even to India — but in the meantime the Philippines found another huge customer with China. So the electronics firms in the Philippines were able to sell here in China. So even though times were difficult in America, they were still able to sell here in China during difficult years.

And as I said, between Fujian and the Philippines mutually, our number one trading product is electronics. So the top exports between China and the Philippines comprise semi-conductor devices, machinery parts and accessories, electrical and electronic machinery, and electronic micro assemblies. I don’t know if there are any Filipinos here who are in that industry.

Approximately one-third of total electronic exports are skewed towards the Chinese market. But if we talk about the entire trade between China and the Philippines, 42 percent has grown annually since 2001. So now China is number three among our trading partners, following only the U.S. and Japan. For example, you Capampangans here — are there any Capampangans… Ah, yes, our Capampangans. Are there any from Tarlac, from Subic? That’s it! Okay — when you return home, if you go home around 2009, the trip from Manila to Clark-Subic will be fast because we have a fast train that can now go there. Construction just started last week so it will be finished in 2009. So when you return, visit your relatives, because you will likely take Philippine Airlines, landing Xiamen to Manila. You will take the train to Clark-Subic, the trip will be fast, remember this is because of the friendship between your host country and the Philippines because it was funded by China for the Philippines. And we are delighted with the financing of our Northrail project.

I want to inform you that a major priority of our country now is infrastructure because for a long time — I guess you may not have been here then or maybe you were still there — for a long time we haven’t been able to fund our own infrastructure without borrowing. Because before our budget was 900 billion pesos, taxes 700 billion. Of the 700 billion, 350 billion goes to paying interest on our large debt; 250 billion goes to the salaries of our government workers; 150 billion goes to the share of local government, so that’s 700 billion already. There’s nothing left for infrastructure, nothing left for education, for social services, for health. So where do we get it? We borrow. That’s the difference between spending and taxes, the 200 billion pesos. That was always our deficit then.

But I thank Lito, our senator, our congressmen because they passed our tax reforms. Now we are moving towards a balanced budget, we no longer need to always rely on debt for infrastructure and social services. We have a goal to balance our budget by 2010, but as I said before the reforms our deficit was 200 billion. Our deficit this year is between 100 and 120 billion, halved in one year after your tax reforms, senator and congressmen, so my economic managers say that even if I say we should balance the budget by 2010 we can achieve it by 2008.

And not only can we balance the budget, we can spend on infrastructure that we haven’t been able to spend on for a long time if we couldn’t borrow. Infrastructure development is crucial to our economic development plan for the nation. Maybe you who live in Xiamen — I don’t know how long you’ve been here. You’re very young, maybe 20 years ago you definitely weren’t here — 20 years ago, Xiamen was poor but they spent on their infrastructure. Now, Xiamen is very beautiful, very rich, able to provide good jobs for you. That’s what we need to do in our country — spend on infrastructure so that investors will come.

And this… The Northrail project as just an example of how much help China gives us, that Northrail which will speed up the trip from Manila to Clark-Subic is worth nine hundred million dollars, 900 million dollars. A generous loan from China, this is very important when this train line is built, it will make travel to the province to Clark-Subic easier. And China also provides a lot of support for our agriculture — there! Dr. Undan is there at the Central Luzon State University in Nueva Ecija — that’s a big help from China to him. We are happy to know China’s support for the Philippines in the field of agriculture. In Dr. Undan’s area there is a beautiful Philippine-Sino Agricultural Center or Center for Agricultural Technology that looks like a Ming Palace, it’s very beautiful. That is a symbol of China’s help to our agriculture.

So here is Arty Yap, we have a large cooperation in agriculture with China. And I do all of this just to create many jobs for our Filipino citizens. The sincere desire of our administration is to uplift the Philippines so that a strong republic is what our children and grandchildren will inherit.

I’m very happy for you here that you are earning well here in China. But I long for the day when going abroad for a job is an option and not the only choice for a Filipino worker. So even though you are here in China, I ask that you continue your support so that we can achieve our plans for the Philippines.

Again, thank you very much for attending. Thank you very much. I am so happy to meet the Filipino community of Southern China.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during a Meeting with the Filipino Community. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409203808/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3000&Itemid=38