Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the opening ceremony of the 34th Asia-Pacific Convention of the Kiwanis International

[Delivered at the Atlantic Hall Waterfront Cebu City Hotel, Lahug District Cebu City, Cebu, March 13, 2009]

Thank you.

Thank you, Cerge, for your introduction and, of course, a heartfelt congratulations to Kiwanis!

First to my Cabalen, Chairman Navarro, congratulations! To our guests, our guests headed by Kiwanis International President Don, welcome to the Philippines; and our host Kiwanis Club Cebu; and we have, of course, to congratulate Marit Remonde and Miguel del Gallego. Our officials of the Philippine government; of the province of Cebu led by Governor Gwen Garcia who, I understand, hosted a very nice dinner for you last night; And in the table next to the Presidential table, we have our national officials such as our legislators. We have Deputy Speaker Raul del Mar — is this your district, Raul? Is this your district? So he is our host congressman. And then next to him we have my Presidential Adviser on Climate Change Sonny Alvarez; and Congressman Neri Soon Ruiz; former congresswoman and spouse of the incumbent congressman, Congresswoman Nancy Cuenco and Congressman Benhur Salimbangon:

So, we’re all very happy to be here and I’m sure I speak for all of them when I say to all the foreign delegates to this convention, welcome to the Philippines! Welcome to Cebu! And to the Kiwanis Club of Cebu City, whom the Mayor called the best civic club in his city, for hosting this Convention, congratulations also!

I guess we should congratulate, as I said earlier, that this South District Governor Marit and Convention Chairman Miguel for leaving no stone unturned. I understand that Marit worked very hard to bring this event to her husband Cerge’s province, which is now also her home province. But one of these days, Chairman Navarro and I will host you also, won’t we?

Now Cerge was introduced as a fellow Kiwanian, because I understand that Cerge was president of Kiwanis Cebu in 1997-1998, not really so long ago. So it was Cerge who first got Marit interested in Kiwanis. But in 2001, when Cerge joined my new administration, then Marit took his place as a full-fledged member of the Kiwanis Club. So now we have Press Secretary Cerge Remonde. He took his oath of office before me sometime ago but Marit wasn’t there so we didn’t have the picture taking, we simply will have a reenactment of the picture taking here when Marit is around and all of you are here. And we have Marit of Kiwanis Philippines South.

Originally, I understand, that originally founded as a business club way back in 1915, Kiwanis soon transformed itself into a service organization dedicated to changing the world; one child, one community at a time. Cerge and I and our other officials…that is our national officials, are dedicated also to a common vision: a Philippines on the verge of First World in 20 years; when we hope that by time we will have dramatically reduced poverty, created a robust middle-class and have all the hallmarks of a modern society in strong, stable institutions.

I’m glad that you are all here. Chairman Miguel was saying that he was afraid that because of the global financial crisis, there might be not such a good attendance. But thank you for this good attendance, 400 strong from the region are here.

And I hope that as you go around you will see that our economy is stronger than it has been in generations. It has demonstrated that the hard choices we made together with our congressmen and congresswomen in recent years regarding economic reforms have allowed the resources to mitigate the impact of the global financial crisis on the Philippines. These efforts have served us well. They have helped to ensure that at least, thus so far, the global crisis does not become a crisis in the Philippines.

Having said that, we have not been immune to the impact of the global crisis. When we were in the bus from the airport coming here, I asked Governor Gwen Garcia, “do you have displaced workers in our economic zone, in our economic export zone?” She said, “yes,” because we have a strong electronics and furniture export industry here, and it’s export industries that are taking the brunt in the Philippines of the global crisis.

So, therefore, we must continue to focus on jobs. We must focus… and also not only jobs but also keeping prices low because if there is unemployment created in the export sector, well, the cost of living becomes more difficult for them. So, the government must provide incentives to help the private sector to keep and create jobs. One of the things that we are doing together with the Secretary of Labor is for those electronics firms who said that they don’t want to fire all of their workers because they know that there will be a rebound — it’s just that they don’t know when the rebound will happen in the electronics sector. So, they said if the government could help them and keep their workers even if their workers don’t have real work to do but to train in the meantime. So, that’s what we’re doing. They can pay their workers half of the minimum wage because they won’t be working anyway while the government is training them for higher skills for the rebound. And so this half of the minimum wage is not a wage, it is just an allowance for their food and their transportation to their training. So, that is among the things that we’re doing to help the private sector keep and create jobs.

Also, while the electronics and the furniture sector of Cebu, which is heavily export-oriented, is doing retrenchment, other companies are expanding. So even as we speak now, my Secretary of Tourism, who is from Cebu, is conducting a jobs fair somewhere here in Cebu because tourists continue to come to Cebu. There is a 6.0 percent increase in tourism so far this year in spite of the global economic crisis.

The government must also continue to come to the rescue of the poorest among us with targeted subsidies of food, fuel and rice. And all that of course will cost money. In challenging economic times, therefore, the government must tighten its own belt and live within its own means, so that we can have the money to pay for all of these subsidies and programs that I mentioned earlier. So we must live within our own means just like the average Filipino household.

So to that end, the government is taking a series of actions to stop unnecessary and wasteful spending. For example, when we were in the airport today, I checked to make sure that they start to use fluorescent lights rather than incandescent lights, that’s one way of saving. The taxpayers deserve no less from the government and public servants.

One of the other actions is my Executive Order to all government agencies to reduce by one, 1.5 percent their respective Maintenance, Overhead and Operating Budgets. This translates to a 7-billion peso savings, and these savings are not to be kept in the bank. The government must pour all its savings and revenue into programs that help the poor and even the middle-class.

This includes more and more investments in education, healthcare and infrastructure. And in my Executive Order, I mandated that savings from MOOE be allocated to emergency employment for the next six months. I mentioned this because Kiwanis Clubs are always open to partnerships with others, including governments throughout the world. So, I invite you, the Kiwanis, to increase the reach of your civic projects by considering partnerships with our government in these important initiatives.

Education may be an important program thrust that would be most interesting to Kiwanis Clubs like those who are here present. Your organization has a long history of supporting the growth and development, and especially the education of children.

I heard, for instance, that the Kiwanis Club of Cebu has been running for almost 30 years now — Cerge? — a successful collegiate scholarship program. And I understand that the program has sent numerous poor students to college and that out of the hundreds that Kiwanis has sent through college in Cebu since 1980, I understand that there are 10 summa cum laude, 47 magna and 29 cum laudes. So, congratulations for that! Also, congratulations for the Kiwanis Book Club. One of these days, Cabalen, I hope that we can also look at Kiwanis Pampanga and see what projects we can do together.

For one, perhaps we can all support programs for providing meals for our children in school and jobs and training opportunities for our young graduates that indeed is crucial.

We must tackle many challenges at once to keep our economy and way of life going strong. That’s why on the part of government, we must live within our means and run a lean, efficient government. All the while, we must also simultaneously invest in people.

For this reason, in the light of the global crisis, in the implementation of the rationalization program of government, I have asked Secretary Andaya to make sure that nobody is dislocated. If in accordance with the rationalization program an employee is occupying a position that is declared redundant due to rationalization, but he still prefers to stay in government, then the position will only be abolished upon his regular retirement when he turns 65 or when he turns 60 and takes his voluntary retirement. Because it would really be quite ironic if we’re setting aside money for emergency employment and then we’re letting other people go in the meantime. So a lot of the positions declared redundant are anyway going to be vacated by retirement in a few years time.

And I believe we can wait for that time.

So these are the things that we’re doing in spite of the fact that in 2008 when many countries were having a negative growth rate, the Philippines had a GNP growth rate of 6.0 percent. We are not complacent. We have to work hard to make sure that the Philippines remains resilient in the face of the global crisis. So, we are not complacent but we are hopeful.

In the Kiwanis Cebu Club website, a song of hope plays in the background while one browses the contents of the site. In part the song goes like this: “Together, we can; together, we strive this task to fulfill.” Indeed, if we are together, we can make a difference. After all, we share a common passion: a civic organization like Kiwanis and a government institution like the government of the Philippines. So, therefore, let us all be in service together.

To Kiwanis Filipinos — let us all be in service together.

To Kiwanis from all parts of the region — welcome and I hope you will also be there with your governments and are working with the Kiwanis here to help our people as well.

To all of you, welcome! Congratulations! And thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s Speech during the Opening Ceremony of the 34th Asia-Pacific Convention of the Kiwanis International. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412104321/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=21988&Itemid=38