COCO DIESEL: A SOLUTION TO OUR ENERGY WOES

I am very pleased with your warm welcome to me this afternoon. What we are doing is about energy. Energy is an important part of the Economic and Social Reform Agenda of my administration.

My attendance here, my attendance here, is to explain to you how important this coco diesel that we are undertaking is.

There are three important things about this coco diesel that we are launching today.

First, as our speakers mentioned earlier, this helps to increase the income of our coconut farmers. Because, we have new uses for our copra. Back when I was a small child in Iligan, my grandmother, her plantation was also copra. And during that time, the copra sold all over the world was for make-up and things like that, but now, it is also used for energy.

And we, other countries, were ahead of us. Now, we are doing it in our country to ensure that there will be buyers of the products of our coconut farmers.

The second reason why this coco diesel is important, aside from the fact that it increases the income of our coconut farmers, is that it cleans up our environment. This is the implementation of the Clean Air Act because, according to Claire, since bus operators experimented with the use of coco diesel, pollution in Metro Manila has been reduced.

And thirdly, because we are now using coconut for energy, it reduces our dependence on imported oil. And that will help us lower the price of electricity.

Because, one reason why the price of electricity increases is that whenever the price of oil we buy from other countries increases, the price of electricity also increases. However, I promise, as one of my six promises to our poor, that in the next six years I will bring electricity to all barangays of our country and make our electricity the cheapest in the entire region.

This afternoon, I will use the opportunity to explain to you how we will lower the price of electricity in the coming years. This will be the result of our electricity reform that we started back in 2001, but of course my presidency was short, the basic reforms are not done in one or two or three years. And as I said, the basic reform, especially for electricity, will involve a lot of construction, many new rules will be made, many new factories will be built like this coco diesel oil we made, it will take several years. But if you give me the opportunity to build on the strong start I have made, the fruits of the electric power reform we started will be realized in our next administration.

Before I became president, the Philippines was second only to Japan in the most expensive electricity prices. Now, we are number 7 among other regions. Why? Why is electric power more expensive, cheaper in the other countries than in the Philippines? The reason is first, they have their own plenty indigenous energy resources or they resort to using Nuclear Energy but that is prohibited by the Philippine Constitution.

I, I need your mandate in May to build on what we have started. I need a mandate from the people to undertake the more strategic measures to address the problem of the electricity industry.

My colleagues and I, along with Vince from the Department of Energy, have drawn up a long-term energy program that will ensure reasonable costs and efficient, effective electricity service for everyone.

First, we are still looking for additional Malampaya. Now, we have an agreement with China. We have a joint exploration there in the area of the Spratly. Instead of fighting over who owns it, we used our foreign policy to have a joint exploration. And once we discover oil or natural gas, we will share the benefits instead of fighting over it.

Also we are developing more geothermal resources. We are second in the world in terms of started and will bear fruit and the plants will provide us with electricity, we’ll be number one geothermal power in the whole world.

What is the beauty of this geothermal energy? It is naturally Filipino and a cleaner source of energy.

Laguna is fortunate because in Laguna, you have geothermal power coming from Mt. Makiling. That is why I made this program here. And the hydro power, Laguna is also fortunate because there is hydro power coming from Caliraya, Botocan and Kalayaan.

The request of one, this that we have started to look for additional resources in the sea together with China, together with Shell of the U.K.

Secondly, our own use, the geothermal. Another thing we will fulfill is the privatization of the transmission and generation assets of NAPOCOR to increase efficiency and permanently lower the price of electricity.

Another thing, competition, we made competition in airplanes and telecommunications. In fact, that is why when I was not yet president, there were only five million cellphones. Now, there are 25 million cellphones in our country. And it is cheaper to use. That is why many can afford cellphones.

What we did with airplanes and telecommunications, we will do with wholesale power generation through a wholesale electricity spot market that will start next year.

Well, it's a bit difficult to talk about these things, because economists and engineers know about them, but I will try to explain it, although not accurately, but more or less understandable to a layman.

Isn't the stock market, because all prices are written, you immediately know the price, you know if you will buy or not. And now the farmer, because of the cellphone, they can now call, they now know the price. If the price of the product goes up, they run to the market and sell it. If the price falls, they will put it in the refrigerator first.

That's what we will do with the price of electricity, that too. It is called WESM, Wholesale Electricity Spot Market.

And also, let's bring in investments to build more efficient power plants that will cater to the increasing demand for electricity.

One reason why cellular phones have also become cheaper is because now, telephone companies are being forced to interconnect with each other. So, if you call from Globe, you can connect to Smart and it won't be expensive. We forced the interconnection.

We will do the same with electricity. We will implement the efficient and reliable interconnection of the transmission system. That means, even if the electricity comes from here, if it is sold cheaper, that's what the people of Cebu will buy, if it's cheaper here than what comes from the Visayas because everything is interconnected.

Our electric distribution utilities also should perform efficiently as encourage the sector to have a “cost-plus” orientation towards a “cost-efficient regime”. This is the work of the Energy Regulatory Commission. Again, I will use jargon for a moment. They are moving towards a performance-based rate making methodology for distribution utilities rather than the current “cost-plus” orientation that we inherited from the traditional system.

What does this mean? Now, when a utility like MERALCO or the Laguna Electric Cooperative applies for a rate increase, what it submits is, say, these are our expenses. This is our allowed rate of investment so this is what we should charge, cost-plus so the higher the expenses, the higher the charge. So, there is no incentive to be efficient because, in total, whenever expenses increase, even if it comes from inefficiency, electricity prices increase.

What we will make performance-based is, the Energy Regulatory Commission creates a benchmark of the good companies here and abroad. How much do they spend on this operation? How much is spent on overhead? How much is spent on rent? How much is spent on their transmission losses? Our companies should have the same ratio, like in the government or in local government units – this is your IRA but you cannot exceed 50% for salaries. That's just what will be done with electricity. You cannot exceed so much percent for your system loss. If not, you cannot charge that to our consumers. That's what is called performance-based. And the Energy Regulatory Commission is doing… or has done? They are making the rules and regulations for performance-based rather than cost-plus.

Another thing, here in the provinces, I mentioned the provinces, we succeeded in lowering the systems loss of Electric Cooperatives through my Executive Order 119 which improved the operation of the electric cooperatives. For example, the Aklan Electric Cooperative, system losses have decreased. Before, it was 23 percent, now it's only 13 percent. They even paid off their debt to NAPOCOR of P70 million.

That's what we're doing here in Laguna. Isn't that right, Governor Lingling, we're helping Laguna? The DOE – energy and the NEA – National Electrification Administration are helping Laguna reduce its systems losses. Didn't you say earlier, Governor Lingling, when we talked at your headquarters, a Mayor reminded us to forgive the Laguna Electric Cooperative's debt of P200 million and the condition was to lower the price of electricity charged by this cooperative.

So that's how we did it here, we will do it throughout the Philippines, in all Electric Cooperatives.

In the reform of the electric power sector, there will be new players, such as supplier/aggregators to help promote competition.

For example, because this is jargon. Vince, sorry if I'm not accurate technically. But isn't it that when there are small sellers of products – garments, for example? Each one has expensive shipping costs. But if there's a company that consolidates everything. Just one container, it's cheaper, so it's the same with electricity, we will have suppliers/aggregators, is that right? So, that's what we will do.

So those are the steps to lower the price of electricity and make it the lowest in the entire region during our next administration.

Is it difficult to understand? Of course, engineers, economists, lawyers – are needed in all of these things. Experience is also needed. I hope that this reform we started, we don't entrust it to those without experience and who don't understand what will be done.

That's what I said about electricity in all barangays. Because our promise to the poor is to make it the cheapest, and we will deliver it.

Electricity in all barangays of the Philippines. By the year 2006, all barangays will have electricity. Why am I saying this? Because to complete all barangays with electricity, we only need to energize 1,000 barangays each year from now on. And I also have experience in this because I was able to do this during my short presidency, bringing light to 4,200 barangays during my short presidency.

So this includes the 160 barangays in Laguna and Quezon where many of our farmers come from now. In fact, these areas Vince, aren't they 100% electrified now.

Laguna is now 100 percent electrified and this, Vince, wasn't fulfilled during our short term in office.

So, to reiterate as a conclusion, my six promises to the poor of our country for the next six years are:

First, we will bring electricity to 1,500 barangays each year and lower the cost of electricity to the lowest in the region;

Second, we will create one million new jobs each year including the existing coco diesel industry.

Thank you also to those who fulfilled our desire to develop the coco-diesel industry. I mentioned Mr. Carlos, Mr. Santos from Lucena, Mr. Lao, we already mentioned Claire and IMMBOA. I want to thank Toyota Motors Philippines because they promised that they have a convertible gasoline tank, which can use diesel and can use coco diesel.

Third, we will ensure that all 4,000 45,000 barangays across the country have clean water. Even today, PAGCOR is talking to Mayor Aquino to bring clean water to his barangay which does not yet have clean water.

Fourth, we will halve the price of commonly used medicine;

Fifth, we will build three thousand new schools, provide a college or voc-tech scholarship to every poor family, and a computer for every school. We started the scholarships here in Biñan for 100 families of Laguna.

And sixth, let's triple the loans for the self-employed and small business owners like those selling banana cue and like our coconut farmers who have their own businesses.

My countrymen, this election is about you, not about me. The people have the right to hear from the candidates what they will do. My campaign is about the issues, not the personalities. This election is about solving your problems, not about me. We must all move forward together, unite in solving each other's problems.

So, people of San Pablo, people of Laguna, people of Quezon, coconut farmers, transportation workers, those who make coco-diesel factories, let's work together to solve the problem of poverty, let's unite.

Long live coco-diesel, long live the coconut farmers, long live transportation.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2004 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].