Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the Launching Ceremony of the United Nations Millennium Project Report

[ Delivered at the Dusit Nikko Hotel, Makati City, February 16, 2005 ]

INVESTING IN DEVELOPMENT: A PRACTICAL PLAN TO ACHIEVE THE MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS

We went through a lot of trouble to prepare that not leaving it to technical people but working on it among the policymakers ourselves, myself and the Cabinet, and we are very grateful and I’m very happy to hear that professor Sachs thinks it’s one of the best development plans he has ever read. Thank you very much for your praise and support.

Fighting poverty can only be successful with a practical plan and a strong will.

I’d like to thank the United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan, Professor Sachs and the other experts for agreeing that our plan does conform with the overall plan of the United Nations. I’d like to thank them all for providing us that framework to begin with, as I assure you that I will continue to provide the political will to drive its implementation forward to fruition, and as I provide the political will to wage the fight against terrorism alongside the war against poverty.

We launch this practical plan to attain the millennium development goals to build prosperity for our people, and in the process to mop up the breeding grounds of terrorist recruits.

There’s been a lot of debate about what causes terrorism — definitely, evil causes terrorism. But in the Philippines we know that whatever may be the cause or terrorism, the spread of terrorism, which means the recruitment of the hatchet men, has a great deal to do with poverty. And it is no coincidence that the most extensive recruitment of the terrorist hatchet men and messengers can be found in the poorest provinces of our country.

The U.N. development goals are, as Deborah said, mirrored in my ten-point pro-poor legacy agenda that aims to shore up the economy, uplift the lives of our people, strengthen democracy, and forge peace and national solidarity.

The new economic team I put in place to carry out my agenda consists of officials who are capable, loyal and dedicated to change.

I fully expect this team to work with me to lead the nation to a new era of prosperity, freedom and national growth. Not prosperity for a few but, as Deborah said, prosperity for the greatest number of our people. It is important for us — and I thank Congress for passing the budget. I thank Senate that they will soon pass the budget — because this budget invests in our pro-poor agenda. We will also work not only to pass the budget for a pro-poor agenda but to clamp down on corruption, to weed out wasteful government spending, and to raise revenues. These are all key pillars of my economic plan to bring stability and prosperity to our nation.

We are turning the corner: we’ve come off the watch list of the FATF; we are forging fiscal discipline. In fact, we have forged fiscal discipline; and we are enforcing law and order.

Creating safe streets free from crime and kidnapping are central for our workers, our businessmen and foreigners to go about their jobs.

More government officials are being charged with corruption. Soon they will not only be charged, they will have their ill-gotten gains forfeited to the government. That is my next instruction to our anti-corruption officials.

The clean up of government goes hand in hand with the protection of the environment even as investments in mining start to pour in.

And we are strictly monitoring the implementation of our agenda: the agenda for growth, the agenda against corruption, and the agenda for physical and fiscal discipline. We are monitoring these per municipality, per goal every single day.

I’m happy to hear that our house of representatives recently formed a committee on the MDGS with Congresswornan Neris Soon-Ruiz as chairwoman. Congratulations, Neris!

I’m also happy to hear that twelve city mayors are working closely with our Department of Interior and Local Government and the United Nations Philippine country team to promote the MDGS.

We’re reinforcing the building blocks of human development with the mortar of political unity and the rule of law and justice for all.

Today, Philippine development is built on the principled solidarity of our political institutions, and focused – commitment to change and reform.

We will slay the deficit dragon by raising revenues through our own power and initiative, so that we stop financing our development with incessant borrowings. And as we bring about an economic turnaround, so also shall we give peace the pedestal it deserves in every Filipino home.

As Cecille Alvarez said, ‘we mourn the loss of lives.’ we mourn the loss of lives all over the world because of terrorism.

The quest for a more equitable and compassionate world is hindered by the moral abyss where terrorists dwell. Crushing the wall of poverty must go hand in hand with crushing evil itself.

Yes, we are poised for an economic turnaround and a leap forward in the fight against poverty.

Yes, this is a year of urgent change and fervent hopes.

And I thank the United Nations for your faith and confidence in the Philippines.

Salamat and Mabuhay!

Source: Adamson University Library