Thank you very much Secretary Montemayor.

Mayor Acharon, Former Mayor Antonino, Tuna Congress Chairman Domingo Teng, the balikbayan to General Santos City U.S. Ambassador Frank Ricciardone, members of the presidential party assigned to me including Secretary Roxas, Datumanong, Lorenzo and Dureza, Cotabato Governor Manny Piñol, officers of the AFP and the PNP led by South Commander Ernesto Carolina, members of the Sangguniang Panglunsod led by Vice Mayor Congson, participants and foreign delegates of this 4th Tuna Congress, congratulations to all of you on the occasion of this seemingly very successful Congress once again.

I was here last year for the Tuna Congress and I don’t really spend every year going to the same place. And originally, I declined the invitation to this Congress. But it’s very difficult to say no when Adelbert Antonino calls me up almost everyday to nag me about it. So, here I am. Stop laughing Adel.

And besides I always think about GenSan, I always think about SOCSKSARGEN because when i was in DTI I had a great deal to do with the beginnings of what has become now a very successful growth area. I know this area including Cotabato City. And I know that you lead Mindanao’s growth. I understand that the growth rate of Southern Mindanao is 6.1 percent. That is the highest growth rate in Mindanao. And it is higher than the national GNP growth rate of 5.2 percent.

Your impressive growth rate comes from the judicious use of your rich natural resources by the various industries especially the tuna industry whose center is here in General Santos. And I congratulate all of you, everyone from the tuna industry.

I also congratulate Mayor Acharon and the people of General Santos for your enterprising spirit. If you are hosting this Charter Day Celebration and this Tuna Congress, you still have the energy and enthusiasm to host this year’s convention of the Councilors League of the Philippines — two major conventions taking place in General Santos at the same time.

I had declined the invitation to address the Councilors League because I was supposed to go back to Manila immediately after this meeting. But I decided to spend the night here, so though I hope… So though the Councilors League meeting is finished, I hope to be able to see some of the remaining councilors tonight after all through the invitation of Mayor Acharon.

Indeed, the energy and vibrance of General Santos is especially seen in the tuna industry. This is why I named your President, Domingo Teng, to represent Mindanao in the export development council. With his membership — he says Mar Roxas makes him work very hard — because he is supposed to help not only the tuna industry but the country’s entire export sector.

I would like to congratulate General Santos also for your string of awards as the most competitive city. Two times already. One by A.I.M. and the other one… Of both by A.I.M., two years.

Indeed, competitiveness is a key to the strong Philippine republic that I want to build. It is also the key to success in the globalized world of the 21st century.

Thus. I commend the SOCSKSARGEN Federation of Shipping Associations and Allied Industries for choosing as your theme for the Congress: “fish without barriers.” Last year, it was “fish without borders.” Now, it is “fish without barriers.”

And to be able to achieve ‘fish without barriers’ I thank our American friends, represented here today again by Ambassador Ricciardone, who was here just last week. Incidentally, I want to brag that he came to GenSan Last week because he was invited to dole. But I told him, you cannot go to dole without going to GenSan. And you can’t go to GenSan without speaking about tuna. So, he spoke to you about tuna last week.

But through him, I want to thank once again American officialdom for working with Congress to ease the barriers to ensure that our canned tuna is not threatened by canned tuna from other countries in the United States market.

You asked me and your government to work against the Andean countries having preferential access to the U.S. market for their canned tuna. In turn, I delivered the message not only to president bush but also to his Cabinet members and our friends in the U.S. Congress. There is now a so-called Philippine caucus in the U.S. Congress that seek to help the Philippines. Senator Inouye is one of the more famous names among them. Senator Hillary Clinton is also another of those names. They complied. These senators and congressmen complied with our request to protect the Philippines during the debates on the Andean trade preferences. But even then, the canned tuna industry must be prepared to compete with the pouched tuna from the Andean countries, while your government, while I and my Cabinet members and diplomats are working further for a level playing field. Mar Roxas proposes that the work for GSP privileges for processed tuna, and that is what he is going to do, because processed tuna includes canned tuna and pouched tuna. In the meantime, your industry must also be innovative and expand the range of your packaging sizes and explore value-added from positions.

Also, why stop at the United States. Look for other markets. I heard you earlier, Domingo talking about the European Union market. And I was speaking with some of our friends from the European Union. And they said, we don’t produce tuna. I wonder why we are not helping your canned tuna. And so, they have begun also to look at how they can help the Philippines access the E.U. more.

But, why work always only on market access. Why not look at that great big market next door, the 1.3 billion people of china, 400 million of whom have the purchasing power, and growing. They should come to know what a wonderful product Philippine tuna is from General Santos City.

I thank your resolution that commends my administration for our role in supporting your lobby for a level playing field for canned tuna exports. I assure you that we will always stand by your collective interest and the general welfare of our people.

If I may make a suggestion, perhaps you could also have a resolution thanking the senators and the congressmen in the U.S. Congress who comprise the new Philippine caucus. So that they can continue to be encouraged to work for the welfare of their friends in the Philippines.

While we are proud of our tuna industry, we have to be concerned that our tuna exports have been declining over the last five years while exports of two other countries in ASEAN have increased. We must look more closely into consumer preferences and realign our marketing strategies, advertising included, to suit market changes.

Thailand is succeeding in selling branded tuna while we have concentrated on supplying in-house brands. Thailand has done an industry study which we should also do. Our embassy in Washington is seeking the assistance of the U.S. Trade and Development Agency for the conduct of a study that will improve Philippine tuna’s competitiveness in the world market. I’m inviting you, our industry’s big fish, our major players to conduct a parallel effort.

Speaking of Thailand, one of the secrets of its present success is its program that it calls one million Baht per village or one village-one product program. This program of Prime Minister Thaksin doubled the growth rate of Thailand in one year. My Cabinet and I — and we discussed it in a Cabinet meeting yesterday — would like to focus on this in the Philippines for this year. We will have a one million-peso per town, one town-one product program.

Actually, we did this last year with agricultural modernization, where we financed each municipality with one million pesos of agricultural modernization projects from the Department of Agriculture. This year, the one million will be in loans for small and medium enterprises per town, and one product per town. General Santos is a tuna town — i told Mayor Acharon in the car earlier — therefore I am Turning over a check to Mayor Acharon for one million pesos to be lent out to the small and medium tuna fishermen.

Last week, I was in Mindanao for the Mindanao Business Conference. There, I also announced that the rate of cargo handlers are now standardized at 10 pesos for domestic ports. And I have frozen the fee increases in port usage and wharfage. And I asked Mayor Acharon sometime back to fast-track the transshipment classification of the General Santos Makar wharf. All these should help decrease total export costs.

We should also ensure the viability of supply. The BFAR has launched the tuna production enhancement project to install fish aggregating devices or Payao in strategic parts of our portion of the Celebes Sea. BFAR has also conducted surveys that have pinpointed rich tuna fishing grounds, particularly our portion of the Pacific Ocean fronting Surigao and Samar. Several fishing companies are benefitting from this study.

Last January, as you have said, we finalized a fisheries agreement between the Philippines and Indonesia. When you said ‘fish without borders’ that was what you were asking me to do — have no more borders with Indonesia through a fisheries agreement — and i have complied. This will hopefully generate more jobs and safeguard the livelihood of many fishermen and processing plant workers. We are exploring other possible bilateral agreements, as you have asked, with our neighboring countries. I suggest that your industry conduct a mission to look at whether it will be worth going into a similar agreement with the new nation of East Timor.

I am aware of the other concerns that you have raised, mentioned in the resolutions that Domingo Teng discussed in his speech on the issue of patenting the smoke filtered process. I’m asking the intellectual property office, is that still under you, Mar? LPR? To look into the claims of the contending parties.

I am also directing the BFAR to coordinate with the DOTC, particularly the MARINA, for the review and rationalization of the licensing requirements for tuna handliners in the light of existing laws and regulations. I expect a report on this, Leony, within 30 days.

On the transfer to GenSan City of the BFAR regional office and the fisheries quality control laboratory, I agree. I am directing the D.A. to transfer the regulatory, licensing and quarantine functions, and the laboratory of BFAR to General Santos City.

On MARINA. MARINA is resisting your request to move to Gensan from Koronadal for what they say are financial and budgetary reasons. But I was telling mayor Acharon, and I am telling you now, I agree though that it is more logical for MARINA to be located in a major port like GenSan than to be in a landlocked city like Koronadal. Therefore, I propose that the GenSan government, the local shipping industry and the industrial users in GenSan provide for some counterpart of the cost of transferring if you really feel that it will really increase the convenience and competitiveness on the part of your shipping industry and the users of that shipping industry.

I commend everyone for the effort to sustain and enhance the competitiveness of Philippine Tuna. You have been a big boost to the nation’s economy and well-being of the people in Mindanao. You are invaluable to the strong republic we are all striving to build. You are important for our security in Mindanao.

Speaking of security, let me bring your attention to the sad plight of the Filipino repatriates from Sabah now in Sulu, Tawi-Tawi, Basilan and Zamboanga Peninsula. We need to find jobs for them. We need to comfort them in their despair. We need to help provide them with food, medicines and temporary shelter.

I am taking this opportunity to seek the help of all the participants in your Congress. I appeal for food, clothing, medicine and shelter for the thousands deported from Sabah and cramped in temporary quarters in Bongao and Zamboanga City. Please help them.

I also need you help in bringing about a successful end-game in the military campaign against the Abu Sayyaf. If you remember, I flew to General Santos immediately after the bombing of Fitmart. After seeing the situation and sensing the feelings of the people here, I send the marines to General Santos City to help stabilize the situation and order the immediate reassignment of certain key people to the area. Even when there were already orders to transfer the marines — was that last month, Nesty? — last month, upon the request of the local government and the communities, though the plane was already here to fetch the marines, I cancelled the transfer immediately. See how the people of GenSan can dictate to the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. I did this due to my personal concern for the people of SOCSKSARGEN especially General Santos.

But now because of the need to end the Abu Sayyaf scourge in Sulu, we need the marines there. But rest assured that the new hierarchy of the PNP and army leadership in this area can live up to the expectations of the people. Even without the marines, I assure you there will be no vacuum in the peacekeeping efforts.

I am tasking South Commander Nesty Carolina to ensure that the discipline and the courtesy that is expected by the people which was shown by the marines — that’s why you loved them so much — will rule the actuations of all the peacekeeping forces here in General Santos and even elsewhere. I’m also tasking the general to assure that foot patrols to have a visibility of the government peacekeeping force in all sensitive areas that they will continue and even be reinforced.

I will continue to monitor the events and situation here personally through former Mayor Antonino to countercheck the information I am given to the formal government hierarchy. Again, I am doing this not only because I know the importance and contributions of SOCSKSARGEN to the economy of the Philippines but because of my true and genuine concern for the people of General Santos.

After all, among the most memorable events of my career before I became president, was what I mentioned earlier, my participation as undersecretary of DTI and putting together the Mindanao development plan which eventually became the SOCSKSARGEN master plan. That’s why I share in the pride of you successes and I share in the fears of your apprehensions. I am one with you in difficulty and in triumph. And I greatly admire the vibrancy of your community.

I commend the strength of your collective determination to compete globally and also to take care of your peace and order problems. Our cooperation has born many, many fruits. Remember the last time i came to GenSan, I was happy to announce that after a successful encounter, commander tropical, the head of the Abu Sofia, the kidnapping syndicate was killed by those whom the people of General Santos chose to be their law enforcers. Today, I am here in General Santos again, and I am proud to announce that the number one drug pusher here in the region, commander bravo was also killed late last night by the law enforcers who have been working with the people of General Santos.

And so I say, with regard to development and with regard to peace, in progress and in peace, carry on! My government will always be behind you.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 4th Tuna Congress and 34th General Santos City Charter Day. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412224507/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8394&Itemid=38