Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, during the celebration of the 63rd anniversary of the founding of Quezon City and Awards Night.

Thank you very much, Mayor Sonny Belmonte, for your very kind introduction of me. And I just want to say that if I accomplished some of the things you said I accomplished in a year and a half of my presidency, it is because I have guides and supporters who are steadfast like Speaker Sonny Belmonte then and now Mayor Sonny Belmonte of Quezon City.

I also greet the other officials of Quezon City under the leadership of our two congressmen and congresswoman who are here now — Congressman Chuck Mathay; and Congresswoman Naneth Daza; as well as the members of the city council, under the leadership of Vice Mayor Herbert Bautista; and the barangay chairmen under the leadership of ADC president Almario Francisco; I greet our awardees; first of all, the one who provides so many jobs and taxes to Quezon City, outstanding businessman Mr. Henry Sy; I am also proud that his daughter, who was my classmate, is number 39 on the fortune women list. That’s even more of an honor. International Fortune, not the fortune here in the Philippines. So we cannot deny that Mr. Henry Sy provides a lot of jobs. And because his daughter is one of the 39 top businesswomen in the whole world, we can expect that the second generation will continue to provide many jobs and taxes to Quezon City from the Sy family.

Now, for the other awardees. I greet and I am proud of them. One of the most reliable members of my Cabinet — Secretary Angelo Reyes. And here is his beloved mother. Congratulations, Mrs. Reyes. Because Angie always says that what he is now was shaped by his mother, Mrs. Reyes. So it’s just right that she is here so she can also share in Secretary Reyes’ award as outstanding soldier of Quezon City.

I also greet some contemporaries of my parents. They are very important to our country and very important to Quezon City. First of all, one of the experts in land reform — Justice Mila German. Also a contemporary of my mother. Both doctors of my mother and when we were children, she was already known as one of the most dedicated pediatricians — Dra. Fe del Mundo. You will be surprised to know that I can say the father of my father was the brother of artists, so she was a friend of my father before he became a widower. So I met an artist friend of hers and when I was a little girl, I always watched her at parties. She looks the same until now — Ms. Rosa Rosal.

I also greet, she is not here tonight. As her son said, she would have loved to be here but she is already of age and is sick. But she has a big contribution to education — Dr. Onofre Corpuz. So I greet his son. And those who are about my age. I remember, we were so proud when he became a grand master and world champion in chess — Eugene Torre. And of course, we still watch him on television, he was removed from Frontpage, now he’s back on Frontpage — Mel Tiangco. Then the next generation, the younger generation, the new generation. She is in America now but she has made a great contribution to the youth, to the environment and that is Gina Llopez who is now represented by my classmate Dulce. President Aquino is not here but everyone knows that she lives on 55th Times street. And she has done a lot for our country. Even now as Former President she still gives a lot of advice to me. For example, regarding what we are preparing for, the possible war in the Middle East and how to take care of our overseas workers in the Middle East because in 1991 she also experienced Operation Desert Storm. She has expressed and shared with me historical insights. So, even now President Cory Aquino continues to be a great help to our country.

And one… I don’t know if she’s my contemporary, she’s also my contemporary and we always watch her, especially during the lahar period — Dr. Rey Punongbayan.

The selection of our leading citizens of Quezon City is very good. But Sonny Belmonte said he had nothing to do with the selection of who would be the outstanding citizens. I think, first of all, we should still congratulate Sonny Belmonte because even though he did not choose the awardees, he has an innovation because this is the first time there is an award for outstanding citizens of Quezon City.

During the selection process, I think we should congratulate the chairman of the foundation day activity — Dr. Vic Vic Enriga. Here are our, not just Mr. Henry Sy, but also the various businessmen who are active here in Quezon City. I greet them all, led by the president of the PCCI, Sergio Luis Ortiz, Jun. Where is he here? They said he has arrived. Where's Jun? Huh, he's not here yet. Okay, he wasn't here earlier, they said he arrived. And Nathan Zulueta from Quezon City as well.

Guests, as Sonny Belmonte said, I still have a sore throat until now. So I won't prolong my greetings to you. I just want to say that the city of Quezon City is very important to our country. Whatever the form of Quezon City is, that is the form of our country. Because first of all, Quezon City is our capital city. And secondly, Quezon City is the largest city in the entire Philippines. In fact, if you look at the provinces, only three provinces are larger than Quezon City, only two provinces are larger than Quezon City. So Quezon City, even if you consider it a province, is the 3rd biggest province in our country. So of course, whatever the form of Quezon City is, that is the form of our country. And Quezon City has a big problem because although it is the largest city and if you think of it as a province, it is already the third largest province. It is also the largest incidence of poverty. There are so many poor people in Quezon City. There are so many urban poor people whose form of poverty is different from the poverty in the province. That is the challenge of Mayor Sonny Belmonte, which is to suppress the problem of poverty in Quezon City. Because of the size of Quezon City and because of the number of poor people in Quezon City. That is a big contribution to suppressing poverty in our entire country.

And we need that. But in the challenge of fighting poverty, many difficulties will also happen to an administrator or an executive of a place. So if we want to eradicate poverty in Quezon City, even in the entire Philippines, what we need is a strong republic. And what does a strong republic need? Strong institutions and among the strong institutions needed for a strong republic is an effective government from the national government to the local government to the bureaucracy, which we expect to be concerned for the people. And the relationship with Congress and the Senate, what we want is, first of all, not to be adversarial, but we also don't want horse trading to be used to unite.

So earlier, when I started my greetings, that's what I said — I'm a new president, Sonny Belmonte became speaker of the House of Representatives. And even though I inherited that congress, so there are many who are not my party mates. You will remember we changed administrations. With the great support of Sonny Belmonte's colleagues, the relationship between Congress and the presidency was not adversarial. And Sonny didn't use horse trading to pass the important laws I needed when he was speaker. So even in Congress, Sonny helped me build a strong republic.

So we weren't surprised when Sonny won as Mayor of Quezon City. Right Sonny, with so many barangays, Sonny lost only in two barangays. In one barangay, what, 30 votes, that's where he lost. And after that he became mayor and that's how he became mayor quickly. He solved and suppressed so many problems. So in that strong republic, we also need the creativity of our local governments to really emerge. And that is seen here in Quezon City.

So I am happy to be part of this celebration tonight. And I want to greet Sonny, I want to greet all of you — officials who are helping him — to make the city strong, the heart of our country. And I congratulate the outstanding citizens of Quezon City because you are also helping to make the city of Quezon City a strong city that needs to be like that, the largest city and the most leading city. Because I repeat, whatever the form of Quezon City is, that is the form of the Republic of the Philippines.

So again — to our honorees, to the officials of Quezon City and especially to the city mayor of Quezon City. Happy Anniversary and congratulations to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 63rd Foundation Anniversary of Quezon City and Gabi ng Parangal. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210938/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8414&Itemid=38