Thank you. Troop commander give “tikas pahinga.”

Thank you, outgoing Education Secretary Jesli Lapus. Outgoing Education Secretary because he’s the incoming Secretary of Trade and Industry.

And down there in the stage, because she has not yet taken over, our incoming Secretary of Education Mona Valisno; Congresswoman Naida Angping; CHED Commissioner Nenalyn Defensor; our host, Father Murillo, thank you for inviting me to this event; Commandant Aseron and of course Principal Aliwalas; other school officials, teachers, parents, graduating students of the CAT and your colleagues in San Sebastian, magandang umaga sa inyong lahat.

Congratulations! to all those graduating from the Citizenship Advancement Training.

You know, Naida was telling me how nice that you could come today. Actually, Father, when the invitation arrived — you see, all my invitations go through a Committee on Appointments — and when the invitation arrived, my Committee on Appointments turned it down. But when I saw it, I said, “No.” I overruled their turning it down and I said, “No, I will come. I want to come.”

For one thing San Sebastian is a neighbor. I’ve been here many times but only to the church to be ninang in weddings and to admire the most beautiful example of gothic architecture in our country. So, it’s time for me to visit the school itself.

And I think the CAT graduation is just proper because I want to highlight how important is the CAT course to our vision to have a Strong Republic ready to join the first-world in 20 years. To strengthen our Republic, it is important that we engage the support of the people by enhancing civil-military relations. We want to review the reservist and reserve force development program of the AFP, the ROTC and other similar programs like the CAT consistent with the doctrine of a citizen’s army enshrined in the Constitution.

I hope that our CAT graduating students will join the ROTC or its equivalent and will join the reservist force afterwards when you graduate from college. Also enshrined in the Constitution is that the President must hold office until the 30th of June. And for that purpose, I will continue hands-on governance until my last minute in office.

To that end, we will promote the key initiatives our government has advanced since I took office. We will focus on three areas:

One, bringing more power and growth to each region, and decongesting Manila. Starting March 15, the loop, the MRT-LRT loop, will be completed and open for public transport so I hope some of our students will be able to benefit from that.

Second focus, continuing to promote the importance of the three E’s: education, the economy and the environment, to our efforts to create sustainable and equitable development.

Third, a continuous focus on the youth of the nation as our hope for a brighter, better Philippines.

We have made progress in many areas. For instance, CHED Commissioner Nenalyn Defensor told me about our unprecedented scholarship program for college. But we have also an unprecedented scholarship program for high school. In fact, today almost 50% of all high school students are on government scholarship. And I ask Father Murillo whether San Sebastian College and High School are benefiting from our unprecedented large scholarship program. He said, “Yes, San Sebastian is a beneficiary of government scholarship program.” Congratulations to you!

You know the reason why I insisted on having especially a high school scholarship program, because many years ago, we had no public high schools. My father, for instance, when he was living in Lubao he studied in grade school in the Lubao Elementary School but for high school he had to go to San Fernando High School. There was only one high school in the whole province of Pampanga that was public school.

Today, in every barangay in Lubao, there is a high school, a public high school. And so therefore what happens to the private high schools if parents have a choice especially if they have financial difficulty of sending their children to a free high school versus sending their children to a paying high school? Of course, they will send their children to a free high school. What will happen to the private high school system? It will die just like the private grade school system which is very, very small.

So, I’ve been telling Jing Lapus and all the officials of the DepEd, let us not kill the private high schools. Instead of building more classrooms for public high schools, let us use the money for scholarships so that our young people can have a good private high school education paid for partly by the government.

So we have made progress in many areas but more needs to be done. Everything our government has worked hard to achieve has been to make the future brighter for the next generation of Filipinos. You, the youth of our nation, our hope and inspiration. Everything we must do must be to build a better life for each and every young person in this nation.

While I am proud of what our government has achieved, past achievement is only as good as the ability of the nation to continue to grow and prosper. I fervently desire that the progress that we have made will not stop. So, I hope the next administration will continue this extensive private high school scholarship program instead of building more public high school buildings.

I also hope that what remains to be done will be picked up by you, the next generation of leadership. As a nation, we must keep our sights firmly set on the future, to build on what is good and work even harder to meet the challenges of what remains to be done.

You, the young of our nation, are the bridge between the past and the future. It is for you that we right the wrongs, fight for change and seek to make a better day. Our nation has come far, but it still has far to go. You, the youth, represent the aspirations of our nation. It is to you that we dedicate the efforts of our government to lift up the Philippines.

The foundation for opportunity is education. It is the key to a better life. It opens minds and opens doors. That is why we remain dedicated in our last months in office to promoting, advancing, pushing for more and better education. We have come far, but we still have far to go and must not rest.

I have an abiding interest in seeing that you, the young people of today, seize the value of education, of a good education like San Sebastian education. As Father Murillo said, number one in the BAR, number one in the NCEE and number one in the number of BAR reviewers. Congratulations to San Sebastian!

And may you, our young people seize the value of education and use this tool to advance yourselves and the nation. Your CAT training, my dear young graduates will help you advance our nation.

Congratulations! Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Citizenship Advancement Training (CAT) Military Exercises and Pgma Scholarship Report. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080413/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27688&Itemid=38