Thank you very much, Secretary Romulo for introducing me. Thank you.

Thank you also, Ambassador Pete Chan for your kind greetings earlier.

And with me tonight are some of our government officials who are also members of our delegation. Aside from Secretary Romulo who introduced me, and who was here in March 2009, we also have our Trade and Industry Secretary Peter Favila and our Press Secretary, Cerge Remonde. We also have a member of the business delegation, Mr. William Kho, he is there.

We all thank and greet our fellow Filipinos in Turkey. Thank you for attending tonight. To my fellow Kapampangan Nilo, thank you very much and to the other Kapampangans, thank you for your presence tonight. To Catherine — where are you from Catherine? Ah, from Aklan — good evening and thank you very much for coming tonight… now. Okay. To our brothers and sisters from the Visayas and Mindanao, thank you very much for coming tonight, tonight, and to my mother’s side relatives who are Ilocano, thank you for being here.

And we heard the stories of our two leaders of the Filipino community. In fact, I’m very happy to see Nilo, my fellow Filipino, that you were also here when I came here when I was Vice President, so nice to see my fellow provincial again. And the stories of Ms. Mirano about the various Outstanding Filipinos here in Turkey. So, I am very happy with their stories that our fellow Filipinos here in Turkey continue to reap praise from the locals. Congratulations to all of you!

And I received a report from the Department of Foreign Affairs that almost all Filipinos here are treated well and have good salaries. And that group, Catherine’s group, Ambassador Pete Chan said, what you are really doing is helping, extending the Embassy here in Istanbul, because it is in Ankara, so you are the first line of defense when Filipinos have problems here. So congratulations for what you are doing in unity.

I would also like to greet Mr. Zaimuglo, our Philippine Honorary Consul to Istanbul, whom I met in Manila.

This trip of ours here is part of our overall strategy to engage the international community to benefit our economy, as well as protect you, our Overseas Workers and to uphold our national security.

My visit is timely now, after nine years, because this year marks our 60th Anniversary of diplomatic relations between the Philippines and Turkey. And all of you, you are witnesses to the good relationship between our two countries because you live and work here in Turkey. And you know that this country, this is a great nation straddling the East and the West. Earlier, when I was going around and even the last time, I really wanted to say, “Ah, now we’re in Europe. Ah, now we’re in Asia, just crossing the bridge.” But truly, geographically and culturally, Turkey is a natural bridge for dialogue among civilizations and cultures, East and West, Asia and Europe, Islam and Christianity.

And we are greeting the gentleman who has the Turkish schools in Zamboanga and San Juan, and I understand our young people at the table over there are alumni of the Turkish schools in the Philippines. So we’re very happy that you’re all here but truly you can be said to be part of the dynamic economy of Turkey.

Earlier, we were in Ankara, meeting with President Gul, the president of Turkey. This is part of our celebration, as Ambassador Pete Chan said, this is the highlight of our 60th Anniversary celebration. President Gul said earlier, there is a commonality between our two countries, he said, I mean, among the many commonalities. The Philippines and Turkey, he said, both of us have millions of citizens living and working abroad. And I thanked him because the general working environment is good for our Filipino workers working here. He said, they try their best to give a working environment because they know the feeling of a country with many citizens abroad, so they also strive to ensure that the citizens of other countries here have a good environment. And he said, he said, that if there are problems they will strive to make the environment even better for Filipino workers.

Another importance of Turkey is its great help and support for our peace efforts in Mindanao. Turkey's role as a member of the OIC Peace Committee in Mindanao, there are twelve countries helping our peace process in Mindanao on the part of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, this shows Turkey's sincerity to help us find a solution to our efforts for peace in our country.

And since we have students here, another thing that was discussed earlier, Turkey offered a scholarship for Filipino students. This is important for our peace and security because our youth will be exposed here, the moderate, mainstream Muslim democracy, that's what Turkey champions and it is important for our youth to be exposed here rather than being exposed to those who teach radical Islam. That is one of the benefits of our relationship with Turkey.

Our defense cooperation is expanding. A Turkish company is upgrading our armored personnel carrier, our tanks are being upgraded here. And in November, they will deliver six armored personnel carriers. And earlier, in our meeting with President Gul, he said he hoped we could sign an agreement on defense and military cooperation.

There are many opportunities for trade between our two countries. That's why this afternoon, Secretary Favila met with the Istanbul Chamber of Commerce and Industry. Because we want to expand our trade with each other. Here in Turkey, we are promoting precious and costume jewelry and also halal food and also fresh and processed food, especially bananas and other agricultural commodities. We are offering jewelry because the Philippines is considered one of the top exporters of jewelry in the world, we are number 12 in costume jewelry exporting countries. Our costume jewelry in the Philippines comes from natural materials: sea shells, coconut shells, bamboo, fossilized stones, abaca, sinamay, amber. And this business is good, this industry is good because costume jewelry is labor intensive. And Philippine costume jewelry is considered by many to be better compared to other Asian countries in our handmade items that use natural materials and coloring schemes. Because Filipinos are recognized as very creative people.

So these are the things we are trying to promote further and President Gul himself said that we have great potential. He said they respect the Philippines because we are one of the few in our region that did not experience a recession during the last world economic crisis. So they consider our economy to be stable in East Asia.

And on the economy, our trips — like what we are trying to do now here — in other places where we have gone, our trips have helped secure important trade opportunities and foreign investments, and this in turn have helped us to achieve what they say — 34 quarters or more than eight years of uninterrupted growth. And this is the achievement because of which we were able to withstand the recession that is now raging around us.

In our part of the world, the countries that were not hit by the recession, those whose growth rate did not turn negative were China, Indonesia, Vietnam and the Philippines. Our other neighboring countries all experienced a recession. If you remember, last September, that’s when the crisis in the world economy happened. If you remember in New York, probably on the front pages of newspapers, even here in Turkey, was the collapse of Lehman Brothers, which caused many banks around the world to suffer losses. Merrill Lynch had a fire sale, the American Insurance Group — the owner of Phil-Am Life in the Philippines, the mother company — experienced a liquidity crisis. So that was the start of this global economic crisis. This was like the stock market crash of 1929. This time it was the crash of Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch and AIG.

And this global economic crisis, it’s been one year, a long nightmare for many people and many nations. But the poorest, and many in the developing countries, were the most affected around the world. The headlines are always about Wall Street or because of a lack of global regulation or many rich people losing money, but attention should also be given to the need to ensure that the developing countries of the world are given the support they need to ensure that if we have an economic rebound now, which seems to be starting, it should really be inclusive, hopefully including the poor and truly global, the whole world.

So as I said, if the world would stop always looking at the banking capitals — New York, London, Singapore — if the world would take a minute to shift its sights from the banking capitals, they might be surprised to learn, to discover the quiet successes that can be found in other parts of the world like the Philippines. That’s why I am here and I will go to London to talk about our success and the opportunities we can offer to investors, whether foreign or Filipino.

We have weathered, we are so far weathering the global economic storm without fanfare. Why are we strong? Because we were prepared. Why were we prepared? Because we made difficult decisions several years ago to reform our banking system. For example, when Lehman Brothers collapsed, less than one percent of our banking system was exposed to it. And that less than one percent was fully covered by reserves and capital, and everyone knows how much because the disclosures in our banking system are very transparent. That’s one thing we did, reforming the banking system.

It was even harder, we had to raise new revenues, taxes, what is called the Value Added Tax, very unpopular but we did it and our revenue increased by 100 billion pesos every year and those proceeds are what we use to invest, invest, invest in our people and to make our economy competitive.

Because what I want to happen is to help make our economy competitive so that one day working abroad will be a career choice and not just the only choice for a hardworking Filipino worker.

I think my fellow provincial, it’s a career choice, he has a very good job here but there are others who had to go abroad because there were no opportunities in their own communities. Hopefully that, secondly, hopefully it becomes less and less and less until that kind of working abroad disappears. Hopefully it will only be a career choice and that’s why we are making reforms in our economy.

Meanwhile, as we continue to work towards that day, we give thanks, the Philippines gives thanks to all of you, our Overseas Filipinos, for your concern, concern for your family, concern for your work, concern for your country. That's it, for there, thank you very much.

And thank you for your continued support and may the Filipino always live long here in Turkey!

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during a meeting with the Filipino Community. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412095258/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26204&Itemid=38