Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the meeting with leaders of the Filipino community in Korea

Thank you very much, Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas. You know, Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas is a symbol of the great Filipino worker. Because she is not only the Secretary of Labor of our country who takes care of Filipinos in our country, she also takes care of workers all over the world as she is the president of the International Labor Organization.

You Filipinos are truly special; our Philippine delegation is very high-powered. Look, Kabayan Noli de Castro is here; from Negros Occidental is Charlie Cojuangco, Congressman; from Marikina is Del de Guzman, Congressman; we have the Bulacan Association, right? We showed him to everyone, Secretary Blas Ople of Foreign Affairs; the one President Bush called the Great Heir to a Great Political Tradition, Secretary Mar Roxas; ah, this one, he needs your help because the Korean market is one of the biggest emerging markets for our tourism, Secretary Dick Gordon. Help him; you know, here in Korea there are many investors who are investing in the Philippines, including in our power sector, electricity, and energy. That’s why I’m with Secretary Vince Perez of Energy now.

And in this trip, we will ask Korea to – you know those bananas here that come from us, right? – I will ask them to lower the tax on bananas entering here. That’s why Cito Lorenzo is here to fight for that; and Korea is one of the most generous in terms of Official Development Assistance, so ODA Secretary Mai Jimenez is here to arrange that; and they greatly help our fellow countrymen, as I, an Ilocano, would say, and those in the Cordillera. Indeed, there is also a son of Ilocandia, Presidential Adviser Chavit Singson of the North Quad; there is also a son of the Cordillera, my head of the Presidential Management Staff, Secretary Yongyong Afable; and of course, let me greet… Oh, let me greet Ambassador Jarasa and Mrs. Jarasa, our Ambassador to Korea, but Korea’s Ambassador to the Philippines is also here, Ambassador Son Sang-ha, Korean Ambassador to the Philippines.

And to you oldtimers here, I have someone I brought with me, I invited him because he is a symbol of our help to Korea when it was still a new democracy, Former Ambassador to Korea and one of the Filipino soldiers who fought for the freedom of Korea, General and Ambassador Ernesto Gidaya.

The various organizations here: I already greeted the Bulacan group, the Ilocano, the Cordillera; to my beloved Capampangan brothers and sisters, good day and evening; I heard there are… Ah, it’s already getting late. Okay; and I also heard there are Bicolanos, good evening to all of you; and our various church groups. I see that the Filipino community here in Korea is thriving because of the very active nature of our different church organizations; our Korean friends; to all of you, dear, great Filipino workers in Korea, good evening and thank you for your heroism.

Because of the skill, diligence, and excellence of our OFWs and workers within the country as well, I want to tell you that our GNP increased by 5.6 percent and our GDP by 4.5 percent. What is the difference between the two? The 5.6 GNP includes OFW remittances, the 4.5 does not. So the difference between the two is, that is, the GDP does not include your remittances, the GNP does. This means the difference between 5.6 and 4.5 is what comes from the contribution of our overseas Filipinos like yourselves. So thank you very much for your remittances.

Year after year, you send no less than six billion dollars. Sometimes even seven billion, sometimes eight billion. And because of the money you send to your children, parents, and siblings, millions of young people are able to study or finish their education. Because of the money you send, or the houses you buy here for them there, thousands of new houses are being built. In fact, the other day, I had a meeting with developers, housing developers, and they said the majority of middle-class housing now is being bought by OFWs. So you are providing homes for your relatives. But because housing is the biggest multiplier that provides jobs and other businesses in our country, that also comes from your help. So thank you for that. Because of… What, Dick? Or Dick said you send money for education, for housing… For buying a house or you send money to pay for a house you buy from here, you should also send tourists, Dick said. I told Kabayan Noli that tourism, whether in our country or in other countries in Asia, benefits us when it rises. Because in all the places where tourism is strong, Filipinos are the musicians. So congratulations to you. When you send money to your relatives that also becomes their capital for their businesses, you launch many small and medium enterprises. Our economy benefits a lot. And on top of all this, you give a good reputation to our country, if you are this good, they say, maybe it’s the same in the Philippines. The Philippines is probably the home of the great Filipino worker.

What you are doing is sending relatives to school, buying them houses, and providing them with capital. Your contribution to our economy perfectly aligns with the aspiration I have expressed for our country since my first State of the Nation Address as president in 2001. I said then: jobs, education, a home of one’s own, and let me add: food on every table — this is the dream of the people. And I told the Congressmen and Senators then, and this in common sense and plain talk, is the core of my vision.

After a year of striving for this, I realized these were just goals. But the vision should be, the vision for our nation must be: to rebuild and strengthen the Philippine republic, as Ambassador Jarasa said. Because only a strong republic can ensure jobs, education, homes, and food on every Filipino’s table.

This strong republic that I speak of, my vision, has two characteristics that define it: first, freedom from class and sector so that this republic will stand for the interest of the people, rather than the interest of a powerful minority; and second, capacity, represented by strong institutions and a strong bureaucracy, to implement good policies and deliver basic services.

Here in Korea, it is one of the strong republics they say. This year, because our 5 percent growth rate is higher than theirs, we are only lagging behind because they are already much larger, we have a long way to catch up to them. They have a large lead over us because they have been developing for a long time. We will chase their development because their per capita income is 10,000 dollars, ours is 1,000 dollars. In the past, during my father’s time, our per capita income was larger than theirs. But when… When we had Martial Law, they had export-oriented industrialization. In the 1970’s things changed, our paths diverged. That’s why they achieved their 10,000 dollars per capita within the last thirty years. It’s a shame, isn’t it? During my father’s time, we were the second most developed country in Asia. So Korea wasn’t like us back then. So Korea, what they did with export-oriented industrialization, that’s what lifted them up. But we weren’t able to do that during the Martial Law period. We weren’t able to keep up with countries, you know, other economies like Malaysia, the economy of Taiwan. We weren’t able to keep up with them because our country was in turmoil with the problems of Martial Law. So back then, Korea’s growth rate was far ahead of ours. If we had a small growth rate, Korea was at ten percent, nine, eight, seven, like that. So if we are at five now and Korea is at three, we still have a long way to catch up again.

So we can see, the lesson there is that what happened in Korea was not the result of a miracle. It was the result of the country's relentless effort as well as the ordinary citizens to improve their lives. And you, you live here, you witness this. You see their discipline and hard work every day. And we remember when there was a crisis, Korea in 1998, '99, even their wealthy people gave jewelry to pay off Korea's debts. So there is a strong spirit of sacrifice. But when it comes to hard work, our Filipino workers do not lack discipline and diligence. That is why you are sought after in every corner of the world.

Your country values you. Because of this, our congressmen, our senators, the administration, as an administration urgent measure, passed the Overseas Absentee Voting Law. And Filipino society and the Philippine government also support you through tax-free income here in Korea. Korea is also included where the government sent doctors and social workers to treat and advise OFWs. And I have also increased your benefits from the OWW. Death benefits have doubled, from 50,000 before to 100,000 now. Everyone will die, right? Before there were no disability benefits, now we provide disability benefits up to 50,000 pesos, depending on the disaster you experienced. And every year, one hundred children of OFWs will be given a scholarship.

And here in Korea, we are also fighting for the passage of the work permit bill. This is not a promise, okay? Because that is not within my power, but we are working on it with you.

And now that the world has changed since the US-led coalition acted against Iraq, and a new Asian perspective on political and economic security is needed, Filipinos abroad must be included in the consideration of our new perspective.

What is this new perspective that came from the war in Iraq from the Coalition of the Willing? This new perspective is something we must recognize, that here in Asia, we need to be more responsible for our own political and economic security. And when I say our security, that includes our citizens not only in the Philippines but also Filipinos abroad.

In this changed world, a world that changed since March 20, 2003, we recognize that the threat of terrorism continues, and is further increased by the possibility that global unrest will reach North Korea. This is the challenge of our region. And I am telling you this because you are here in Korea, in South Korea, and because the threats reaching North Korea, the turmoil of our world in this changed world, I want to tell you that we will do everything necessary to keep Filipinos safe. Not only in the Philippines but also in different parts of the world, especially now our Filipinos here in Korea. Because since the problem of global stability worsened, it has always been the policy of our government that our primary duty is the safety and well-being of Filipinos whether in the Philippines or abroad. Our main concern is to keep you safe and out of danger. I need to be concerned with the peace and security of the eight million Filipinos living and working in more than one hundred and forty countries around the world, including the thirty thousand Filipinos living here in Korea.

This is what we need: peace, security, jobs, education, homes, food on every table. And I thank you, great Filipino workers, because you make a huge contribution to our country's aspirations. I hope your success continues. And I hope your help continues so that our republic can also become strong like the country where you work.

Thank you very much and long live the Filipino worker.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Meeting with the Filipino Community Leaders in Korea. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412200849/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6479&Itemid=38