Thank you very much, Chairman Ruben Conti for your introduction. Thank you also for your innovations in the cooperative movement.

I also greet the former Chairman of the Cooperative Development Authority who is now the Secretary of Tourism, Secretary Obet Pagdanganan. I also greet, but he always wants to be backstage, our Secretary of Housing, Mike Defensor. He's backstage.

I would also like to express my greetings to one of my many Cabinet members from Mindanao… Secretary Cito Lorenzo, including his former company Del Monte because the Del Monte Cooperative won and… a Hall of Fame awardee which proves it is an Outstanding Cooperative. I also extend my greetings to the other awardees this year.

To our officers and officials here in Cagayan De Oro and Misamis Oriental, our host mayor, Mayor Dongco Emano; our Congressman, Congressman Oca Moreno; and I also want to extend my greetings to a son of Cagayan De Oro who has done so much for our cooperative farmers and other farmers, the head of the National Irrigation Administration, Jess Paras of Cagayan de Oro; Cito and Jess, under my administration, during my short time as president, we finished, we completed, we repaired half-a-million hectares of irrigation systems.

What we… what remains… What we inherited, one million hectares of irrigation. In our short time as president, half-a-million hectares remained un-irrigated, only half-a-million hectares. If, in my short time as president, we completed half-a-million hectares, what more in the coming years of the next administration? Six years, I mean.

To all of you, Cooperative Development Authority Board and administration officers, cooperative leaders throughout Mindanao, good morning to all cooperatives in Mindanao.

I know that you have requests like what our speaker said earlier, like the registration of electric cooperatives with the CDA, one of the issues. My principle here depends on where the electric bill is lower for consumers. Like… That's also my intention, that's why I condoned billions in debt of electric cooperatives. I hope you haven't forgotten that I condoned your debt. Are there any electric cooperatives here? None of you. Okay, because they are not included in the electric cooperative. That's our problem and our kind of controversy here or issue stemming from different interpretations of the tax exemption of coops, so I am instructing the Secretary of Justice through Ruben – where are you from Ruben? Oh, Batangas, I will speak in Tagalog to him – Ruben, tell the Secretary of Justice, Mercy Gutierrez, to issue an opinion regarding the tax exemption of cooperatives that must be followed and whatever opinion Secretary of Justice Mercy Gutierrez issues, the BIR and the CDA must follow. So, you will talk to her later.

Earlier, your speaker also said that we could make the Municipal Cooperative Local Government mandatory… And what you want, your request is for local governments to put a Municipal Cooperative Development officer. Now, if we want it to be mandatory, we need a law. But today what we can do if we want it in the next administration is to amend the Local Government Code. Perhaps we should amend the constitution so that a federal form of government is our country. Then, in the federal government here in Mindanao, Congress, the legislative body of Mindanao, can put Municipal Cooperative Development officers here.

But in the meantime, while there is no law or no new federal constitution, we can request, we cannot demand, we can request the local governments to hopefully put in an officer. I, in response to your request, especially in my administration, gave the entire IRA to local governments, unlike Estrada who retained 20 percent through an Executive Order. I repealed the Executive Order, all IRA went to local governments, I even paid off President Estrada's debt to the IRA. Therefore, I support your request for it, not mandatory but a request to put in a Municipal Cooperative officer. You also have a request with the Land Bank, especially our Agrarian Reform Beneficiaries Cooperatives, where are you? Agrarian Reform Beneficiaries, none? You. Because I know that Agrarian Reform Beneficiaries still have adjustments coming from the landlords. So, there is still a lot of debt and arrears in the Land Bank. So, Ruben Conti, again, I will speak in Tagalog, tell… Ah, don't forget before I instruct her, don't forget – what year was it when we had the… Two years ago, 2002. In my instruction, the Land Bank gave you a moratorium on your past due interest and penalty. Now I don't know if that request is still the same. So, anyway… Oh, Cito is a member of the board of the Land Bank. Okay, so let's instruct, not through Ruben because he is not a member of the Land Bank and not a son of Mindanao. Cito, a member of the Land Bank, a son of Mindanao and I can instruct you in Bisaya. You will tell the Land Bank to continue to help the land reform borrowers with their past due penalties to our farmers in the Land Bank.

The penalty on the debts of our farmers in land reform because they still have adjustments that the landlords no longer have can help them. A special treatment of the poor sector is very important. That is one of the principles of my administration. Like microfinance, for the poor, we lent to them during my short time as president, one million women have benefited from our microfinance. And included here are 4,000 families here in Misamis Oriental. Perhaps Congressman Oca Moreno will look for where these 4,000 people we helped so they can also help Oca Moreno and Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo and our colleagues in K4.

Now, in its launching, we saw – oh, I will speak in Tagalog again because of Ruben – okay, the GMA in the cooperatives of the CDA is helping here especially the CDA National Livelihood Support Program for the Urban and Rural Poor. Included here is Quedancor, our very good president of Quedancor, Nelson Buenaflor, he says now many farmers have been helped by Buenaflor and there is a special project with the Cooperative Development Authority. Special for you, our cooperatives here in Mindanao.

That is with the strong start of our short time as president for the new for the ordinary Filipino. Because many of our ordinary Filipinos are really members of cooperatives. But that is just a down payment so that we can make the next installment of these other fundamental reforms that are included in your position papers now. Because you have seen that we have a down payment on your needs for the progress of the cooperative movement in Mindanao and throughout the Philippines, please help me.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Mindanao Cooperative Conference. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090415/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5662&Itemid=38