Thank you, Secretary Puno.

General Razon, happy birthday and congratulations! (Applause) Likewise to Mrs. Razon and Nanay Razon and the other members of the Razon family. (Applause)

Our new Police Director-General Jess Versoza, congratulations! (Applause) Likewise to Mrs. Versoza, Jess’ parents and other members of the family. (Applause)

Secretary Ebdane here representing not only all the appointive officials of our administration but also all the former chiefs of the Philippine National Police (PNP) whom I all greet today.(Applause) Members of Congress, Don Emilio Yap and the other private benefactors of the Philippine National Police (applause), members of the diplomatic corps, ladies and gentlemen:

Today, we bid farewell to an outstanding leader of the Philippine National Police and welcome another exceptional official who begins his term as PNP chief.

Director-General Avelino I. Razon Jr., as he said to us in his tour-of-duty report, started the first three months of his term as PNP Chief with three big bangs that tested his mettle fast: the Glorietta tragedy, the Batasan bombing, the Manila Pen coup attempt. And with those trials, the public very quickly got to know this loyal, perceptive and determined police officer, the unflappable man in uniform who won the public’s trust in him and in the PNP.

That is how the police achieved the highest approval rating in the past seven years. Congratulations, Mamang Pulis Sonny Razon!(Applause) The symbol of Sonny Razon's leadership is Mamang Pulis and of course, Aleng Pulis, because at least 10 percent of our police force is made up of women. This symbol promoted by Sonny Razon, the symbol of an ideal police officer, is a police officer who is reliable, compassionate, approachable, presentable, humane, God-fearing, and skilled in responding to the various needs of the community, whether it be resolving disputes inside the home or on the streets, arresting criminals, or pursuing insurgents and terrorists. This is a result of the progressive activities under the program mentioned by our two distinguished guests, the PNP transformation program.

And a great achievement of Sonny in this transformation program is the manpower allocation, which has seen more and more of Mamang Pulis and Aleng Pulis in the streets, downloaded to the ratio of 95 percent from headquarters, to sustain an increased number of patrol and checkpoint operations and ensure police visibility in the localities.

And not only the statistic of the increased approval rating of the PNP should be a source of pride, but also because Sonny remembered last year in this hall – it was smaller then, it’s bigger now, Sonny enlarged it – what I said that I expect to be Sonny’s legacy is the existence of human rights… or human rights. And so aside from the increased approval rating we must congratulate Sonny Razon for working on the issue of human rights so that, as he himself has reported, the number of extra-judicial killings or political killings has gone down by 85 percent, congratulations! (Applause)

The Mamang Pulis paradigm that Sonny Razon brought to the PNP and the transformation that he moved forward, a transformation that, as Jess Versoza said, spans several PNP chiefs during our administration, starting from the concept that has started during the time of General Jun Ebdane, is indeed a microcosm of how we came to office determined to change the strategic paradigm for the Philippines and especially the Philippine economy.

The Philippine economy and peace and order are twins of each other. Without peace and order we cannot have a strong economy. And, conversely, a strong and growing economy has been the central pillar we have labored to create to help guarantee peace, order and stability in our country.

Our efforts are paying off: not only an increased approval for the PNP, not only the giant reduction in political killings but also in that our economy is more resilient today than before, also that we have created almost seven million jobs in seven years, and that investments continue to come despite continued volatility in the global markets.

As a result of our economic turnaround, we are also able to invest in key sectors to cushion the harsh impact of high prices for food and fuel on our poor that has hit not only our country but the whole world this past year.

In addition to modernizing the PNP, we are investing in modernizing infrastructure like roads and bridges on an unprecedented scale. And we are also investing in expanded education, healthcare, and other social services.

This includes the expanded housing and livelihood program for police officers and their families, which was named “Pulis Kalinga”. I remember in December, we went to Bicutan, right? Isn't that right Sonny? Where some units were started but were completed during the time of Director General Razon.

And the housing projects in Baras, Rizal continue; the one Sonny mentioned in San Miguel, Bulacan, is this part of, what was it? 1,600 hectares that we obtained from the Central Bank as a dividend of the Central Bank to our country; and the 1,600 hectares were divided into four parts – 400 hectares for the police, 400 hectares for General Yano’s comrades in the military, 400 hectares for teachers, and 400 hectares for other government workers and employees.

That is why I am happy that in the part of the PNP, Sonny Razon has started the horizontal development. There is also one in Camp Castañeda in Silang, Cavite and others, Sonny Razon mentioned many places of our housing program for the police. For the children, the sons and daughters, and I want to give my best wishes to Miss Versoza as she takes her bar exams and I hope that all the children of the police can reach that point and to reach that high level of education, thousands of children of police officers are also able to study under various types of our scholarships.

These benefits for the police have helped with the transformations made by Sonny and his predecessors in reducing the incidence of crimes, especially street crimes. That is a big reduction during Sonny Razon's time. And that is something that the ordinary Filipino feels if his street is more crime-free than ever before. And we are confident that the good example of Mamang Pulis Sonny will be continued by his successor.

Our new PNP chief Jess Versoza had also a very, how shall I say, very varied experienced in the police force and as he was talking about how Ronnie Puno would advise him, inspire him, or comfort him as the case maybe, during the highs and lows of his career. I could not help but remember in my own mind the different things that Jess underwent at least during my administration. But one thing I’d like to point out is that he has been assigned to practically every hot spot of the country, including Basilan and Maguindanao.

And of the rich experience of Jess Versoza, I specifically point this one out because his experience is valuable to what we are seeking to do today. That is we are committed to do everything possible to bring lasting peace to Mindanao and end 40 years of fighting that has killed more than a 120,000 people.

It is in the interest of all Filipinos, not just to have his street free of crime but also to end the violence that has held the southern part of our country back and that has required our investment of hundreds of millions of pesos to support our military and police presence in Mindanao. As I said to the UN General Assembly a few days ago, we will pursue the peace process in Mindanao.

The recent violence has reminded us all that peace is the only option for our country and the people of Mindanao but also everybody in his own street even here in Metro Manila. However, we must end the armed rebellions through disarmament, demobilization and rehabilitation. And a very strong role of the PNP is expected in making sure that Mindanao remains peaceful.

After all, what is happening there in Mindanao is a law-enforcement exercise. It is not an all-out-war. We are now focused on dialogues with all of the communities involved in the peace process – both Muslim and Christians.

We are building more bridges to affected communities and to all men and women of good will who reject the use of armed struggle as a means of achieving political and societal change.

Earlier, DG Versoza mentioned and highlighted some citizens, civilians who used their right as citizens to bring about change in the police force.

And this is also what we expect in our peace process – what Sonny’s classmate, Jun Esperon, is doing now – bringing the peace process to the people themselves. And we want it to be like what our young lady here in the third row did, coming from her that there should be change in the police service at the police station. We also expect that it will come from the people themselves that the rebels should lay down their arms so that the entire country can move forward.

And so with these new directions in the police, in the peace process, in our country at large against the gale force winds of the global economy, we remain bullish on our country, and with that continually transforming police under the leadership now of our new DG Jess Versoza, we’re optimistic about our future. I am very pleased to hear the deep commitment of our police leaders to being a force for good.

Mahal nating lahat ang ating taong bayan. And as Commander-in-Chief, I can only end by saying, I am very grateful to the Lord, as Sonny calls “The Architect of the Great Universe”, because He has given me the privilege to have Sonny Razon and Jess Versoza with me in serving the country.

To both of you, congratulations! To all of you, thank you very much. (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Retirement Honors and Change of Command Ceremonies. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135218/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php option=com_content&task=view&id=1658&Itemid=38