Dreaming of an Evergreen Philippines

Dusit Hotel Nikko, Makati City 23 October 2006

Clean and Green Foundation is eleven years old. And for the past several years, you have tenaciously pursued the vision of increased attention to our natural environment and making sure we build up, not just deplete our natural resources, as lamented by Ambassador Yamazaki.

In these past several years, you have assembled environmental criteria applicable to an array of products, including laundry detergents, household batteries, tissue paper, automotive engine oil, crayons, portland cement, and fire extinguishers.

And it seems like only yesterday, in 2003, when together in a similar ceremony as this, we launched the National Eco-Labelling Program called “Green Choice Philippines.”

In 2004, I signed Executive Order 301 mandating all government offices to patronize environment- friendly products.

We did these twin moves to give impetus to an active practice of green productivity among manufacturers and green procurement by institutional buyers, and the biggest institutional buyer of course is the government.

We have come full circle today to fulfilling the equation: GP1 plus GP2 equals GP3. Where GP1 is Green Productivity, GP2 is Green Purchasing, and GP3 is Green Philippines.

Our administration has likewise laid out the outlines of creating a Green Philippines that encompasses conservation, energy independence, reforestation, and designation of national parks and wildlife refuges.

We must take back our forests—and I’m happy that Mrs. Ramos was talking about some of your activities including planting trees—we must replenish fallen trees and many of them fell during the last Milenyo typhoon. We must replenish them with new, protected forests to protect our land and our people. We must reforest that land and bring back the beauty of the Philippines we all love and want—the beauty that was described in the song ‘What a wonderful world/ we want to tap the enthusiasm of everyone to clean up our environment. We need to beautify our villages and cities of trash. We need to build up more urban parks and recreation areas—I thank shell for building that very beautiful linear park and its perimeter—we must purify our water and clean up industrial sites that are an eyesore and are unhealthy.

Over the weekend, I played golf somewhere and looking over the fence, I saw a factory emitting smoke. I said, “Oh my God, I thought we had no more smokestacks.” But we still have some of them and therefore we do need to enforce more environmental laws.

As Peter said, the first law I signed as president of the Philippines on January 26, 2001 was Republic Act 9003, also known as the Ecological Solid Waste Management Act.

We’re also earnestly implementing the Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act in partnership with local government units and private organizations nationwide—many of whom are here today. As we end, let me say that as we progress to the full implementation of the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act and the Ecological Solid Waste Management Act, we would like to see an improvement in universal compliance with all the laws, rules and regulations on the environment.

There have been mild protests regarding these laws, by those who claim that we are trying to accomplish too much in too short a time and increasing costs. But we need not enumerate the sordid statistics of the social cost of environmental damage and the dire consequences that arise from the lack of clean air and clean water and proper solid waste management. Pollution kills people and saps the strength of the nation.

As part of our Green Philippines, we also want an energy-efficient nation, free from reliance on costly and exhaust-spewing cars and smokestacks. Although I saw that smokestack in that factory this weekend, I can say that overall, our industrial and business organizations—that some of the icons are here today—have steadily imbibed the spirit of environmentalism.

We can harness our sun, wind and geothermal resource and produce our own clean fuels through biofuels and not rely on foreign suppliers. But we need the will of the people and NGOs like Clean and Green to move the politicians and legislators to embrace this new, clean, green Philippines.

And we want to turn our coral reefs and beaches, the wonder of the world, into national parks and international sanctuaries for eco-tourism and scientific research. Among the national parks must surely be Verde Island which is the center of marine biodiversity in the world today I have instructed Secretary Reyes, our DENR secretary, to hold a biodiversity forum right in Verde island so that we can all remember that we have the chance to develop our nation right from the start: clean, healthy, productive and beautiful.

These are just a few ideas for our ‘Green Philippines’ and we take the opportunity of this GP3 conference-workshop to call on everyone—not just those in the workshop—together let us call on the rest to respond to this call to action to bring new, innovative thinking to land management, care for our environment, and ways to create jobs and have a clean, socially responsible environmental policy.

We need to get beyond the era of “either/or” thinking on the environment. We must embrace change and be bold in creating a ‘Green Philippines’ that is both green and economically successful. The Philippines can become a model of environmental stewardship within ten years. And GP3 with your labelling program, your green productivity, and your green procurement is indeed a big help in creating that vision.

And on the part of government by patronizing producers and suppliers that adhere to green production principles, government procurement will be serving notice to the rest of the country’s producers that they should shift to green production or be left out.

E.O. 301 directs the incorporation of environmental criteria in public tenders, whenever appropriate, and the establishment of specifications that would make it possible to ascertain and classify products as environmentally advantageous.

We have systems and mechanisms to make our GP3 equation a practical reality because we have such an efficient and enthusiastic secretariat like clean and green foundation. It has only been two years since we issued E.O.301 and we are getting there slowly but surely, and faster with the support of clean and green and with GP3.

As our previous speakers have said, there is now a National Eco-Labelling Program Board to serve as third-party verifier of claims on the environmental soundness of products and services, and updates a growing list of environmentally-sound products like the products of Unilever, like the products of Procter and Gamble also. They’ve all been very, very environment-friendly

The transformation to a green culture is already underway. To illustrate, bottled water and organic foods, which are generally more expensive than the traditional products, are rising in popularity. This tells us that our people would rather spend more on healthier food. And that’s why aside from institutional buyers like industry and government, we should never forget consumer power.

With that trend in place, therefore, GP3 and the government can work together to ask everyone to help us bring about a ‘Green Philippines’ that will be our ultimate profit and prize for the benefit of the rising generation of Filipinos.

Thank you very much and Mabuhay !

Source: Presidential Museum and Library