Thank you very much, Governor Tommy Joson, for welcoming us all. And regarding the food, don't worry, the district engineers aren't just feeding our barangay captains, they are also taking them around, touring them here at CLSU and some even went to Subic.

I also want to give respect to our congressman here in this district, Congressman Violago. We have three congressmen with him, not actually congressmen but congresswomen. Here is Congresswoman Josie Joson of the first district. Here also is congresswoman of… I should remember her party name, not her name, Congresswoman Butil, Nelly. And congresswoman of Quezon, wife of the vice chairman of the Road Board, Congresswoman Aleta Suarez. The mother of the congressmen is also here, although she is younger than the other congressmen, First Lady of the House of Representatives, Gina De Venecia. I already mentioned Mrs. Suarez so I will also greet the DPWH officials, the chairman of the Road Board is Dante Soriquez, and the vice chairman is Danny Suarez.

The Cabinet members with me who are here are Secretary Mar Roxas, “Mr. Palengke;” Secretary Mike Defensor, he has a lot of housing here; and Secretary of the Press, Milt Alingod; Secretary of DAR, Obet Pagdanganan; my Presidential Adviser for infrastructure, Teddy Encarnacion; and son of Nueva Ecija, you know him, Presidential Assistant Rene Diaz; also here is General Boysie Braganza, the Commanding General of the 7th Division.

Let me greet our hosts here. I already greeted Governor Joson. I already greeted Congressman Violago. Let me also greet the Mayor of Muñoz, Mayor Alvarez. As well as all the Board members, the mayors of Nueva Ecija, Vice Mayor Alvarez and members of the City Council of Muñoz. Now, I greet those who are hosting us, our guests.

I welcome, welcome to the barangay captains of Regions I to V, good afternoon to all of you.

First of all, let me greet those from Nueva Ecija. Because with the frequency of my visits here, I think there is no doubt how much I love you, the people of Nueva Ecija.

And today, here we are also launching the changes we need to make to make our country more progressive. As Vice Chairman of the Road Board Danny Suarez said on this occasion, we are launching the third part – so three lights, three colors of light – three parts of the “Kalsada Natin, Alagaan Natin” program.

This program uses one billion pesos to allow the barangays to take care of the national roads that pass through you. And we will strive to do this throughout the country. Because if the road is not properly maintained, it will be damaged. Now, this program covers so far in what we have done, the third launching. It covers so far all national arterial roads and all national secondary roads throughout Luzon because every citizen, every barangay must contribute to the whole enterprise. And as far as I understand, from the experience of the first two launches, Unisan to Urdaneta and Southern Luzon, I learned, I saw, I found out that the barangay captains also provided great help to the workers in the implementation of this program.

Therefore, I am directing Chairman Soriquez and Vice Chairman Suarez that starting December 1, 2003, all assisting barangay captains throughout Luzon will receive a 500 pesos a month supervision fee. You all helped out first, so you should be given a supervision fee.

This endeavor of ours, our care for the roads, the national road that passes through the barangay, this program can serve as the cornerstone of our country’s progress. The important benefit that this program will immediately provide is jobs. It was like during my father’s time, when the emergency employment program of President Macapagal was established in 1962. Like my father, for me, creating jobs for our countrymen is the main priority since I became president. Thank you that despite what my opponents criticize me for, Mar Roxas is here, “Mr. Palengke,” but today we will call him “Mr. Investment” because based on the latest report on investments in the Philippines, investments in the Philippines still increased by 22 percent. This is according to the latest report of the Department of Trade and Industry, which handles the Board of Investments and the Philippine Economic Zone Authority. And most of this money that came in came from foreign investments. This means that, whatever some people say here in our country, the trust of foreign investors in us is still there. There are businessmen who criticize, the important thing is the businessman who speaks with their money, not just with their mouth. So our investors have spoken, a 22 percent increase in investment. And according to the Japanese, the Philippines is the number 3 preferred investment destination, next only to Thailand and Malaysia.

What more could be achieved if we were united instead of fighting? The government’s sincere desire is to improve the lives of the citizens. When businesses like this increase, so will the jobs for our countrymen. So you, barangay captains, you officials here, I ask you, on top of your good supervision, this “Kalsada Natin, Alagaan Natin” (Our Roads, Let's Take Care of Them), I ask for our unity instead of us being divided and fighting against each other because of the desire of some groups to impose their wrong beliefs on our country.

I appeal to all of you, barangay captains, if we want to end poverty, if we want to end poverty, let us all unite because that is what we need if we want to improve the lives of our countrymen.

Therefore, let us work together for the success of “Kalsada Ko, Alagaan Ko” (My Road, I Will Take Care Of It), for the success of our programs that offer investments, and for the success of our other national endeavors. In that way, hopefully with our unity and basic reforms like what we are doing to attract investments and create more jobs on our roads. And with unity, we can achieve the progress of our country and the progress of your communities.

Thank you very much and welcome to all the barangay captains. Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Farmers’ Forum on Agrarian Reform. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140605/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7413&Itemid=38