Thank you very much, Secretary Gonzales, National Security Adviser and convenor of this series of Local Peace and Security Assemblies.

Our hosts here at the assembly, Governor Yebes, Congresswoman Carreon, Mayor Carreon; and Congressman Jalosjos, our leaders from the various provinces and highly urbanized cities of the Zamboanga Peninsula from the South, Governor Au Cerilles together with Congressman Cerilles; and… let us also have, the first speaker from Mindanao, Speaker Boy Nograles (applause); also from the South, Congressman Vic Yu (applause); and from Zamboanga Sibugay, Congressman Belma Cabilao (applause) and beside the highly urbanized city of Zamboanga City, Mayor Celso Lobregat (applause); mayors, vice mayors, board members from the different cities and municipalities of Region IX, other officials of the national government, other participants, especially those coming from the religious, academe NGOs, farmers and fisherfolk, representatives of all of you, good noon and buenos dias (applause).

Daghang salamat y muchas gracias sa mga resolusyon. Dunay guid mga espesyal nga problema dinhi sa Region 9 nga lahin sa mga uban tungod kay ang Zamboanga Peninsula usa ka melting pot sa lain-laing ethnic communities gikan sa Luzon, Visayas ug Mindanao ug mga lumad sab. And I’d like to recall that my own family reflects this particular quality or characteristic of Zamboanga Peninsula. My grandfather, Juan Macaraeg, was an Ilocano from Binalonan, Pangasinan and, in the 1920s he came to Zamboanga Peninsula to work for Sta. Clara Lumber, so he’s one of those who contributed to the ethnic richness and diversity of this peninsula. He was already married to my lola who is from Pangasinan from San Carlos, and when they came, my lolo and my lola, they brought not only my mother, their only child, but they also brought my grandfather’s cousins, my lola’s siblings, a whole clan came over. And I think that’s very typical of those who came over to that new frontier in the 1920s. My mother was in primary school and my grandfather, from my mother’s stories of course… percent of Sta. Clara Lumber didn’t spend most of his time in the big city of Zamboanga. He spent it in the hinterlands of Zamboanga Peninsula, then only one province, and my mother had many recollections of my grandfather being in Margosatubig.

And that’s why I was so happy when Congressman Cerilles brought me then as senator to that town of Margosatubig. Now, as Governor Cerilles tells me, it’s one of the oldest towns—the oldest town in what has become Zamboanga del Sur. So my grandfather left my mother in Zamboanga City in the care of the Lorenzo family, Celso’s grandfather and grandmother. And that’s how my mother became a very fluent speaker of Spanish aside from Chabakano. So, my grandfather being the head of that whole clan that came over was very patriarchal. One of his cousins, a Guico, because my grandfather was Guico-Macaraeg, was a bachelor and my grandfather decided that he would choose the bride for his cousin and he chose a member of the prominent family in Manukan — the Sagario clan — to be the bride of his cousin. And that’s why the Guicos of Manukan, my cousins, have been my supporters here since I first ran in 1992. And being a nobody then, I still had an overwhelming victory here in Zamboanga del Norte because I have such a big clan here. Thank you for that (applause).

Today, in fact, I invited them to come to have lunch with me, forty of them are outside waiting to have lunch together with us.

So, that’s one characteristic diri sa Zamboanga Peninsula mahimo ug melting pot. And I guess your… the first Chief of Staff from Mindanao, General Yano (applause) from Sindangan, Zamboanga del Norte must also be one of the examples, one of the fruits of that melting pot.

There is also not only a difference in ethnicity, but also a big difference in the income of the residents here like my mother, when she was living with the Lorenzo family, was interacting with the old elite, not only the Lorenzos but the Aranetas, etcetera, etcetera, the Alanos. But on the other hand, here in Zamboanga del Norte together with Sian. Sian is the poorest city in the entire country, guided by the entire country. So aside from that, how many armed groups influence the various cities here, and in some of the poorest cities, one armed group is causing trouble. In fact, Secretary Bert Gonzales said ‘that here in Zambonaga del Norte, this is a microcosm, because all the armed groups are represented somewhere here in Zamboanga del Norte especially on the other side, right? In Cesar’s district. And because it’s like it’s so isolated from the rest of Zamboanga del Norte that it is like a different world altogether. Because of this, there are problems with peace and order.

We are committed doing everything possible to bring lasting peace not only to Zamboanga Peninsula but to the whole of Mindanao and to end 40 years of fighting that has killed more than 120,000 Filipinos. It is in the interest of all Filipinos, Muslims and Christians, to end the violence that has held this part of our country back. We remain committed to the peace process. We have negotiated in good faith with our Muslim brethren to keep the peace these last seven years and also to look for a lasting peace for generations to come. However, lately, lawless groups within the MILF have taken the law into their own hands and that will not stand.

We will not negotiate with a gun pointed at our head. So, no matter what the Supreme Court ultimately decides, the government will not sign the proposed MOA-AD (applause).

We have refocused all peace talks from one centered on dialogues with rebels to one of authentic dialogues with the communities. And I hope that, that will address some of your resolutions that are expressed in many paragraphs about consulting with the communities, with the stakeholders. And disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) is the context of our engagement with all armed groups. And I thank you also that you agree with that as reflected in your resolution.

Indeed, your resolution contains the essential elements to any lasting peace and if everyone supports these elements and the national government is committed on our part to do such support, Mindanao can indeed be the bread basket for the country. I congratulate Zamboanga Peninsula for being self-sufficient in rice but it can be even more than that as long as we have lasting peace in this island. Maayo nga mahimug bread basket ang Mindanao, ara sa tibuok nasud mayo alang sa Mindanao mayo alang sab sa nasud.

Because we all know the effect on us Filipinos of the global economic problem this year with the increase in the price of food, oil and rice, the increase in inflation and the suffering of the poor.

A big challenge for our economic managers is the increase in the price of crude oil in the world by 44 percent and rice also worldwide by 43 percent within one year.

It's good that we were prepared through our tough choices to reform our tax system. And we have some of our congressmen here who were those who helped us make the tough choices and the tough tax reforms. Which now provides funds for investment in programs that will help the poor overcome the problems caused by rising oil prices, food, and other basic necessities.

The Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program is one of our important programs. This program provides monthly cash assistance to the poorest families in the country if the families meet certain conditions, especially school attendance. Here in Zamboanga del Norte, there are over 116,000 poor families; 32 percent of them are included in the Pantawid Pamilya program from 13 municipalities.

On this occasion, I reassert the concern of the government to continue and even expand these targeted direct payments to the most-poor to see them through this tough time. Busa kagabii na storya mi ni Secretary Espie Cabral who has just arrived from a leave of absence ug ingon sab ko sa iya nga pun-an nato moabot sa 50 percent sa mga pamilyang kabus sa Zamboanga del Norte ang moapil sa Pantawid Pamilya (applause).

Karong adlawa sag, gi-abrehan nato ang usa ka programa ga gi-announce ko ni adtong State of the Nation Address. We call this program “A Healthy Start” because it starts in the morning when the children go to school; it also starts their life, because we’re talking about the preschool daycare and grade one students of the poorest areas of the country. Kung diin ang mga gagmay nga estudyante sa mga labing food-poor nga probinsiya hatagan ug pamahaw. Gisugdan na kini karong adlawa sa Central Elementary School sa Dapitan, Mayor Jalosjos ug sa mga day care centers sa La Libertad, Mutia, Piñon, Polanco, Rizal, Sibutad, Liloy, Salug, Siocon, Siraway ug Tampilisan.

We will also work hard not only to provide this direct assistance to the poorest of the poor but also to work on strengthening the economy to further strengthen the banking system, to improve our fiscal health, to encourage investment in our most promising growth sectors and expand our potential sectors for growth. Here, diri sa Zamboanga Peninsula, the potential sectors for growth include seaweed farming for Zamboanga City and Zamboanga del Sur. Rubber is especially strong in Zamboanga Sibugay, in fact, we acknowledged that in our State of the Nation Address.

Apan, we will only be successful if every segment of society pulls together and commits to build an ever-stronger Zamboanga Peninula and therefore hopefully an ever-stronger Philippines.

So, once again, I thank you for your resolution—the roadmap to an ever stronger Zamboanga Peninsula. Let us all together pull together and work towards that vision. Daghan salamat. Muchas gracias (applause).

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Local Peace and Security Assembly. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135326/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1677&Itemid=38