Thank you very much Secretary Roco.

President Varela, Chairman Tan, President Chua, Vice-Chairman Bacani, Ambassador del Rosario, ladies and gentlemen:

I thank the organizers of this important annual event for the opportunity to address the captains of industry and business leaders of the country.

You know I was supposed to go straight from Indonesia to the United States but I came back for this one day because Jimmy Tan asked me to make sure I attend the Philippine Business Council.

Your theme is managing transitions: perspectives and strategies for the emerging economy, that when you sent it to me, I’ve seen the back between the e and the merging, so I was talking about the emerging economy. But I think however, there are many people who will talk about E-commerce in this conference. And from your President I think that I would rather remove the dot for the moment although I am very well-known to be pushing for I.C.T. As the number on growth sector for the future, I will dispense it that advocacy for today because you have heard me talked very much about that in the past and my chairmanship of the I-Tec council speaks for itself with regard to my personal attention to the development of e-commerce or the e-economy. I think to remove the dot and we talked about the emerging economy. What is the economy that is emerging now. And this must be interpreted in the light of the September 11 tragedy in New York and Washington which has changed the global mood.

Had I spoken before September 11, yes, I would have talked about I.C.T. I would have talked about the other sector similar to ICT In that they are human resource intensive, skills intensive service sectors because that is where our competitive advantage lies. But today in this annual meeting and when you look at the world around us now, it is important that we recognize and stress that world business conditions are more uncertain now. And our priorities have changed since early September. We have not removed the priority of e-commerce but we are adding another priority and that is economic security.

On December 10th, we are convening the National Socio-Economic Summit of 2001 to forge a multi-partisan and multi-sectoral two-year action agenda to counter the effects of global recession and terrorism. And I expect to see you there again.

I can only find comfort in the fact that the Philippine economy has proven remarkably resilient given the state of the regional and global economy. GNP growth is at 3.4%, better than most of our neighbors and trading partners. Inflation is down. It is the lowest in the last 12 months and our fiscal situation is stable. The IMF said that they were already lost their bet three times. They bet I could not pass the power sector reform law, they lost that bet. They bet that we could not pass the Money Laundering Law, they lost that bet. They have made a bet but we will not be able to keep our budget deficits ceiling and they’re afraid they’re going to lose the third bet as well. But they will be happy to lose that bet.

That said, the global uncertainty that has resulted from the tragic events of September 11 makes economic planning for any country very difficult. It has also impacted an essential element of global economic growth — confidence. Until businesses and consumers regain confidence in the economic system all countries remain affected by September 11. No country is truly insulated from the global economic slowdown, but fortunately our country with its heavy agricultural and service composition has fared better than most.

And so, if you look at the indicators– GNP, inflation, employment which is rising, net employment, — our economy is strong, our democracy is stable, our role in the world becoming clearer. And I am focused on what needs to be done to address two wars: the war on crime, of which terrorism is only a part; and the war against poverty in the country. These two priorities are very linked as poverty fuels the willingness of those, of some to support criminal activities. Let me tell you what we are doing in these important areas:

In the battle against crime:

As a matter of policy, first, there can be no tolerance for kidnapping, no negotiations for ransom, and no back room deals. This is often a painful choice where innocent lives are at stake. Second, there must be swift justice to those who engage in this kind of sub-human behavior. Third, we must become well-organized in the government in order to respond to this threat-including cleaning house in our police, military and intelligence agencies as necessary.

As you know, this is a challenge with many causes. From bandits who hide behind religion — like the Abu Sayyaf, to those who prey on their own people — like the Chinese gangs many of whom had been arrested very recently, through to hard-core criminals. In all cases, we are putting the full force of our security forces against this challenge. We have recently arrested a large number involved in kidnap-for-ransom crimes. As a matter of fact, the solution rate to criminality is higher now. And of about 305 identified kidnappers, more than half have already been arrested.

And I am confident that more will follow as we continue. And because in recent times many of those arrested for kidnapping and drug trafficking turned out to be related to secessionist activities. We have signed ceasefire agreements with groups who have decided to give peace and development a chance. This is a clear sign that the war on crime and terrorism is not just won through the barrel of a gun.

And also because in recent times we have found that many of those arrested for kidnapping and drug trafficking were Chinese nationals, I also signed three treaties on crime-fighting with Beijing in my state visit to the People’s Republic of China: one on extradition, one on narcotics, and one on transnational crimes. These are but a few examples of our cooperation with neighboring countries to solve our common problems of criminality.

As you very well all know in a much covert announcement, I lifted the moratorium on the death penalty to convicted kidnappers to strike fear on kidnap-for-ransom syndicates and show the government’s resolve to deal with the kidnapping menace which is our number one menace in the country today.

I instructed Secretary Joey Lina to rid the police of scalawags. He has already initiated proceedings and he is willing report the results directly to the business community.

We are resurrecting also the community-oriented police system which used to work well in the past.

In the past, on of the reasons why earlier kidnapping spates were arrested was that the special action force of the police and the marines were brought into the fight. But now the special action force and the marines are there in Basilan. And because of this to replace them, what we are doing is recruitment. Recruitment of new policemen. We are encouraging the policemen who have no college degree to retire. And we are recruiting new policemen and we want as the very basic minimum that they must have a college degree. This is in accordance with our desire to professionalize the police force.

So far from the last time I talked to the Chinese community about the kidnapping problem, we’ve been able to hire 400 new policemen with the college degree and therefore professionally-oriented. But we truly effective Secretary Lina says, he needs 1,700 policemen to replace the special action force and the marines who are fighting another battle somewhere else.

This morning we had a meeting and after discussing the budgetary requirements, within the next two days the PNP is ready to hire the balance of the 1,300 that they need to have greater police visibility in the areas where you feel you need them.

I convened the national anti-crime commission this morning and instructed all the component agencies to work double time to solve the pending crime cases and to prevent more kidnappings from occurring. I am providing the NACC with the necessary equipment, including helicopters and surveillance facilities, and giving it the budget to enable it to function effectively.

As far as the surveillance equipment is concerned, for instance , the national anti-kidnapping tasked force headed by General Ebdane inherited surveillance equipment from the defunct PAOCTF. And he is making this available to the PNP mainstream including the tasked force at the PNP that’s created within the PNP itself on fighting kidnapping.

And I think you have seen the headlines, there is a re-organization of the police, aside from their modernization and their professionalization. Emy Boncodin is also releasing additional money for surveillance. And as I said earlier, we are improving the screening process for policemen applicants , only college graduates can now be admitted to the police force.

Part of the re-organization is that we are putting back General Edgardo Aglipay from the National Capital Region because reviewing the records during the time when he was the head of the NCR the kidnapping was quite low. And he reported to me some of the things that he did during his time including a general term that would call hardening of targets. And what he did before which was effective he will do again now as the head of the NCR PNP.

Because the kidnapping problem is much more serious than many of other crimes that have been committed the usual crimes. I am asking him to leave the attention of the other crimes to the police districts, for it also very good. And as far as kidnapping is concerned that is where the renewed or the returning NCR Police Director will concentrate his efforts. We have also asked former DILG Secretary and former Mayor of Manila , Mayor Lim to be a full time consultant to the National Anti-Crime Commission.

When I was in Hong Kong, I asked the Hong Kong police experts to train our police force. To train our police force especially on anti-kidnapping activities. And this will also be done with Israel, Scotland Yard, and the U.S. In fact, part of what I will be discussing when I go to the United States tomorrow is how to enlist the FBI to beef-up their personnel right here so that they can help and have joint operations with the Philippines on anti-kidnapping. Kidnapping in the Philippines is not a local domestic industry. It is a transnational crime. We have the evidence of that because we have arrested other nationals. And that’s why we are justifying in getting the not just the support but the participation of this various law enforcement and intelligence agencies from the other countries.

We have already set up an emergency response center to assist victims and their relatives. General Ebdane who is the head of the NACC Anti-kidnapping Task Force has already put up a nerve center right in Binondo. And this is very useful because they received the information from the Chinese community about what they think should be done. For instance, because of the 1,700 new policemen professional policemen, college graduate that we need to hire, they were only initially able to hire 400, they do their strategic placements. And because Valenzuela has lately been an area where the kidnappings occur, the police visibility will be concentrated in Valenzuela. But that’s two days, it will be next two days, because two days from now there will be the massive recruiting. Why do I say two days from now? Because the payroll will be available on November 30th. So therefore, they can be hired starting November 16th because they will have their pay on November 30th.

And just as I set up a reward system for Abu Sayyaf leaders, which has resulted in many captures, I also have made a total of P100 million available as a reward pool for the capture of kidnappers for ransom. In fact, just as we have distributed about fifteen million already for those who helped us capture important Abu Sayyaf leaders. Joey Lina showed me earlier a lists that showed me already all five million pesos to those who have helped us capture in recent weeks some of the important kidnap for ransom personalities. And we will continue this.

We are mobilizing the peace and order councils more actively. I understand that the federation of the Filipino-Chinese Chamber of Commerce has its own committee that acts together with the peace and order councils in Chinatown and the other places where the people are concerned with the problem of kidnapping. In places like Chinatown, I have authorized the organization of Bantay-Bayan self-defense units which are authorized to carry firearms and effect citizens’ arrest. I asked Joey Lina also, have you already deputized people in Chinatown? He said, he’s still waiting for the list of the people that he should deputized. So please give us that list. I don’t think you want us to deputize every Barangay Tanod. So you’ve got to give a list of those you recommend — responsible enough to be able to carry firearms because if they do any monkey business at least I know the Chinese community will answer for them as well.

Let us all asked media once again not to report news about especially about live kidnapping cases. And I believed that there has already been a stoppage of the leaks from the PNP and who had on live kidnapping cases. It is important that when you have live kidnapping case, no leak comes out so as not to jeopardize the safety of victims still in the hands of kidnappers.

Using the National Anti-Crime Commission as the center, we are establishing closer coordination among all intelligence agencies so that we can maximize all mechanisms of the state to identify and locate kidnap for ransom groups. The intelligence coordinator is Col. Victor Corpus.

We are I think very close to resolving the problem of the Abu Sayyaf. In fact Admiral Blair of the CINCPAC is quite impressed with our commanders who’re very aggressive, quite impressed with our men who are flying and our men on the grounds even they have a lot of their very, very experienced. And the men who came here earlier to the Philippines identified some of the hardware shortcomings and system shortcomings. And I think with that or even before that the problem of Abu Sayyaf will be solved. And when that happens, oh I can hardly wait for the Special Action Force of the police and the Marines to be available in Metro Manila again.

In the meantime, I am very pleased that we were recently able to pass the Anti-Money Laundering Bill. And I think the bill was keeping in accordance with the fears of the Chinese business community. In other words, it is not going to be a tool for harassment. The provisions you were afraid of are not there. On the other hand, there are enough provisions to make the fatf feel that we really have done forward which is not what they say about all the other anti-money laundering bills that were passed before the deadline. And this bill gives the government the tools it needs to track financial transactions that my have links to criminal groups. This is not a short-term initiative. This is now a permanent part of the process that we are taking to ensure the security of the people of the Philippines.

My dear countrymen, a great challenge faces many in global security and the economy.

To suppress the scourge of kidnapping, terrorism and other crimes, we need general unity.

And finally, we are working to address the root cause of crime — which is rampant poverty.

On the battle against poverty: our economic fundamentals as I said earlier remain stable despite an uncertain global environment and although immediate challenges remain, we have near-term fiscal and monetary measures to ensure stable prices, adequate liquidity and funding for our development initiatives. I would not dare say this if the statistics did not back me up. And you have already seen them in the business page.

Immediate contingency measures that we have put in place stand us in good stead to meet immediate needs for macro-economic stability. We are working hard so that our GDP and our deficit ceiling targets for this year will be met and so that we will have the funding options in place to meet next year’s budget requirements.

We are committed to the long-term structural reforms that will ensure continued strength in domestic demand, continued diversification of our GDP and strengthening of the Philippines environment for investment.

I am committed to making the Philippines a safe and desirable place for business and investment.

Our administration is committed to good governance at all levels. We do not hesitate to investigate any serious allegation and we hold anyone accountable if corruption has been found to take place in his area. This is an important part of our efforts to identify and prosecute those who are corrupt and to change the mindset of those who support this practice by making payments that feed corruption. Corruption is not a soft crime, it impacts our ability to meet our economic targets and it impacts our ability to attract investment.

We are addressing this at all levels as I said. Our administration is working hard to promote good governance at all levels and we are working diligently to ensure that the people of the Philippines are getting the professional and clean government they expect and deserve. This includes the following:

To reduce corruption in the Executive branch, Cabinet Secretaries will have to deliver tangible results within 12 months from my SONA which is within eight months, from now in fighting graft. Our new e-procurement program, well, at last I’m talking about the e-merging economy is now saving billions and minimizing anomalies. And now we have now a working Presidential Anti-Graft Commission with an Executive Director with the board existing and they are investigating moto propio corruption cases in high places all those that I passed on to them.

And we are making the Bureau of Internal Revenue and Customs showcases in our fight against graft and corruption. All the rice that has been seized, all the rice that has, the smuggled rice that has been seized — in the past they were auctioned off, and when they auctioned off. And in the past reports say that those who smuggled them in the first place were those who bought them. So I told Titus Villanueva, we will not auctioned off the rice that has been seized. We will hold them as part of our social welfare activities as part of the rice allowance as provided by law for the soldiers in hardship posts like Mindanao.

And at first they said, but the law requires that the office should … No, look at the law. And the law talks about you auctioned off goods that are not contraband. But if the importation of rice is prohibited except when there is a shortage. When there is no shortage rice is contraband. Therefore, it does hot have to be auctioned off. And there is a portion that says there: if the contraband goods have commercial value, they may be sold. That’s what I pointed out to call you, see the word is — they may be sold it does not say they must be sold because I want to teach a lesson to those who are smuggling rice who think they can get the rice and sell it again in the open market by buying it in auctions. They will not be able to buy that at auction because it will not be auctioned off. So stop investing your money in rice smuggling.

To reduce corruption among elective officials, we are still committed to help honest people get elected by financing the full computerization of elections. We released two billion pesos of the needed 3.4 for computerization. And I believed Congress will add another half a billion in the 2002 budget, so that the funding release will be in time for computerization.

And to reduce red tape in the National government, within eight months, all government agencies will have implement measures to cut in half the number of signatures required for their service. And where legislation is required to effect this efficiency, the agencies concerned are drafting appropriate bills for my endorsement to Congress.

This morning, I had breakfast, Vicky Garchitorena and I have breakfast with Hernando de Soto who is the author of the Mystery of Capital. I thought all the he would teach me would be how to make the squatters become landowners by buying the government land that they occupy. But he showed me of his experience in many countries where in fact his work was how to cut down on red tape in housing, and in business. And therefore, this is what he is going to be doing for the Philippine government. And this is going to be a full time job to do the studies. It cannot be anymore that the head of the agency will work on his agency’s problems. Yes, they have that, they will have to do that but some body must look at it from the outside going in, because it’s very hard sometimes to see it when you are so subjective. And so this is what Vicky Garchitorena will be doing starting January next year. She will work with Hernando de Soto on cutting down on red tape or using subrosa documents bringing them out in the open and making them eligible for legal transactions. It is a revolutionary concept that has already worked very well in many parts of Latin America and weaving very Latin. I think our culture is very, very suited to the reforms that de Soto told me he was able to achieve in many other Latin American countries.

I have also asked our local governments likewise to streamline their operations and slash red tape in order to have seamless efforts between national and local governments to be investor-friendly.

And I am glad that we gave an award today to one of those local governments that are investor-friendly and have seamless efforts with the national government. And I would like to congratulate Mayor Jimmy Fresnedi for making Muntinlupa an investor-friendly city. Jimmy Fresnedi is not only friendly to business, he is friendly to the poor because in our anti-poverty programs for housing, for de Soto empowerment, the City of Muntinlupa never fails to give a substantial counterpart . That’s why it is so easy to do social reform as well in the City of Muntinlupa.

When we talk about the e-merging economy, the e-merging economy is characterized by two things before September 11 anyway, one is the emergence of e-commerce or information and communication technology as the main mode of doing things. And the other one is the inevitable emergence of globalization.

We support the launching of a new round of multilateral negotiations in the WTO, but Secretary Mar Roxas is there in Doha with very clear instructions to work hard and exercise leadership if necessary so that there will be a balanced agenda that addresses all concerns. I would like to see this round, I told Mar to be truly a development round where capacity building goes in step with liberalization and facilitation.

Mar Roxas gave me some documents, they worked in progress on the draft declaration. And I have instructed that, this time to Secretary Joe Concepcion so that he can bet it in behalf of the business community on whether it is contributing to the bringing about of a truly development round in WTO.

Even if I assure our people that the economy’s fundamentals remain strong and that we are taking steps to stimulate domestic demand, I ask you to prepare for hard times ahead. We will do what we can do to make the economy grow by exerting influence on factors that we can control. But there are factors that are not within the governments control, there are factors that are outside of our country, there are factors inside of our country that is in the hands of the businessmen to control not the government itself.

The government is doing all that I have described and more to improve the business environment, create jobs, and improve the lot of the Filipino people. But I need the continued support of the business sector. We need to work in tandem. The business of government is governance and the business of business is business. We will attend to governance. Please take care of business.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the 27th Philippine Business Conference. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212530/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8762&Itemid=38