Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Reception for the Diplomatic Corps

[Delivered at the Premier Guest House, Malacañang, August 13, 2003]

His Excellency Archbishop Franco, Excellencies of the Diplomatic corps, Secretary Ople and the other cabinet members, Ambassador Bautista and the other fellow workers in government, ladies and gentlemen, good evening:

I invited you tonight, ladies and gentlemen of the diplomatic community, to thank you for your support last July 27.

We successfully thwarted the attempts of a misguided few to challenge the constitutional order of our country. We continue to move to prevent further misadventures both by understanding the legitimate grievances of our soldiers and by investigating and prosecuting those who exploit these grievances for clearly self-serving and political reasons.

Much of our success can be credited to the clear expressions of support that you and your governments gave during our hour of need and which you continue to give. Thank you very much for that.

Your expressions of support sustained us, as we faced difficult situations and made hard decisions. Your confidence in our ability to deal with this crisis and in our leadership and governance sent strong signals to the mutineers and to their supporters that they could expect nothing from the international community, except perhaps your condemnation.

For your actions, Excellencies, and those of your leaders, you have my deep appreciation and the thanks of a grateful nation.

You have renewed our faith in the community of nations. You have confirmed that today, more than ever before, the lines that distinguish foreign and domestic affairs have become blurred. But that the links between what is happening in one country and what’s going on in the world have never been clearer, and the inextricable link between security and economic issues have never been more apparent.

After fifteen days, we lifted the State of Rebellion. There’s no longer a need for extraordinary measures to deal with the direct threat although its strategic causes must be uprooted. While several leaders continue to be at large, they shall be accounted for by the normal run of law intelligence, enforcement, investigative and judicial processes.

The truth will surface in these various fronts. On the one hand, we are unmasking the larger conspiracy to destroy our nation in the light of clear and cold evidence. On the other hand, through the commissions and task forces I have created, we’re leaving no stone unturned in unearthing the lapses of integrity, diligence and professionalism in the armed forces the only way we can attack the roots of instability is through a relentless pursuit of impartial justice through the courts, and a cleansing process within the uniformed service. I shall be undaunted on both counts.

The truth shall set us free. Let all allegations of graft and corruption come to light and be brought responsibly and openly before the bar of justice. I’m referring to both the military and civilian sectors. This is the time to put an end to coddling, looking the other way, or whitewashing investigations. It’s a time for all Filipinos to prove that we are not mired in a culture of corruption and that we can decisively shake off the stigma of being called a corrupt society. We live in a mature democratic system. We live in a mature democratic system that can repair its infirmities through the institutions of duly-constituted governance. We live in a mature democratic system that can confront the challenge without resorting to the use of force or coercion. We retain our faith in the restorative powers of democracy.

I would prefer seeing the military and civilian leaders of the Oakwood conspiracy taking the brunt of full retribution under the law, rather than the ordinary soldiers whom they misled and deceived. We will put an end to this spectacle of having the small fry being held to account for the sins of the rich and powerful. The worst evil comes from those who have no compunction to destroy our democratic way of life by deploying pawns from their political fortresses. We shall expose and punish the leaders who planted this conspiracy and sought to reap its unjust rewards. This will show the shallowness of the conspiracy and the unremitting capacity of our democratic system to mete out justice and due process. We can now banish residual fears and get on with the normal work, with the normal course of work and business.

It’s the business of peace that I am determined to carry out with your support. Our peace process with the MILF is on track, thanks to the central role being played by Malaysia and the role being played by other countries in the OIC. The United States Institute of Peace Will — as the parties might allow — also help out, primarily, by ensuring that there will be resources for economic development once a peace agreement is concluded.

With the help of Norway, we will have talks soon with the communist rebels. Exploratory talks will ensue with the representatives of the national democratic front in Oslo not too far from today.

With the help of the OIC, particularly the members of the Committee of the Eight, led by Indonesia, we have been successfully implementing our 1996 peace agreement with the MILF.

With the help of our international partners, we continue to fight terror on every front.

The hunt against Al-Ghozi will go on until he is recaptured. A wider net has been spread and local officials and the communities have been alerted. We have the initiative and we will not stop.

Our common values and visions bind us and renew our faith and belief in each other as members of a community of nations. The challenges that face our nation are many. And no nation should face these challenges alone.

Our continuing partnership in all fronts is vital and indispensable.

Once again, your Excellencies, thank you. And please convey my thanks to your governments.

Mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Reception for the Diplomatic Corps. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194722/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6514&Itemid=38