REACHING OUT FOR THE FUTURE

In response to what we have recommended, let me say again a few things. Let me repeat some of the things that I said in my statement last Thursday. I said last Thursday that over the years, our political system has degenerated to such an extent that it’s very difficult to live within the system with hands totally untainted. Our system has degenerated to such an extent that more often than not it’s political agenda first and national interest last. For example, we have endless investigations and scandals in aid of politics and media projection rather than in aid of legislation or executive action. Because of this system of politics, our country has been left behind by other countries in the region, and our best and brightest, the cream of our youth is bolting with their feet to leave the country.

The political system that we are a part of has… All part of has indeed degenerated to the point that it needs fundamental change. And I am glad that the statement of the manifesto talks about that fundamental change. We are collectively to blame for the degeneration of the system. We must collectively be the solution. And indeed I said earlier, let he who is without sin cast the first stone. And to those who feel that they cannot cast the first stone, I invite them all to help me in the solution.

Thank you for your inputs to what will be my state of the nation address. But anticipating that state of the nation address, I already said last Thursday a few things. I said that what I intend to do is to work with you, the legislators and the civil groups who believe that changes in the fundamental law of the land are necessary in order to confront such basic issues as federalism, parliamentary form of government, reducing red tape in government processes, running for the public office under a true party system and with less need to raise campaign funds, modernizing the economic provisions of the Constitution, and so forth.

In the meantime, I am restructuring and strengthening the Cabinet. Today, I announced the appointment of Land Bank President Margarito Teves as the new secretary of Finance. I am asking our sectors to give me names of candidates that we can invite to replace those who will not return to the Cabinet or even to help out at other levels of the government. And now that I am restructuring and strengthening the Cabinet, the Cabinet will be given a free hand on governance while I focus on the fundamental changes that we need to put in place, many of them being indicated in your manifesto.

I will begin to reach out to political and civil sectors that have an interest in the various advocacies that are relevant to our Constitution. For instance, in the last campaign, I was the only candidate who advocated for a parliamentary federal form of government.

And so Mr. Speaker, I shall therefore study the ideas contained in the manifesto in a manner of a president listening closely to the pulse of the people and see how support and consensus can be consolidated not only among our allies but among those who may differ with us but have a clear stake in the future of our nation.

Thank you once again, Mr. Speaker, for your collect expression of faith in the Constitution.

Thank you all very much.

Source: Adamson University Library