Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the U.P. College of Law General Alumni Homecoming

[Delivered at the Rizal Ballroom, Shangri-la Hotel, Makati City, November 12, 2004]

Thank you very much Joey, class ’79 and my former Secretary of Local Government, now more prosperous as President of Manila Hotel. Senate President Frank Drilon; Gabby Villareal, class ’79 also, but to me fondly known as the son of my father’s speaker of the House of the Representatives Cony Villareal; Attorney Villaluz; Boy Regino, Chairman; and of course our very illustrious Ombudsman Sonny Marcelo also class ’79; members of all classes of the U.P. law school; Ladies and Gentlemen:

Thank you for inviting me once again to your homecoming. It’s always an important occasion for me to be able to talk to you. And to listen to you afterwards when we’re having our socials.

I value your talent and your contribution to the Philippines–Four presidents and twelve Chief Justices of the Supreme Court including our much admired Chief Justice Davide walked through the portals of your institution.

Senate President Drilon leads your alumni in the upper chamber in the legislative solutions to our fiscal problems, they’re so many of them dwell from U.P. Law of School: Kiko Pangilinan, Miriam Defensor-Santiago, Pia Cayetano, Ed Angara, Johnny Ponce Enrile, Dick Gordon and Joker Arroyo.

And a good number of Associate Justices of the Supreme Court and the other Appelate Courts and the Regional Trial Courts and members of the House are your colleagues I see here –Louie Villafuerte, and Sim Datumanong, and I’m told that somewhere here is also also Congressman Edcel Lagman.

I have a number of appointees–I don’t want to mention all of them because.. the whole night but we can point out among the distinguished alumni of U.P. Law School that I appointed: Ramon Magsaysay Awardee and PCGG Chairperson Haydee Yorac, then of course Sonny Marcelo, the cutting edge against corruption, and I’m happy to let you know that the World Bank and many others including our budget officers are working to strengthen the investigative capability of the Ombudsman because everybody believes Sonny Marcelo. I see Mario Bautista though he is not an appointee, I’d like to congratulate him too, class of ’79 would also be proud of him.

Now, outside of class ’79, class ’77, right? He is not here tonight, is Nonong Cruz, our truly civilian Defense Secretary. He will undertake Philippine Defense reforms, only a civilian secretary conduit with the aid of the U.S. government over the next five years. He is not here because I send him to China as a follow up of the unprecedented security and defense alliance we’re entering into with the People’s Republic of China. But I’m also happy to let you know that for Nonong’s defense reform program which the U.S. will assist for the next five years we’ve met our Philippine counterpart funding. So, I think many of the reforms that we are all looking for in the defense can be done by U.P. Law Alumnus Nonong Cruz.

Well, I’ve already talked about, I’ve already mentioned the Mario Bautista, although he is not my appointee he helped turn the tide of history as private prosecutor, when he presented Clarissa Ocampo as a key witness in the trial of the century. Congratulations to Mario. Thanks for your contribution to EDSA ll.

Truly, from the class of 79 our host, we have so many of you who are serving not only the government, you are serving in the private sector, serving to improve transparency and fight graft and corruption whether in government or in the private sector. I am truly happy to be here tonight and I pointed out what your colleagues have been doing, your alumni have been doing about the fiscal problem and also in the fight against corruption, because the starting point in our effort to address our fiscal problem begins with the acknowledgement that the root cause of our problems in our nation today is an entrenched culture of corruption.

Too many people and companies in the Philippines do not pay their fair share of taxes. They are aided and abetted by a system of inadequate tax laws and government corruption. What we’re doing is to make sure that tax dodgers and corrupt officials are caught and that the taxes and ill-gotten gains are used for the public good. I have ordered the release of 100 million pesos to bolster our anti-smuggling campaign.

And as part of our efforts of the fruits of our efforts in fighting graft with the executive branch, I’m glad that revenue has grown to P516.4 billion in the first nine months of this year, up by 13.1% over the same period last year, and higher than this year’s target of P501 billion. How did we overshoot the target? Mostly due to stronger enforcement of tax and the use by our BIR revenue of information technology systems that help track tax dodgers.

We have prosecuted over two dozen ranking officials whose corrupt practices were identified through our lifestyle checks and other investigation programs. And in that celebrated case you all knew about I have instructed the military to be resolute in the case against their former comptroller General Garcia. He shall be dealt with to the fullest extent of the law. I hear a murmur. I’m wording, I’m wording my speech very carefully so that you will not use anything I say to follow that deal in his behalf. Are we making an example of General Garcia? Sorry Attorney but you bet, but the example is not just meant for his fellow military officers, it’s meant for everyone in government.

We must tackle corruption wherever it may be found, be it the military, civilian government, or the private sector. And if we are to restore any sense of fairness in the system we must do that.

The Philippines is at a crossroads and there is only one path to take if we are to turn the country around: the path of fiscal discipline, the generation of new revenue and the rooting out of corruption in government.

We have made progress, but we need real momentum. Many generations of slow growth and years of government promises and malfeasance have left our people very deeply cynical. Because of this, success in achieving the 10-point legacy agenda I outlined in my Presidential Inaugural Address will be based on restoring faith in our institutions of government and making real progress in the fight against poverty. But in order to do this, I need Congress. I need the Senate.

We need to generate increased levels of revenue to support our goal of a balanced budget by 2010 and not perpetuate inaction. I remember when I was a Senator I would be visited by credit-rating agencies nagging me about indexation of alcohol and cigarette taxes, nagging me about expanding VAT and those are still the same challenges we have today.

Of course we are not close to the situation faced by Argentina because our debts have a long-term scheduling. Our international debt obligations. Nevertheless, our fiscal challenge is to balance our national budget by 2010, reduce our consolidated public sector deficit, and reduce our debt stock. Because we have such a large debt stock, servicing costs are immensely draining and they take valuable resources away from public investments that would otherwise be used to expand economic opportunity for our people.

That’s why we the executive and the legislative branches of government are actively working together on the structural reforms that will address this situation.

I’m heartened that the House of Representatives has approved the most difficult of my eight proposed tax measures, the excise tax on alcohol and cigarettes, and other tobacco products. And Frank tells me that the committee report in the Senate has been prepared and the Senate will begin floor debate on an even more stringent version early next week.

The House worked also until 2 a.m. Yesterday morning to pass the second of those tax measures, the lateral attrition bill. Thank you Louie, thank you Sim, thank you Edcel if you’re somewhere here. The passage of this law will set out both incentives for performance and penalties for government officials who’re not doing their job to support our revenue collection efforts. This addresses a basic failing of our civil service code and is expected to generate new levels of revenue.

Early next week, as the Senate begins deliberating the more stringent version of the alcohol and the cigarette taxes the House will begin to deliberate the fiscal, incentives bill, it will be on the floor of the House of Representatives.

And when I receive these three bills on my desk, and I’m assured by the congressional leaders that they’ll be on my desk well before the year ends , I look forward to their fetching about P30 billion of the P80 billion tax increment that we want to finance development and balance our budget by 2010.

So, in spite of the numerous challenges we face, we’re living within our deficit ceiling. Our deficit reached only P141.9 billion in the first nine months of this year, compared to the allowed ceiling of P143.3 billion for the period. So, it’s not our current deficit that’s really the problem, it’s our big debt stock that keeps eating up into our budget as far as interest expenses are concerned.

But we are making breakthroughs in solving our near-term fiscal problems, so that we can lay down the foundation for robust economic growth in the coming years. And I took that opportunity, I grabbed the opportunity to accept the invitation that you sent me to be with you tonight because you are such important leaders of the profession. And I need you if we are to have national solidarity. This is the time for national solidarity for fiscal reform and against corruption wherever it can be found–in government, in our courts, even in the at bus stops and dimly lit corners where you have , had mulcting cops awaiting the hurried commuter or driver.

The rule of law can release this nation from the stranglehold of poverty and corruption. And you, the U.P Law Alumni, you are exemplars of wisdom and justice. And you will, beyond reasonable doubt, forge a society of laws, and not of men.

Yes you are leaders of the country, of the executive branch, the legislative branch, the judiciary, the private profession.

So, I need you all to help me lead this nation to prosperity. Thank you. And happy alumni welcome!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the U.P. College of Law General Alumni Homecoming. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615132949/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5746&Itemid=38