Thank you very much, outgoing Secretary of Trade and Industry Favila, incoming member of the Monetary Board.

Outgoing Secretary of Education and incoming Secretary of Trade and Industry, Jesli Lapus; former Secretary of Agriculture Arthur Yap; our very capable organizers of this celebration today and organizers of the entrepreneurs of our country, Joey Concepcion; Chairperson Myrna Yao; Congressman Lito Roxas; Mr. Sanjiv Vohra, our Citi Bank Head of the Philippines; (our 100 model entrepreneurs, our inspiration, our women icons inspiration for the women of the Philippines; women, Happy Women's Day to all of us!

I have been saying for a long time that because of our administration, we have two main programs for women: one, human rights and the other is economic rights, especially in entrepreneurial development. I said we should always celebrate Women’s Day celebrating women entrepreneurs. That is why I thank the Philippine Center for Entrepreneurship, under the leadership of our consultant for entrepreneurship, Joey Concepcion, and the Commission on Women of Myrna Yao for organizing this “Go Negosyo Women Entrepreneur Summit,” the most fitting celebration of our Women’s Day.

This is the second year of Go Negosyo Women and 15,000 have already participated. This shows that the entire country can be proud of the theme “Women, You are the Success of the Nation” because of the success of the businesses of thousands of women across the country. Congratulations to all of you!

And once again, we especially congratulate the awardees of the Go Negosyo-Philippine Council of Women Inspiring Women of the Year. And our one hundred entrepreneurs, not all of whom are women, but most of our entrepreneurs are women and they became an inspiration in Joey Concepcion’s book “Success in Poverty.” Congratulations!

When I took my oath as President in 2004, I declared my desire to support three million entrepreneurs during our administration, through loans and assistance to become good managers, so that they can establish a strong foundation for a broad middle class.

And now that Secretary Peter Favila is finishing his term as Secretary of Trade and Industry and Chairman of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Development, he gave a report that during our administration from 2001 to 2009, we were able to lend P340 billion pesos to almost six million micro, small and medium enterprises and also created six million jobs, so we exceeded our target of supporting three million entrepreneurs. Congratulations Peter and everyone who helped you!

Therefore, to ensure that there is always someone to defend microenterprises, small enterprise loans in the Monetary Board of the Central Bank, I decided to appoint former Secretary Peter Favila as a member of the Monetary Board to defend you entrepreneurs.

Regarding the training on how to be a good manager, it's not the right government that's teaching because the government consists of bureaucrats. Managers should be the ones teaching, so we are grateful to Go Negosyo because they are the ones teaching and providing inspiration on how to become excellent entrepreneurs for our women as well as our men.

Another good news. In microenterprises, ninety percent of those who were loaned to are women. Filipino women are truly successful in business.

Actually, the Philippines is recognized throughout the country as number one in Asia in gender parity and number six in the world. Only New Zealand and four Scandinavian countries surpass us in gender parity worldwide, and then it's us. So our gender parity is really good. And this year, it's getting even better in the world index, so it was already good, it's getting better year after year.

For example, in terms of access to education, women are ahead of men, because the enrollment rate is higher and the retention rate of women is also higher, and there are also more female honor students. So women are ahead in education. More women start and continue their studies compared to men.

In terms of health, Filipinas live longer than Filipino men. And here it is, in small entrepreneurship, women are clearly ahead. So we have a lot to celebrate.

This is a great joy for me, because when I was still a senator, I wrote Republic Act 7882, which provided assistance to women with their own micro and cottage business enterprises.

We also enacted the Barangay Micro Business Enterprises or BAMBE Law during our administration, and Myrna Yao mentioned the Magna Carta, where… so also the Magna Carta for SMEs, the Magna Carta for Women, and the Magna Carta for SMEs where microenterprises were included, thus establishing the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Development where Secretary Favila became Chairman as Secretary of Trade and Industry but we made him Vice Chairman in the Enterprise Council, none other than our entrepreneur consultant, Joey Concepcion, the Vice Chairman of our MSMED Council.

So, we really expect that the private sector, the NGO Go Negosyo, will continue to promote the welfare of our entrepreneurs and women’s entrepreneurs.

This success is due to our collective effort, big or small, to recognize that women have equal economic rights as well as human rights.

And with the help of Joey and other groups that promote entrepreneurship, the ability of women in business is further spreading.

So that is what we are celebrating today: Women’s Day; Women’s Month, Hurray! for women entrepreneurs.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 2nd Go Negosyo Women Entrepreneurship Summit and launching of the book “Tagumpay mula sa Kahirapan” (Success from Poverty). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080421/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27687&Itemid=38