Thank you very much, Secretary Pat Santo Tomas.

And first of all, I would also like to congratulate you and the NLRC for having its best first quarter ever this year when it disposed of more than 10,000 cases. Congratulations to all of you!

Please sit down everyone.

I would also like to greet the various Cabinet members here, as well as our labor leaders, Mr. Alejandro Villaviza, thank you and to TUCP for the support you expressed for our change in our political system.

I also greet Attorney Allan Montaño, this is his first time sitting on the stage, a new generation of the Federation of Free Workers. And of course, one of our institutions, the one who led our prayer, Mr. Vladimir Tupaz.

To all of you, my countrymen, this is the day for workers all over the world and this is the day to mark the strides that the great Filipino worker has taken to rise to the apex of competence and competitiveness.

Earlier, Mr. Villaviza mentioned in his message read by Attorney Mendoza that today they are offering or giving or using as a sign of respect for the three million unemployed. On the one hand, we are sad because there are three million Filipinos without jobs. But on the other hand, I remember – Pat, I said, wasn't it when we first took office in 2001 that four million Filipinos were unemployed? So now, three million. At least we've gained a million.

Our gains in the economy mark payback time for the people for the reforms we made in taxes. Now we have been able to allocate 13 billion pesos for the additional allowance of government workers and in the budget for the coming year, Secretary Andaya will put in salary standardization so that it reaches 20 billion pesos in the next budget.

Our amelioration measures must not only affirm the paramount interest of our workers, but ease the plight of the average Filipino in the face of current pressures and difficulties.

For example, the price of goods, to make the price of goods affordable now during a time of high oil prices around the world, earlier we opened a PX store for government workers, we call it PS mart and this is just part of the 1.2 billion pesos that we will allocate for PX stores of government workers throughout the Philippines.

For the private sector, I support a reasonable wage hike hammered out by the tripartite regional wage boards. We acknowledge the need to alleviate the burdens of our workers amid the rising cost of living brought about by high oil prices in the world market, while we also share the concerns of the business sector over the impact on business and employment. A middle ground can be reached if all sides are focused on common goals and principles, mainly the good of the nation. So that was a good parting statement in Attorney Mendoza's message, our labor sector understands, as long as we talk well about the situation of each side. A win-win solution can be found that can ease the plight of labor while at the same time preserve the investment climate and the pace of growth.

Harmony, teamwork and creativity are the key to success. In fact, with harmony, teamwork and creativity through the work of the NLRC plus the mediation and conciliation efforts that DOLE has done in the first quarter of this year, we were able to gain more than 600 million pesos worth of days saved from being able to avert a strike. Congratulations to all sides!

The social insurance system, we are strengthening it so that the blessings reach the workers even more. For example, the GSIS will provide a scholarship worth 60 million pesos. OWWA, Nitoy, won't you cover the health rehabilitation of OFWs worth 44 million pesos? And so that PGH can provide better service to workers, we will spend 100 million pesos for its rehabilitation. And GSIS will help Philhealth pay for hospitalization for its members. This is in addition to what Philhealth pays and this GSIS contribution to the discounts paid by workers amounts to 40 million pesos.

Philhealth, you heard, Pingkoy, earlier a request that the coverage of Philhealth should be expanded to the informal sector such as fishermen, sacadas, farmers, so we will add or set aside 40 million pesos to pay the premiums of these personnel or members of the informal sector especially the poor sacadas.

For wage earners, I removed the withholding tax of minimum wage earners, but now I hope Congress will pass the complete tax exemption that will relieve a billion pesos for our minimum wage earners.

Many workers are burdened with debt, so – I know they are burdened with salary loans and housing loans from GSIS and SSS, burdened also with penalties and surcharges – so GSIS and SSS will waive the penalties on salary and housing loans amounting to almost 12 billion pesos. Is that twelve billion pesos or 1.2 billion? Just a moment, let me look at… what is it, Pat, 12? Yes, 12, okay.

And PAG-IBIG, many are feeling that PAG-IBIG is reducing the interest on housing loans, the total savings from this amounts to 3.2 billion pesos.

Regarding transportation, because when oil prices rise worldwide, transportation is the first to likely increase, so transportation expenses should be eased. There is almost 1.4 billion pesos coming from Land Bank and DBP as loans and from the government's energy savings that will be used for shuttle buses for companies, groups of workers like our three large organizations here on stage and government employees, especially those operating on CNG or other clean air fuels.

I spoke with President Rey David of DBP and President Gilda Pico of Land Bank. In fact, Gilda gave me many schemes, either straight loans or leasing or creating an arrangement with large bus transportation companies so they will handle the maintenance costs. So I am asking Gilda, if she is watching now, to hold a press conference to explain the different schemes on how Land Bank can fund these shuttle buses using clean air for our workers.

You mentioned earlier, the competitiveness and competence of our workers. Our knowledge economy is on a roll. What the workers’ message said about the mismatch, there is a lot of demand in the knowledge economy. So I tell young people entering college now, maybe instead of studying business management, maybe entrepreneurship and instead of studying mass communication, maybe English because that's where the livelihood is, that's where the jobs are. And not only that, in June, according to Boboy Syjuco, ladderization will begin where you can study in voctech schools for the first two years or one year or whatever it is you study or six months, then what you learned there will be credited to a college degree afterwards. This coming June that program would start.

In the meantime, because there is a huge demand for knowledge workers, 100 thousand jobs are available in the call centers and business process outsourcing, we have allocated 500 million pesos. That was our ceremony earlier, that was a symbol of our 500 million pesos for training and scholarships for those who will work in call centers, medical and legal transcription, animation, software development and other skills covered by what we call the knowledge economy. This is the start today, this scholarship program, those who came here are just an example of the first ten thousand of the 100,000 available scholarships and today, while we were giving scholarship vouchers, there are also scholarship vouchers to be distributed in Clark, right? In Baguio, in Taguig, in Legaspi, in Cebu, in Iloilo and in Davao — 500 million pesos.

And so, let me just say that our administration has paid keen attention to the welfare of labor since day one.

Call centers and BPO, less than 2,000 when we started, now 125,000. And from the message of Attorney Mendoza, from four million unemployed when we started, three million now and we will work harder to reduce that even more.

Thank you for your message and thank you for the expression of your aspirations.

I make a point to listen to the people’s needs everyday while as the message also implied, our destabilizers listen to the call of self-interest and endless strife. Therefore, to our destabilizers, I say: “Leave the people to their work and let the president do her job.” To our destabilizers, I say: “Stop the noise and start to serve.”

And I would like to repeat and share with the message given by the workers through the report read by Mr. Villaviza, let us unite, let us work so that every Filipino can have decent work.

Long live the great Filipino worker!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the ‘Araw ng Paggawa’ Celebration (Observance of Labor Day 2006). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213914/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2795&Itemid=38