My dear countrymen, thank you very much for the warm welcome to your servant.

I have come here to build on our commitment to enhance the bilateral relations between the Philippines and Equatorial Guinea.

President Obiang undertook a state visit to the Philippines in May last year to enhance Philippine-Equatorial Guinea bilateral ties, seek avenues for cooperation and greater interaction between the two countries’ peoples.

Given our shared history and common past, because we both went through Spanish rule, Equatoguineans and Filipinos can learn from each others’ experiences and build on these for greater peace and prosperity.

We agreed that it would be of strategic importance for the Philippines and Equatorial Guinea to strengthen ties and increase cooperation in all forms, despite the geographical distance between our two countries. All of this is for the benefit of our people, including you, those of you who live and work here.

We are proud of the contribution of Filipino workers to the development of this country, particularly the 2,500 Filipinos employed in the banking, finance and oil sectors of Equatorial Guinea.

We are striving to further improve your situation.

The government and people honor the Filipino workers abroad for your sacrifice and dedication to your work, your family and your country. Your contribution is wholeheartedly accepted. But it is also our honor to say that the economic gains we are seeing now in the Philippines are preparing the day when Filipinos will no longer need to go abroad for work, and the day when overseas work is just another option and not the only choice you have to earn a living.

The Philippines is on the path to sustained economic growth and stability.

The passage of our value added tax was the biggest move that propelled our economy upwards. In a bold move, it significantly increased the country's revenue. It also sent an unmistakable signal that we are serious about economic progress. But that's not all. It helps build the gains of our economy through our full definition of the economy, through fiscal discipline, through budget balancing and through the long-overdue need to improve human and physical infrastructure. Our efforts are bearing fruit.

Investments are pouring in, our stock market is at an all-time high. We have created six million new jobs in the last six years.

Our unemployment rate is the lowest in a generation. Our poverty rate is also the lowest.

The world is noticing: The Philippines is one of the best values in Asia for Filipinos and foreign investors.

The surge in investments is anchored by the report of Texas Instruments that it will invest one billion dollars to build an electronic chip plant in the Philippines.

Hanjin of Korea is also investing $1.65 billion to build the fourth largest shipyard in the world in the Philippines. Last week, Marubeni and Tokyo Electric bought power plants in the Philippines worth $3.4 billion and will add another half a billion dollars.

This is happening across various industries. We are working to sustain this. Our ambitious reforms are helping to break the offshore cycle. By continuing on this path, we will increasingly be keeping our best and brightest right in the Philippines, closer to friends and families, helping to build our communities, and providing the next generation of leadership.

We are determined to channel the gains from new government revenues into long-overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure. This includes billions of pesos for education, healthcare, and training, as well as billions for new bridges, roads, and ports to enhance the Philippines’ competitiveness.

We take pride in the discipline of our administration in focusing on the economy and our overall fiscal health. We take pride in paying our debts even when the lender has not yet foreclosed on us. We have high hopes of balancing the budget in 2008. We are ensuring that the gains are used to invest in very important social and economic needs. We will not sacrifice long-term benefits for temporary political expediency.

The recent elections demonstrated the vibrant democratic system of the country. Everyone with different beliefs was allowed to participate, but united in the same aspirations for peace and development for the entire nation. It was a success for economic reform, political stability, and peace and order.

We expect the Senate and the House of Representatives of the Philippines to work with us to ensure that we sustain our economic gains. We look forward to meaningful dialogue and cooperation with our policymakers to ensure that we continue to move forward with economic reform.

We have turned the corner on our economy.

There have already been remarkable achievements. But there is still much more to be done and will be done.

For the first time in a generation, our economic gains and national treasury enable us to make strong investments in our country and our people. Towards this end, we have created an investment strategy focused on four key initiatives: 1) enhance our infrastructure to create an environment where businesses are confident to expand and employ more people, because more jobs mean less poverty; 2) enhance social services such as health insurance subsidies for poor families and nutrition programs for students and their families; 3) strengthening support for education in our effort to reduce poverty by investing in better school buildings, new books and teaching materials, and training programs for teachers and school administrators; and 4) cutting red tape and continuing to eliminate corruption in the system.

These are the ways to lift the poor out of poverty. We are doing this for the first time in a generation.

You are one with us and the entire Filipino family, and together we can advance our objectives.

Together, we will push forward and fulfill our common dreams of peace and prosperity.

Long live!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech before the Filipino Community in Equatorial Guinea. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412145933/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2025&Itemid=38