Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 50th Anniversary Celebration of the Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce and Industry, Inc. (FFCCCII)

[Delivered at the Fiesta Pavillon, Manila Hotel, September 17, 2004]

Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Robin Sy and the other officials of the federation; Senate President Drilon and the other Cabinet officials who are here tonight; Ambassador Wu and our other friends from all over the world; the Taipans who are here in the head table; ladies and gentlemen.

And to all of you from the federation, a happy golden anniversary to a golden association, the great Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce.

For fifty years, the federation has been investing in our economy, creating jobs, building classrooms, saving lives.

And your civic action is not seasonal. You have made the Philippines your home, both for good times and bad times. Thank you and congratulations!

Thank you for building all those school buildings that Robin Sy talked about. Frank Drilon tells me that in his project, you built already 666 buildings with more than 300 to go for a total of almost a thousand of the 3,000 school buildings you’ve been building all these years.

And on top of that, thank you for building them at half the price of public works. I know you are able to do this because you subsidize the project, but also because you have a practical design. And I have instructed the DPWH and DepEd to adopt the specs, the design of the federation for our public classrooms. Mr. Robin Sy was there when I gave the instructions. And he heard me extol the virtues of the classroom program of the FFCCCII.

I’ve seen your other superlative projects — from fire rescue operations to relief efforts, to fund raising for charity, to job fairs, like the one you recently held at the federation center in Binondo, where more than 4,000 applicants showed up to apply for the 12,000 vacancies you offered. I’m instructing the Department of Labor to continue that effort to find qualified applicants for the remaining 8,000 vacancies that you have offered.

I’ve said many times that we must recognize that we are a multi-ethnic society in which Christian or Muslim, Cebuano or Tagalog, Mestizo or Chinese, all answer to the name Filipino. and that is a wondrous tribute to the richness and diversity of our culture. And our multi-ethnic society must be characterized by social justice for all and institutionalized accommodation of ethnic traditions.

The federation has contributed much to social justice — and we always thank you for that — in terms of your school building, your charitable contributions. But you have also much to contribute in terms of the traditions and values that are identified with the Chinese race like business acumen, thrift, hard work, humility. And I hope that our children will be able to absorb these values so well-associated with the Chinese members of our community.

These are the same values that have propelled China as the economic powerhouse of our time. Thrift, hard work, discipline, humility — these are but a few of the virtues, the values that have propelled the Chinese community in the Philippines as well to the very top of our economic ladder. You, the Filipino-Chinese leaders of the business community, are the personification as well of the thousand years old bonds between the Philippines and the People’s Republic of China.

These bonds which you personify were the backdrop of my state visit to china, in which the federation contributed a very large business delegation. You were there. In fact, some of you were responsible for the credit and investment agreements that were signed during that visit worth about one billion U.S. dollars. Congratulations! And thank you for that.

During the state visit, you witnessed President Hu Jintao remarking that the agreement we made the last time to increase our trade with each other from practically nothing to 10 billion dollars has been fulfilled. And you were there, we made another agreement, this time to increase total trade to 20 billion dollars in the next five years.

You were also there when we agreed that the millions of Chinese tourists will be ‘a major, the major target market whom both sides will encourage to visit the Philippines.

You were also there when we made a breakthrough in our relationship with china by adding defense and security to the many dimensions of our satisfactory relationship.

And to further symbolize that close relationship, next year, President Hu Jintao will be our special state guest in the 30th anniversary of the celebration of Philippines-China diplomatic relations. I will count on you, leaders of the federation, to help make that return state visit a success, just as I count on you to help make my administration a success.

Indeed, many of you helped get me elected president. Thank you for that. and now it’s my obligation to you to lead with honesty. It’s my obligation to you not to sugarcoat the truth about our economy in which you have been such valuable leaders. If we’re in a crisis today, it’s because in the past, political sentiments have long overruled dispassionate requirements of governance. Now the past is catching up with us. And, therefore, I say to you leaders of the business community – ‘let the truth prevail and let us keep our house in economic order.’

Because you are not strangers to business success, you all know that economic miracles don’t happen overnight. In openly acknowledging that we are in the midst of a great fiscal problem, I was not sounding out the alarm for failure. In fact, I was challenging Philippine society to draw from its wellspring of great values in order to bring our country to the prosperity it deserves.

Whether as heads of business conglomerates, like many of you are, or street sweepers, we can be heroes in our own way. But let’s start by throwing away cynicism and being optimists for the country, even if it is guarded optimism. There is much to be hopeful for, as our recent GNP and investment figures indicate.

And you yourselves, the Chinese community, have told me that the country’s peace and order situation is looking up, that kidnapping is down, that narcotic supply has been cut in half, one reason why I promoted General Aglipay to chief PNP. Heõ’s not here tonight, you see. now, I want to let you know that I ordered him and his immediate boss, Secretary Angelo Reyes to send the ‘kotong cops’ specifically of manila to oblivion. especially the ‘kotong cops’ in Binondo, right Angie?

Our ceasefire in Mindanao has been working for the past 14 months and the peace talks are about to start in an atmosphere of confidence. But I’m not fully satisfied. And I know neither are you fully satisfied. There is still much we have to do in the next six months, in the next six years.

To strengthen our financial position, my economic managers — who are here tonight — have proposed to Congress — who are also here tonight. There’s Frank and Kiko. Mar Roxas was here earlier. And I see a number of congressmen here — my economic managers have submitted to Congress vital tax measures intended to raise at least 80 billion pesos following their passage, 80 billion pesos a year.

I’m aware that there’s a wall of resistance to these measures. But beyond that wall is our country’s redemption from the yoke of poverty. And while we clean up our finances, we shall also rid society of its dregs and misfits.

Yes, kidnapping is down. Thank you, for telling me to make Angie Reyes the head of the task force. Now, let’s make it zero-kidnapping.

And let’s zero in also once again on smuggling. I gave the new customs commissioner two months to do his thing against smuggling. If after two months you, the business community, are not yet satisfied then we will revive the inter-agency anti-smuggling task force. there can be no… You tell me and you agree I’m sure that there can be no sacred cows in the fight against smugglers. Smugglers corrupt our bureaucracy, weaken your industries and deprive the treasury of much needed funds.

Therefore, I look forward to the members of the FFCCCI to help me fight smuggling. also to help me fight tax evasion. to serve as role models to our people, to pay the right taxes, to make it easier for our people to find employment, to serve as mentors to our OFWs and their families who wish to put up businesses of their own, to help fight corruption, to report the fixers and grafters in government, to identify the drug lords and the kidnappers that threaten your safety, to invest in the Philippines rather than abroad, to bring back our dollar exchange rate to 50 pesos to the dollar.

Our actions now will shape our future. Our sacrifices now will mean fewer sacrifices for our children and grandchildren and great grandchildren.

Our heroes, many of them Filipino-Chinese led by Jose Rizal himself, and many others. Our heroes fought two wars for freedom. We must find the inner strength, the moral and political will to fight for economic liberty. The kind of liberty that defeats the grinding poverty around us. The kind of liberty that will give our families the future that they deserve.

Let us rally around the flag that has been draped numerous times in the past over the coffins of our soldiers, our heroes, our patriots. And let us be vigilant against those who wish to bring this beloved nation of ours down.

I am confident you will continue to rise to the challenge.

Congratulations on the last 50 years! My best wishes for the next 50 years.

Xie xie.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 50th Anniversary Celebration of the Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce and Industry, Inc. (FFCCCII). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133157/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5695&Itemid=38