Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the reception for the 110th Anniversary of Philippine Independence

[ Delivered at Malacañang Palace, June 12, 2008 ]

One hundred and ten years after we broke free of foreign bondage, we remember with deep gratitude our heroic forebears who paid the ultimate sacrifice on the altar of freedom so that we may live as a sovereign people.

The centuries-old struggle continues. Instead of colonizing powers, we must now protect our freedom and future as a nation from global economic storms and security threats.

The Philippines has built up a strong economy which is helping us meet the challenges of the global surge in the price of food and fuel. A strong and growing economy has been the central pillar we have labored to create to help guarantee peace, order and stability in our country. It is paying off: our economy reached its highest level of growth in 30 years last year, the peso is strong, and we are close to balancing our budget.

As a result of our economic comeback, we are able to invest in key sectors to cushion the harsh impact of rice and fuel on our poor. We are also able to continue to invest in necessary infrastructure like roads, bridges and education, to name a few. All the while, we are balancing these vital investments with a commitment to meet our fiscal obligations and balance the budget in 2010.

We have been working tirelessly to address challenges arising from the slowdown in the global economy combined with the spike in oil and food prices. The government is working to make sure that our food supplies remain stable and that we put food on the table for every Filipino.

In terms of oil, the high price of gasoline and everyday commodities hits our poor the hardest. While the high price of oil is a global issue and outside the control of government, we have introduced measures to lift the burden of our people.

However, no matter what actions we take, this is a global problem. We must work together to resolve this if there is going to be any long-lasting improvement.

As a responsible member of the international community, we are doing our part to create a world that is more humane.

We have reached out in sympathy to our Chinese brethren in Sichuan Province.

Likewise, we have sent medical teams and continue to make those teams available to help the people of Myanmar. And we coordinate with our ASEAN neighbors on the level of financial aid that each of us sends to Myanmar.

Now that ASEAN has taken tangible steps to be a true union, it must accept its responsibility to advance the cause of economic and social justice within its membership.

As for the passage of the ASEAN Charter, we would love nothing more than to see ASEAN consolidate its gains and move closer together. However, we’ll leave this up to the Philippine Senate, which has been asked to review the Charter for ratification. Certainly, economic integration among Asian nations is imperative if we, as a region, are to take advantage of the expanding global trade and economic opportunities. We are thrilled at the prospect of a vibrant ASEAN. We hold great hope for the ASEAN Charter, which will be the first and the boldest step towards the creation of a regional economic community.

Our strong course of global engagement has been an essential part of our economic turnaround.

It is important to acknowledge the important role that our international friends and allies have made to our national development. This includes the countries and organizations who are our development partners and the foreign investors who have become part of our business community and who have brought their technologies and capital to the Philippines. You are a part of the Philippine economic success story. We are grateful for your contributions and your commitment to our nation and our people.

Be with us in our steadfast desire for the Philippines to break free from the bondage of poverty and to be able to join the first world in 20 years.

We stand today, aware of the challenges we face and the responsibilities we carry. When we act with a singularity of purpose and a focused vision in solidarity with our allies in the world, we can achieve great things.

Indeed, our nations can achieve greater strides when we work as a united force, for we share ideals and possess the same aspirations of peace, stability, freedom and progress.

Ladies and gentlemen, join me in a toast to international solidarity and a resurgent Philippines.

Thank you.

Source: Adamson University Library