Thank you very much Secretary Cabral for your introduction and congratulations on your skillful administration of the vaccine rollout.

Our esteemed governor, Governor Yebe, thank you very much for your welcome remarks and Congressman Jalosjos, thank you also for your welcome; Congressman Cely Carreon, thank you for being with us today, we are always together even in other barangays, other districts and to Vice Governor Olvis and Mayor Baliling, thank you for welcoming us; our various mayors here; our candidates; our health workers; our barangay officials; the people here in Kalawit, good noon to all of you.

I am happy that I was finally able to visit you here. As the Governor said during my visit, I have visited all the cities in Zamboanga del Norte.

Our visits to the provinces are important work during my presidency. But even more importantly, we are not just visiting but investing in the provinces, especially in your province. Our goal is to bring opportunities for progress throughout the country, so that Manila is not the only one to benefit from development. The provinces must reclaim the advantages that are constantly enjoyed by the elite in Manila.

And, we are constantly gratified by the unprecedented numbers that really matter to the welfare and future of our people. With me now is not only Secretary Cabral, but also with us is Secretary Vic Domingo of Public Works and Secretary Jun Icban, Press Secretary. And Jun Icban can tell you about our nine and a half years of continuous economic growth despite these past nine years having a global oil shock, a war in the Middle East, a world financial crisis. But through all that, progress continues, the growth rate of our country, the Philippines.

And now, millions of ordinary Filipinos are traveling via the RORO Nautical Highway. Much more if we compare it to previous years. And here, in Zamboanga del Norte, we prioritized the ports of Dapitan and Dipolog. I will never forget when we first opened the port, RORO, in Dapitan, no shipping company wanted to put a RORO boat there because they said it would be a loss. So, we forced them to do it. Now, around the clock, right? There are trips every hour. So, Zamboanga del Norte has become closer to the whole country.

And so that the entire province can benefit from this RORO that has reached various places in the Philippines, Zamboanga del Norte has also benefited from various projects such as the Sibuco-Siraway-Siocon Baliguian Road, as mentioned by the Governor and Congressman, which strengthens the production and income of farmers in the district of Cesar. The people of the towns that pass through and are near the road, like here in Kalawit, can now bring their products to Dipolog, can bring their products to Dipolog, Dapitan and through Dipolog and Dapitan via RORO all the way to Cebu and other places in the Philippines. So your market for your products has become large. As the Governor and Congressman said, we have also completed farm-to-market roads in your province, and the total of our farm-to-market roads in your province is almost… ah, more than 250 kilometers.

Therefore, Zamboanga Norte was once the poorest of the provinces but not anymore, and with our many more projects in the coming times, we can be sure that more and more of our people in Zamboanga del Norte will graduate out of poverty. So since the surveys on self-rated poverty began, those who asked, do you consider yourself poor? The lowest self-rated poverty on average was achieved during our administration due to our projects in these provinces like Zamboanga del Norte.

Governor and Congressman mentioned that our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino program, which was started by Secretary Cabral when he was still at the Department of Social Welfare, provides financial assistance to the poorest families but with conditions, such as ensuring that children attend school. And another condition is that the family undergoes examination by our Rural Health Workers, our Rural Health Units. Here in Zamboanga del Norte, over 75,000 are already receiving benefits from our Pantawid Pamilya.

And Governor and Congressman also said that the barangays in your province now have connections to electricity, many of them under our administration. Earlier, I asked if there were any barangays left, and they said there were still a few barangays that we haven't electrified. So, after this program, I will call our new Secretary of Energy, Nonoy Ibazeta, to ensure that those barangays without electricity get electricity.

Ensuring that the people are in good health is also an important part of our agenda. Therefore, today, we are launching here in Kalawit a program for the entire country, this is the DOH program to provide our health workers with free medicine against AH1N1 or Avian Flu. Espie, this Avian Flu, is it also good for ordinary flu? Specifically for Avian Flu.

Why, you, our health workers are very diligent. You are the reason why we succeed in preventing international epidemics like SARS or Avian Flu from entering and affecting the country. You make a great sacrifice every day against disease in your barangay while you are also constantly exposed to the danger of viruses. Therefore, we need to protect the people who protect us from diseases, so we launched this program today and our first beneficiaries are our health workers here in Kalawit.

We also want to give you opportunities to immediately purchase affordable medicines. So today, these certified individuals, we distributed certificates earlier for opening a Botika ng Barangay, and these boxes are the first seed capital for the Botika sa Barangay in five barangays here in Kalawit. The Botika sa Barangay in your province has reached almost 200. Many from here have also been included in the PhilHealth program in your province, 200,000, almost 200,000 are members of Philhealth, let's continue these programs in the next administrations.

During my visit to the latest city in Zamboanga del Norte that I haven't visited before, I would like to use this opportunity to thank you all, thank Lando, Cely, Cesar for their great support for me always and hopefully always, let us always be together in serving the country and the province until the end of time.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the launching ceremony of the Department of Health Program “Vaccine Against H1N1 for Health Workers” with awarding of certificates for the Botika ng Barangay Program. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080058/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27884&Itemid=38