Our secretary of labor. I also greet our returning ambassador, very well known by the Japanese – Ambassador Jun Siazon. And I want you to meet the various officials you elected and those elected by your relatives. They are here now as representatives of our country, the Philippines, to greet you. First of all, Sen. Tessie Aquino-Oreta. Congressman … from Ilo-ilo — Cong. Raul Gonzales is also here. … His wife, former Congresswoman of Zambales Pacita Gonzales. And Cong. James Gordon is also here. … Cong. Ace Barbers. The president of all the governors throughout the Philippines and governor of Davao province – Gov. Dolfo del Rosario. Also here is the governor of Palawan, which is visited by tourists – Gov. Joel Reyes. The one who constantly talks with our friends here in Japan because of the large amount of assistance Japan provides to our Official Development Assistance – Sec. Dante Canlas. And earlier you met the one helping to provide assistance for housing, the one in charge of our housing – Sec. Michael Defensor. And our Secretary of the Press Noel Cabrera. Filipino community leaders here in Japan, my fellow Filipinos here in Japan, good morning to all of you. Our fellow Kapampangan… No agda Ilocano… There in… In Mindanao… Maayong buntag kaninyong tanan… Ilongo, maayong aga sa inyong mga tanan. To the Waray, maupay nga aga ha iyo tanan. And are there any Bikolanos here?... And Happy Peñafrancia Day, this day is for the Lady of Penafrancia, if you still remember when you were there. And to all of you, I am happy that we had the opportunity to come together today in the beautiful city of Tokyo.

I am here in Japan at the invitation of their government. But another important reason why I am here is to be able to talk to the overseas Filipino workers and seamen here in Japan. I would also like to thank the all Japan seamen’s union, which is hosting us this morning…

The all Japan seamen’s union is not only hosting us today, they have taken into their field thousands of Filipino seafarers who act as crew for Japanese vessels.

25% of our seafarers are aboard Japanese ships. 25% of our remittances also come from our seafarers. Wherever I go, I am very proud and praise our countrymen who are on those ships. But I am also proud of our countrymen who live and work abroad like you.

I commend you because you, through your skill in working, elevate the dignity of the Filipino people. And with your good, excellent, and hardworking – honest working – you have shown the world that Filipinos should be proud of and admired.

Throughout the world, countries with investments and parents feel the great help of Filipinos. And in the Philippines, the government and the people recognize the contribution of OFWs to the economy and the life of the nation.

Your great help invigorates our economy and drives the development of our country. Millions of young people are able to study or finish their education because of the help you send to the Philippines. Thousands of new houses are being built – and just as many are getting a new life.

For example, what we did earlier – we gave a housing unit to an OFW from Quezon City. And through the loan we provided, he will be able to get a housing unit there in the smile project in Quezon City.

For your relatives and loved ones… Where will the payment for that come from? From none other than your hard work here in Japan.

Because of your help, we have been able to launch so many businesses. The remittances you send are becoming capital for the businesses of your relatives, your loved ones – small businesses that are flourishing throughout the country because of your remittances. The successful businesses built because of your remittances are a huge pillar of our economy.

And because of your remittances, many barangays, many towns, many cities, many provinces have been revitalized by the contributions of OFWs and the contributions of seamen.

So you are not just overseas workers or seamen. You are major economic investors of our country. You know, I come here to look for investments. Sumitomo will supposedly invest in Palawan, we are proud of that — 0m. But you, in general, all our OFWs and seamen, b are sending to our country. So you are really the new investors in the Philippines.

So the country’s designation for you should be changed. You are not just overseas workers and seamen. You should be called overseas Filipino investors.

You overseas investors, your daily investment for the development of the country is your productive years for the sake of our nation. You sacrifice being far from your loved ones to achieve their dreams. But, as I said, the entirety of what you send doesn’t just give reality to the dreams of your relatives and loved ones, but also the dreams of the entire Philippines. So I salute you.

So it is only right that the country reciprocate your help. And in Congress, in my State of the Nation Address, I mentioned the priorities of our government. And we are grateful to our senators and congressmen, because the bill on absentee voting for overseas workers is being given high priority in Congress and the Senate.

And with their diligent support, we hope that soon our overseas Filipino investors will be able to vote and choose the leaders of our government.

On top of the right to vote which is now being discussed in the senate and in congress, there are also other benefits. For example, the social security system recently launched a flexi-fund for OFWs. This is a voluntary provident fund type of program which could provide you, if you’re a member, with additional sources of loans and retirement benefits.

We also have a housing program for the OFWs. This is part of our goal to provide 100,000 housing units a year for workers a year – whether the workers are working in the Philippines or outside.

So, in the example we gave earlier, there are still 10 of our OFWs and investors who are enrolled in this program – here in Japan. We hope there will be more. So we hope you will apply at the embassy to become a member of Pag-IBIG. In that way, from here you can buy affordable housing in the Philippines, even if you are here in another country.

We feel that we should try to give you whatever we can do in order to serve. Because the reality of the Philippine economy is that, for the foreseeable future, it will continue to be heavily dependent on overseas worker remittances.

The jobs in corporations and departments of the Philippines are fewer than the jobs that come from abroad. There are about 7 million Filipinos working abroad. Less than 7 million Filipinos are working in the Philippine industry. So, more is provided by those working abroad than by the industry.

And so, on the basis of this big contribution of yours and only because even if you are not giving big contribution, it is still the country’s responsibility to its people wherever you are, our government wants to work doubly hard to strengthen the protection of overseas Filipino workers.

For a start, the Philippine embassy will be open on Saturdays to take care of the needs of the Filipino workers.

And we will strengthen bilateral relation with countries hosting large numbers of Filipinos. This includes Japan.

You know, the other day I had a great opportunity to visit their emperor and empress. And we were talking about their visit to the Philippines before — when my father was still president. Our good relationship started again in the 1960s after the war. And we were talking about how, since that time, the relationship between our two countries has greatly expanded. I was telling him that Japan is the number one source of ODA for the Philippines, number two in investment in us, number two in trading partner, number two source of tourists and there are so many Filipinos working here… He said that. And the emperor said, “There are so many Filipinos here in Japan and we love them.”

Then I said, “Yes, we have many overseas Filipino workers here and many Filipinos work on Japanese ships.” Then he said, “and many Filipinos have also married Japanese.” Of course, because he is Japanese, he considers that something special to take care of because those who married Japanese have also become Japanese — like Ambassador Siazon.

Then he said that many of those who married Japanese do not all live in Tokyo. Many live in different provinces. And he said, it is his prayer that the adjustment to life and Japanese culture goes well. So that is the government's view of Filipinos here — you are loved and they want those who will live here for a long time to really not have a hard time adjusting to a new way of life, to the new culture they are reaching for, but embracing it as their culture in the long run.

And on the multi-lateral front, we’re intensifying our campaign for the ratification of the 1990 united nation’s convention on the rights of migrant workers and their families and the adaption of the new U.N. Resolutions on the protection of women migrant workers.

My trip here to Japan is very important to advance our desire to further strengthen our ties with this country and achieve the cooperation of their government for the development of our country.

In my State of the Nation Address last July 23rd, I cited the serious challenges facing the Philippines. Our economy, as of the time when I gave my state of the nation address, was – as far as our statistics our concerned – tight and daunting.

4m jobless Filipinos, compared to 2.5m jobless four years ago. And of course, when you have more jobless, there is a corresponding rise in poverty incidence. And now, the poverty incidence is now at 40% of the population compared to 1/3 of the population 4 years ago.

4 years ago, there was a budget surplus of 1B. When I came in, there was a budget deficit of more than 140B.

So that is the economy I inherited – the poverty of our country. But, thank you to all of you – overseas Filipino investors and other Filipinos in the country – thank you for proving our mettle as a nation and as a people, because our efforts are paying-off.

Back then, our economy was struggling. In 1997, the whole world was having a hard time, but the Philippines didn't struggle as much because our major trading partners weren't struggling. There was an Asian crisis then, but America, a large buyer of our products, was – strong. But now, this year – 2001 – not only are Asian countries struggling, but also our major trading partners. Even Japan, due to their hardship, will reduce their official development assistance to various countries. Luckily, it doesn't seem like they will reduce aid to the Philippines.

And because of your great help, and also because of our efforts and unity, when the statistics of the growth rate throughout Asia came out, aside from China perhaps, no other country had a higher growth rate than our Philippines.

Many of our neighboring countries – Singapore and others – have negative growth rates. We have 3.3%, if you don't include OFWs, offices and seamen. But if you are included, it's 3.4%. So the others who are negative or .01 or 1%, now admire the Philippines because our recovery is faster than theirs.

That's because of you. Thank you! Thank you for your contribution to our real growth domestic products — which is 3.3%, as I said — it’s part of the global economic weakness. Because our exports have a big drop. So when our exports dropped significantly, I thought our economy might collapse.

So back then, when my economic managers and I were talking in February – when we saw that the world economy was slowing down, exports were falling – I said, “what will we do?” they said, “let’s rely on our own people, agriculture, small and medium enterprises, housing and remittances will come. Our overseas Filipinos don’t falter.” And so, including the remittances of overseas Filipinos, the Philippine economy displayed a resiliency that has been the result of your thinking Filipino, buying Filipino, investing Filipino. Thank you very much for your contribution to our economy.

When I became president last January, I told our people about my vision of winning the war against poverty within the decade. Jobs, education, own home, food on every table – that’s what I said in Congress, that this is the core of my vision.

And I also urged everyone listening to my SONA last July 23rd, to set aside bickering and politicking for at least one year. Instead of conflict, I asked for one year of cooperation for the good of the people.

It is fortunate that many of our leaders agreed to work first for the good of our country, setting aside politics for the time being.

In fact, many are wondering, actually in the House it is not very noticeable who is in the opposition or who is in the administration. But in the Senate it is very obvious, because they are few. And many are asking, why did Sen. Tessie Aquino-Oreta accept the invitation to go to Japan? That is the symbol that for the good of our country, we must set aside disputes and work together, to show the world – especially Japan, which is always nervous when there are many coups d’etat and instability – that Japan can see that even different parties or different sides are uniting with what our government is declaring to their government. This will increase respect and increase aid.

Here in Japan, the Aquino family is very well known, so it was just right that I asked Tessie to join and she agreed. A big contribution…

In order to succeed, our national agenda must revolve around 4 components. Four elements of the struggle against poverty.

The first is an economic philosophy of free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century. Doing business to create more jobs.

The second component is a modernized agricultural sector founded on social equity. Increasing the income and harvest of poor farmers.

The 3rd component is a social bias toward the disadvantaged to balance our economic development plan. Caring for the parts of society that are left behind by progress. And the 4th component is the improvement of moral standards of government and society. Morality in government and society as the foundation of true progress.

We are promoting fast growing industries where high-valued jobs are most plentiful. One of them is information and communication technology or ICT. And also, aside from ICT, we have the competitive edge in tourism.

Therefore, I have identified tourism as one of the industries that can create tremendous opportunities for the Philippines’ economic recovery. But tourism needs the help of all 7 million overseas Filipinos. Usually, I am with DOT Secretary Dick Gordon. He is not with us today. With him is his brother, Congressman James Gordon.

So, in Dick’s name, I appeal to you – the overseas Filipinos – to support the Philippine Department of Tourism which is looking for volunteer tourism promoters among our overseas Filipinos.

In tourism, there is work, there is a home, there is food, there is education. With just one tourist, you can already help the country.

So, if you are going home, going on vacation in December, I hope you will bring a tourist with you. Or if you cannot come home, tell a friend of yours from here, “I cannot go home this Christmas. Why don’t you take a vacation in the Philippines and give my regards and my Christmas gifts in the Philippines?” maybe they will go home and visit as a tourist. Because that is the program of the Department of Tourism – volunteer tourism promoters.

And, with all of our work that we are trying to do, we also want to have a million new jobs in agriculture and fisheries.

In order to create 1 million jobs in the countryside, we will spend P20 billion annually for agriculture. What I ask of you, my countrymen, is your continued understanding of what is happening in our country and your trust that your government is fulfilling our duty to the best of our ability. My request is that you cooperate with us.

In closing, I wish to greet all the Filipino community leaders who are here with us. My greetings go to the various members of the various associations represented.

We have many organizations and leaders here in Japan. About 37 ambassadors, I think. But, the good quality is that you are united. You are united here in Japan and I am very happy about that.

It is important to look after the well-being of every Filipino in this country, which now has almost 200,000 people. And if we count the seamen, in fact, there are more than 200,000.

You make us proud of your contributions in unifying the community here in Japan. We thank you for your leadership and your unwavering commitment.

I would like to acknowledge the efforts of all those responsible for the success of this gathering here this morning.

First, we have the Philippine embassy in Japan, the officers and members of the various organizations in Japan, the members of the organizing committee for this activity and all the OFWs and seamen who are now OFIS.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech for the Overseas Filipino Workers of Japan. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212804/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8714&Itemid=38