Thank you General Ibrado. Senate President Enrile; Senator Biazon, Executive Secretary Ermita; Undersecretary Santos representing Secretary Gonzales who is on temporary medical leave, Major Service Commanders, members of the diplomatic corps, Former Secretary de Villa, Bishop Tumulak, Congressman Arbison, other government officials present, officers men and women of the Armed Forces, General Icarma give “tikas pahinga”

A warm greeting to our soldiers in celebration of our anniversary.

Special greetings also to those who received awards today.

And I thank you all once again for the many ways that the great Filipino soldier renders service to the Filipino people.

Those who were assigned to implement martial law in Maguindanao showed our people that the Philippines is a law abiding democratic nation that upholds the rule of law and respects human rights. I thank our soldiers very much for that. I have instructed the Secretary of National Defense and the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces to give medals and promotions to the deserving men and women who were in that assignment. Congratulations to all of you!

Today we started that process by giving unit awards to those who were involved in the implementation of Martial Law in Maguindanao. Soon to follow will be their individual promotions and also their individual awards. If anything positive can come out of the terrible tragedy in Maguindanao, it is that the heartbeat of peace and human rights is very much alive. This is clear by the passion by which people across the nation condemned the violence, but also by the admirable behavior of our troops who implemented Martial Law, and by the positive developments we are seeing once again in our peace talks in Mindanao.

We are gratified that even in the midst of Martial Law in Maguindanao; we were able to resume formally our peace negotiations with the MILF. The ceasefire we broken years ago in 2003, six years ago with the MILF continue to hold. And as I said, we have resumed formal peace negotiations.

Let us pray that this will result in a permanent peace. I can’t think of nothing more desirable for the people in Mindanao and for our nation than peace at the soonest possible time. Only lasting peace will bring true justice and ensure that crimes such as those that were committed in Maguindanao and those that were committed also in Basilan cannot be repeated.

During our administration, we have made several important captures and the elimination of key figures of the Abu Sayyaf and Jemaah Islamiah terrorists. You, the great Filipino soldier have hit them hard and with much success. As reported to us earlier by General Ibrado, the Abu Sayyaf strength has been significantly reduced, but there is more to be done if we are to attain long-lasting peace.

Let us continue to strengthen our relations with the people in those areas by literally building bridges with the local population as well as schools, medical facilities and other infrastructure that wins over the people and narrow support for the terrorists. The Kalayaan Barangay Projects that you are putting up have improved the quality of life in those areas rendered vulnerable to the serene songs of rebellion or terrorism because of poverty, maraming salamat para doon.

And I am glad that the unit heads of those involved in the outstanding Kalayaan Barangay Projects also received their awards today.

Those who have been or are now involved in the various campaigns against armed communist groups are showing how to put to rest the destruction and violation of human rights by the communist rebels so that the nation can move ahead. Again, as reported by General Ibrado, insurgent strength has been on the decline since three years ago because of the faithful implementation by the great Filipino soldier of our hard and soft power strategy. Indeed, hard and soft powers go together, peace and development go together.

As we improve the security of the parts of the country that have known some degree of violence, we had quickly able to move to develop the economy in those areas. When we do that, we ensure a lasting peace and order that ensures that security is no longer an issue. Witness the rapid increases in development, in formally infested areas such as Ifugao and Sulu. But also witness that nationally, there is no question about the crucial role that the AFP has played in keeping the peace that has brought us an unprecedented continuous growth for 34 quarters.

Those who participated in the rescue and the rehabilitation efforts in the aftermath of typhoons Ondoy and Pepeng and now in the Mount Mayon explosions showed our people the meaning of courage and sacrifice outside the battlefield. I am very gratified that today, we honored the units that were involved in those rescue and rehabilitation efforts and also we honored the two great Filipino soldiers who gave up their lives in this effort, thank you from a grateful nation.

In my years as your Commander in Chief, I am proud to have presided over the training and the equipping of our military to be more professional and effective. But I am most especially proud to have presided over the biggest increases in benefits in the history of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

Barely three months into my term, I gave you my commitment to the modernization program, including the adjustment of salaries and other benefits for our soldiers. At that time, government was scraping the bottom of the cash barrel when I first assumed office, but together with the Congress and the Senate, we worked for a salary increase starting with making the soldiers’ pay equivalent to that of a teacher. Our soldiers did not deserve to wait any longer. They did not deserve to wait until we would be able to have more fiscal reforms.

But after that, with successive gains in our economy and with the fiscal reforms, the great Filipino soldiers has had three more increases in basic pay, hazard pay and subsistence allowance. As mentioned by General Ibrado, we have also expanded housing and other benefits for our soldiers, including more scholarships for your family members and more protection for your retirement benefits. So, I am also glad that during these awarding ceremonies, we gave awards to the association of state universities and colleges who have been a good partner in providing those scholarships. We also make sure that the families of those who were killed or wounded in battle will be provided for at least during the grieving period.

Yes, we have modernized or we have started to modernize and we are at the process of modernizing our armed forces, but I am even more proud that we have started to modernize and continue to modernize the benefits for the great Filipino soldier.

You are not only thanked in words. So to our soldiers, let us continue to pursue the enemies of the country who destroy the peace and livelihood of the people. Do not stop until all communities are peaceful. Let us also continue the work assigned to the soldiers during calamities and for development. And to fulfill all of this capability, the AFP must continue modernization and promote the readiness of the great Filipino soldier.

So on this, your anniversary, our anniversary; I thank the great Filipino soldier once again for your professionalism, your courage and your dedication to duty and the chain of command.

I am proud of you. You are the great honor of the Filipino race. That is why I am happy to be with you this Christmas Eve. You bring a beautiful Christmas to our country.

Merry and peaceful Christmas!

So to all of you, Merry Christmas and long live! Thank you very much to the great Filipino soldier. Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 74th Armed Forces of the Philippines’ Day. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133615/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27186&Itemid=38