Thank you. Thank you very much.

Thank you.

Thank you again Mike for your very kind introduction once more.

President Edgar Lacson, Conference Chairman and Lakan awardee Alfonso Uy and Chairman of the Conference Alfonso Siy; Secretary Roque; Francis Chua, President of PCCI; our host, Jaime Laya of Philtrust; Donald Dee; members of the Diplomatic Corps; leaders of business; leaders of the labor sector, our partners who are here today; ladies and gentlemen, good morning to all of you and thank you for your kind welcome.

It’s a pleasure to be with friends and allies, among whom I’ve always counted the members of your Confederation. I thank ECOP for nine years of fruitful cooperation and productive partnership.

I recall that when I first joined you at this conference as your new President, nine years ago, I enumerated the measures that needed to be adopted immediately to breathe new life into our economy and to make our country globally competitive again.

Reviewing where we’ve gone since then, I think what you have said in your speeches is that: the Philippines has come a long way since January 2001. Time has gratefully erased many memories of that tumultuous time less than ten years ago, when the nation teetered on political chaos and financial bankruptcy.

The economy was jammed. You were not making investments. Few jobs were being created. The public sector debt was bigger than our entire GDP. Our short-term debts were coming due. Foreign reserves were razor thin.

Into this dismal picture we stepped. I did not seek the Office of the President in 2001. It was thrust upon me. But rather than shirk from this onerous task, with your encouragement, I rolled up my sleeves, determined to turn the Philippines around.

As an economist, I knew that to reverse economic decline, we had to instill fiscal discipline, grow the economy, and invest in human and physical infrastructure.

I suppose that’s what you mean when you say the reforms that we should be unleashing now.

From day one, we worked on these reforms, together with your support, our actions would form the building blocks of a turnaround that would deliver not only 36 quarters anymore, but 37 consecutive quarters of growth. And you, the employers created nine million new jobs, and you helped me bring about a stable fiscal situation. We even reached a record 7.1% growth in GDP in 2007 — the highest in over 30 years.

And now or last year, you were saying, indeed, that last year when you met, when we met you were working on how to survive the global crisis. At a time when more than half of the countries of the world were reeling from negative growth and job losses were estimated to reach 50 million worldwide, in contrast, as you have said, we maintained positive GDP growth and actually more jobs were created than the jobs that were lost.

Yes, one of the things that ECOP and our partners, government and labor can boast of is that: together we managed to keep millions of jobs intact and created even more along the way even during the global crisis of last year. At the time we met at the beginning of the global crisis, although that was not at the beginning, it was already somewhat well into the way because if you remember they gave the date of the global crisis was the day that Lehman Brothers had its collapse. The way that in the 1930s depression, they counted the date that the stock market collapsed.

Well, when we all met together tripartite there are earlier projections of over 200,000 job losses in the Philippines resulting from the global recession. But with the measures instituted by DOLE under the leadership of Nitoy Roque and ECOP, like flexible work arrangements, actual job losses turned out to be only around one-fourth of the forecast. And most of those job losses were temporary, and many of the dislocated have regained their jobs within the year.

On the other hand, many of the unemployed as well as new labor entrants were found so that during this global crisis while the world lose 50 million jobs, the Philippines — correct me if I’m wrong, Nitoy — had the net gain of over one million new jobs.

We should not be surprised therefore over the recent report that self-rated poverty has gone down this year, down this year to 43% — the lowest self-rated poverty in 23 years.

A major source of our economic strength is our harmonious industrial relations system. The number of strikes in the country is at an all-time low, low even if our labor law is one of Asia’s most democratic. This is because you, our employers and you our labor leaders are able to communicate with one another in a professional and open manner without resorting to bluster and threats. You have agreed that the fastest way to resolve differences is over the negotiating table, not through messy strikes and lockouts. So, congratulations to ECOP and its labor partners!

On the national level, together with government, our tripartite partnership is also able to hold positive dialogues on how to deal with global crises in a collective and non-partisan way. I cite the leadership and constructive role of ECOP in all of these dialogues.

We have made other reforms that hopefully have made your businesses more convenient. We have delivered a nationwide transportation system that binds the nation together as never before, so that people and goods can be delivered faster, cheaper and safer from one end of the nation to the other. And almost from scratch, you have helped me create what is today a global powerhouse: the Philippine BPO industry. We did this with vision, determination, and smart government policies.

You have adverted in your speeches earlier to some of those government policies, some of those reforms that we are unleashing now. With your support, I have never shied away from taking on tough issues and tough reforms. And as Francis Chua pointed out, my popularity dipped when I went against the grain and championed the passage of the EVAT never to regain my popularity anymore.

I knew it would be unpopular, but someone had to get the nation’s fiscal house in order and bring in fresh revenue to invest in the people. It was the right thing to do, it has served the people well. We were able to turn around the dire fiscal situation that we inherited from the past.

While challenges remain, today, our revenues are up, both BIR and BOC have exceeded their targets for this year so far. Our deficit to GDP ratio is acceptable, especially during a time when the world has agreed it is not yet time for an exit strategy from the global crisis policies. Our country’s debt stock is more manageable than before. This has resulted in an improvement in our credit ratings. Today we are debt-free from the IMF.

For those who refuse to see progress, just look at the skyline of Manila or Cebu or Global City or Eastwood or even key areas… centers of Mindanao and the Visayas. Today, it is a skyline with new, modern buildings, construction cranes, better roads, hotels, shopping malls, small businesses. They were not there before in 2001.

This is part of the Philippines that you and I helped nurture and create. You have certainly helped in building up that skyline. And I said not only Manila, Cebu but other parts as well. Mike Varela was telling me about Sumitomo Fruits, also changing the skyline in the southern part of our county. Thank you Paul for your expansion. And we hope, we wish you well in the new economic zone that you have been putting up. Congratulations!

And to all of you friends in ECOP, for all the support you have given our programs, our reforms, I sincerely thank you. And most importantly, I thank you for being the one to unleash the reforms because it is up to you to put up the businesses; it is up to you to do the hiring, the creating jobs.

Certainly, we would not have generated jobs for millions of our workers without you and, therefore, for unleashing our reforms, long live ECOP! And again, thank you all very much.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the closing ceremony of the 31st National Conference of Employers. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080117/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27858&Itemid=38