Many thanks to Secretary Blas Ople for your introduction of me. And I would also like to introduce to our friends here this afternoon, Filipinos in Japan, your spouse, Mrs. Susan Ople. She is here.

And I would also like to introduce to all of you, although we met last year, with me is my spouse, Attorney Mike Arroyo; I am also bringing my son, Luli Arroyo; my son and my daughter-in-law, Mikey and Angela Arroyo; of course, I want to greet our ambassador here in Japan and I thank him for the wonderful organization of our visit here, Ambassador Siazon. And you know Ambassador Siazon is Japanese at heart because his spouse is Japanese, Mrs. Kay Siazon.

Also present are some of my Cabinet Members. I will introduce some of them to you, Secretary Lito Camacho with Mrs. Camacho; Secretary Mar Toxas who doesn't have a Mrs. yet; Secretary Dante Canlas; I don't think Governor Buenaventura is here tonight. I also want to greet our Senator from Mindanao, Nene Pimentel; and also a Congresswoman whose heart is also in Japan because her spouse is also Japanese, Congresswoman Nene Ramirez-Sato; Congressman Jing Paras is also here; and Congressman Antonino Roman of Bataan; Governor Tommy Joson is also here; and Governor Caballero and Mrs. Caballero of Compostela Valley; Governor Plaza and her matriarch of the Plaza family, Mrs. Valentina Plaza who is sitting there, former governor; Mayor Boking Morales of Mabalacat; and the one who takes care of you, Secretary Pat Santo Tomas.

We also have some other Cabinet officials here, Secretary Toting Bunye, my Press Secretary; a Japanese mestizo because his grandfather was with the first wave of immigrants from Japan to the Philippines to Baguio, Secretary Yongyong Hamada Afable, Secretary Joey Rufino and his wife Ching; the one helping us fix the red tape in ODA is Mai Jimenez; your envoy, your servant in the Overseas Workers Welfare Administration is Ver Angelo. Where is he? And I also want to greet from Osaka, Consul General Antonio Villamayor.

And I hope I won't mention all their names but I will ask the members of the Philippine Business delegation to stand, they are over there. The Philippine media is also here. So to all of you, to them, to your fellow countrymen, my beloved, Merry Christmas to all of you. Welcome to this Christmas Party. And Caring Malugud if Cabalen Capangpangan, I sincerely thank you for your presence tonight. I am grateful.

To you who are crying out the name of my mother, good evening to all, to the Abraenon Association in Japan, I greet you and I wish you a good evening. To my fellow Mindanaoans, I am where I grew up and where Senator Nene Pimentel came from, thank you very much for coming tonight.

To the fellow countrymen of my husband who are Ilonggo, together with the Organization for the Development and Advancement of Negros in Japan – are you oriental or occidental? Occidental. Oh, thank you very much for attending our program tonight.

Batangueño and the fellow countrymen of Tommy Joson, Japan Association of Novo Ecijanos. We have a large Nueva Ecija delegation now and Presidential Assistant Rene Diaz and member of the Board of San Miguel, Rico Fajardo are also here.

I greet the other associations and organizations of our countrymen who are here tonight. I don't know if my list is complete but as far as I know, the Filipino association is here, one of the largest groups of Filipinos in Japan. And the Philippine Men’s League, the Association of Filipino Students in Japan; the Science and Technology Advisory Council of Japan, thank you for helping provide “Unlad Kabayan at Tuloy Aral” business courses to our OFWs.

Also here is the Filipino circle for advancement and progress; the Overseas Filipino World Net Foundation — ah, none. Ah, they are there; the Association of Filipinos in Tokyo; the Circle of Friends; the Philippine Ladies Association in Japan; the Filipino Wives of Japanese Association. You should make Congresswoman Sato a member, okay? Oh, she is a member; holding hands with her beloved mother; Overseas Workers Association; Philippine Development Society; the Teatro Kanto who sang; United Filipino Group of Yokohama; United Philippine-Japan Association; Philippine Association for Common Cause; Kabayan-Yamato; Filipino Maritime Network.

El Shaddai Japan Chapter; Akabane Sampaguita; Christian Diocese of Traditional Laymen’s Evangelization; Kapatiran; wow! Filipino Missionaries Group; representatives of the Filipino Community from the Kansai and Osaka area.

And I extend my thanks, I am thanking the all-Japan Seamen’s Union for their big help once again tonight in our party here.

You know, in Manila we conducted the First International Employers Award just a few days ago. The outstanding Foreign Employers of Filipinos were honored for their continued preference for Filipino workers and seamen, for installing programs that raised our OFWs productivity and performance, and for providing extraordinary acts of assistance and aid to OFWs in times of hazard or distress. Ninety-three employers received awards. Nineteen received a Presidential Award of Distinction. And of the 19, nine were Japanese including the all-Japan Seamen’s Union. Congratulations at Arigato, all-Japan Seamen’s Union.

But I also greet not only all of you but also the Philippine Embassy especially… Especially because they are open today even on Saturday. You remember because there were many of you when I was here once, that was one thing I instructed when I was here last. And I am also happy that the medical service for our countrymen here in Japan continues, in cooperation with various associations and organizations. And I would also like to thank the Philippine Assistance Group which works with our embassy in providing repatriation and medical services to our countrymen here.

My administration is determined to bring government closer to our people, including the Overseas Filipinos. Even when I was a Senator I already felt that way. That’s why when I was a Senator, I filed an Overseas Voting Bill, other Senators did too. Some filed before me, some in the same session, some afterwards but like many other Overseas Voting Bills before and after mine, at that time when I was Senator, my bill didn’t even progress beyond the committee level. So when I became president, I certified as one of my five most urgent bills, the Overseas Voting Bill.

Now, at last, for the first time after so many attempts, the Overseas Voting Bill has passed both houses of Congress. Salamat sa ating Senator at mga Congressmen. And let’s pray that the House and the Senate can iron out their conflicting provisions because as soon as they do so I will sign it into law within 24 hours.

And before we left the Philippines, Secretary Pat Santo Tomas and I thought about what would be a good gift to give you this Christmas. And this, we will launch programs to help Filipinos working abroad build a future while improving your lives and the lives of your families in the Philippines. Let me reveal for the first time that I have designated my beloved spouse, Attorney Jose Miguel Arroyo, as envoy to our countrymen abroad. He is now my special representative to the OFWs. But, Mike, this has no salary except my love. Mike will be assisted by an inter-agency team led by the DFA and including the DOLE, HUDCC — for housing – and SSS which will bring our new heroes a program called “Kabayanihan.” and this program is being launched here in Japan.

The “Kabayanihan” seeks to install an integrated delivery of basic services to OFWs in your worksite abroad and also at home in the Philippines. Under this program, you will be able to avail of the following services:

OWWA on-site welfare services including expanded and voluntary membership with OWWA.

DOLE/OWWA/POEA Electronic Identification Card or E-card services. The e-card is the ultimate identification card of OFWs. With that E-card, it will no longer be necessary for an OFW to fall in line at the POEA to obtain an overseas employment certificate for the purpose of exemption from the travel tax and the airport terminal fee. So, by simply presenting the E-card, you can have immediate access also to OWWA Welfare Services, POEA processing requirements, and even duty free shop discounts. You can also use this as a credit card and as an ATM card for Philippine Commercial Banks.

Another service is health maintenance service through the OWWA Medicare program.. The OFW and members of your family will be entitled to benefits over and above those which are granted by PhilHealth.

Another service, the Pag-Ibig fund. Earlier, the Pag-Ibig desks were very happy there. They said they sold a lot of housing services. The DOLE and the Pag-Ibig fund have already signed a Memorandum of Agreement for the Joint Implementation of the Pag-Ibig Overseas Housing Program. This program aims to expand Pag-Ibig membership among OFWs and provide you with the opportunity to buy your own homes back home but at very affordable means. And I’d like to inform you that the Pag-Ibig fund has reduced the equity requirements of its housing program for OFWs. Because before, your counterpart was large. Now, Pag-Ibig will also reduce it.

Another service is the SSS provident fund or flexi-fund services. This is for OFWs only, exclusively. It was designed to enable you to save your hard-earned money while working abroad. When you invest in the flexi-fund at a very affordable cost, you are guaranteed continued earnings after your retirement. So, I encourage you to invest in the flexi-fund. It’s like a savings account but with higher interest rates. And more importantly, you can withdraw it anytime.

Starting January 2003, “Kabayanihan” will launch its own website that you can use to convey your suggestions on how the government can further improve services for you.

Aside from “Kabayanihan” — but I also support it — is the program that Vice President Teofisto Guingona agreed to lead. It was developed by the Overseas Filipino Investment Bond which will provide medical services and insurance for OFWs, and housing at the end of the bond. According to his program, the first housing for OFWs will be built in Taguig. The program also includes the proposed Magna Carta for seafarers.

As Ambassador Siazon said, I, along with my colleagues, am here again this time on a state visit at the invitation of the Emperor and Empress of Japan. But I’m here for the same reason I came two times since becoming president: to focus on the economy and security of the Philippines. Whether it’s the fight against global terrorism or improving official development assistance, at the end of the day, it’s always about the economy and improving the lives of our Philippine citizens.

If you remember, when I became president 20 months ago, I inherited an economy with 4 million jobless Filipinos and a 40 percent poverty incidence.

Today, inspite of the global slowdown, we are an economy that has delivered one of the highest growth rates in Asia. In the first three quarters of this year, Philippine GDP grew by 4.1 percent and GNP — wasn’t it, Dante — 5 percent? GDP was powered by the recovery of industry and continued strengthening of services. Industry grew by 3.8 percent because exports grew by 9.5 percent, and construction is on the rebound. NCSO says that construction has rebounded by 25 percent growth.

Services grew by 5.1 percent because of the expansion of telecoms, trade and private services including tourism. Tourism in October had a growth rate compared to October last year of 39.5 percent or 40 percent even with the Bali bombing. And another factor that boosted our economy now is the financial sector aside from banks. It has host including insurance. It has posted the highest growth in four years.

But if our GDP increased by 4.1 percent, our GNP increased by 5. The difference between our GNP and GDP is the contribution of our Overseas Filipino Workers like you. Your increasing remittances have boosted consumption growth in the Philippines. I was watching TV last night, they were showing the markets, the shopping areas, full of people shopping for Christmas even though it was only November 30 — ah, no, December 1. A lot of it is because of the money you sent. Last year, you, the Overseas Filipinos remitted six billion for the whole year. This year, for the first half of the year, you already remitted four billion. And for the first three quarters, you already remitted the six billion that you remitted last year. Thank you so much for your support.

Sabi ko sa inyo our economic growth is one of the highest in Asia today. In fact, it is surpassed only by the industrial giants — China and Korea — and by Vietnam, which started from a much lower base.

Our inflation rate is low at 2.7 percent. Rice for the masses is priced at 14 or 16 pesos per kilo. And if someone complains that in a market there isn’t 16, I immediately call the NFA. Our interest rates are low, so now is the time to fall in love and buy a house. The 91-day treasury bill has been steady at 5 percent. These rates are at their lowest in the last fifteen years. So really, Pag-ibig should vigorously pursue their sales.

We are also taking steps to further strengthen our macroeconomic fundamentals. We will continue to be vigilant in our efforts to reduce our deficit. The Customs, the BIR, and the newly established — the BIR and Customs — the newly established Anti-Smuggling Intelligence and Investigation Commission, which is now being filled with new commissioners, need to work diligently. Because my message to our countrymen in the Philippines who are avoiding paying taxes is this: “whether you are big business or small, forget the accounting tricks, just pay your taxes and duties or see you in court.” But you OFWs are income tax exempt, right? So just help me appeal to your friends in the Philippines to pay the correct taxes.

We are sustaining a no-nonsense drive against corruption, insulating our procedures better from graft, and putting graft busters in the sensitive agencies.

The peace and order situation has improved. The report of our police before I left was that kidnapping has decreased by 35 percent, because we have dismantled six syndicates.

The adverse global environment has provided opportunities to address our national security concerns. Nine-eleven, the subsequent war on terrorism, and the looming war in Iraq have all combined to dampen the world economy. But even before 9-11, alam naman ninyo, in the Philippines, we were already waging a war on terrorism. You will recall that the Abu Sayyaf was able to generate at least 20 million dollars in ransom from Sipadan, long before 9-11, which strengthened their capability for terror. But with our decisive response to 9-11, we gained foreign allies in our war against terror, which has enabled us to neutralize the notorious Abu Sabaya last June and to degrade the Abu Sayyaf strength from thousands to hundreds.

I appeal to you to continue praying for our government, for our country like Father’s prayer earlier. Continue your cooperation with the government so that our unity will be strengthened further for a national goal to lift our country out of poverty.

No president can build a strong republic single-handedly. I can do this only if i can count on the support of the more than 7 million Filipinos overseas.

You, the Filipinos in Japan, are part of the wellspring of support, the network of Filipinos all over the world that I’m counting on.

I thank you for your concern for our fellow Filipinos and for our country. Let us continue our good deeds — those I mentioned earlier that you are doing — our unity. Thank you for being here even though you were here last year and let us continue our unity.

To all of you, Filipinos here in Japan, congratulations because you are great ambassadors of the Philippines. You are great Filipino workers.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during a Meeting with the Filipino Community in Japan. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409205334/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8533&Itemid=38