Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines On the ASEAN Economic Roadmap

[ Delivered at the Hotel Meierhof and Restaurant, Davos, Switzerland, January 26, 2007 ]

The ASEAN economic roadmap

At a time of uncertainty in the world, ASEAN is taking a bold step forward rather than a timid step back by committing to establish an ASEAN charter. At a time when the Doha round is faltering, ASEAN wants to stand up and proclaim its support for keeping the doors of global trade open. And ASEAN is committed to expanding its trade area to create one of the world’s great economic blocs. This is what the ASEAN roadmap is all about.

An ASEAN charter will help achieve “One vision, One identity, One community” and hopefully, someday “one union” by providing an enhanced institutional framework as well as conferring a legal personality to ASEAN.

ASEAN’s first attempt to integrate began with the implementation of our free trade area in 1992. Since then, intra-ASEAN trade has grown fourfold. Now, we have decided to accelerate the establishment of an ASEAN community by 2015 rather than the original ASEAN 2020 vision. ASEAN envisions a single market and production base in which there is a free movement of goods, services, skilled labor and investments, equitable economic development, reduced poverty incidence and narrowed socio-economic development gaps among our members.

To facilitate the free movement of goods, ASEAN integration is now underway in 12 priority sectors that make up the bulk of our trade with one another. ASEAN is not only eliminating or minimizing tariffs on priority sectors, it’s also enhancing trade facilitation to reduce transaction costs and to reduce the cost of doing business in our region. This involves simplification and harmonization of our customs regimes through an ASEAN single window.

As to the free flow of skilled labor, one example of integration is the mutual recognition arrangement for nursing services that was signed in Cebu, Philippines a few weeks ago.

The challenge is to create a stronger, more united and cohesive ASEAN while further expanding our engagement with our dialogue partners and other parties. ASEAN is integrating with all the major economic players in the region—China, India, Japan, Korea—by forging individual 10+1 economic partnership agreements and negotiating free trade areas with each of them. The signing of the ASEAN -China agreement on trade in services at the Cebu Summit inched us closer to free trade in the region, cutting barriers on services such as telecommunications, transportation and tourism. Within the broader forum of East Asia summit made up of ASEAN + 6 dialogue partners, with whom we’re integrating, we gave our community the means to fuel its growth with the declaration on the East Asian Energy Security in Cebu.

And realizing the grave danger post by terrorism to trade and development and therefore to our economic roadmap, in Cebu, the heads of government signed the ASEAN convention on counter-terrorism, Asia’s first legally binding counter-terror instrument.

In sum, ASEAN is moving forward with firm accords on its own charter, security, overseas workers, and trade. It’s moving forward on its economic roadmap.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library