Thank you very much, Chairman Ambeth Ocampo, my fellow provincial, chairman of the National Historical Institute.

General Aglipay, President of the Kaanak Foundation, thank you for organizing this very, very impressive affair today; Monsignor Cesar Solomon, thank you for being here and for leading our prayers as well as our bishop from the Aglipayan church, thank you for being here to represent… Ah, you’re the great grandson of Isabelo Delos Reyes representing not only the Philippine Independent Church but also the beginning of the Philippine Labor Movement; Attorney Abaño, Vice President of the Kaanak Foundation, thank you very much for reading the resolution of support for me; other officials of the Philippine Government who are here today; officers and members of the Kaanak 1896 Foundation; our veterans from the Bulacan chapter are also here, welcome to this affair; my beloved countrymen:

It is a great honor for Malacañang and for me to be a guest of the relatives of the heroes of the revolution on your eighth anniversary today. As Egay Aglipay said, if possible, I want us all to be here every year, because Malacañang is here as a symbol of our republic because your ancestors fought for our republic.

I commend you for your efforts. The programs of General Aglipay that you are talking about, I have seen the fruits of your projects. As Egay said, one thing Kaanak does is celebrate important days in the history of our revolution. It’s very good that our country remembers the sacrifices made by your ancestors so that we may become a nation, a community.

The second thing Egay said, that’s what I’m especially happy about, is that you are actively helping to revive the love of country in our youth. It is really important that the love for our country as a nation, nationhood, is not only present in your ancestors, until you, until it should be in the coming generations. And that’s a good project of our Kaanak. Congratulations! To all of you.

And regarding what you expressed earlier, both in General Aglipay’s speech and in the resolution you read, I thank you all for the continued support you give me. As mentioned earlier by your… And I thank Egay for galvanizing support as your current chairman and president. Egay really has great leadership. Earlier…

Let’s talk about leadership. Earlier, Egay, because I came from the Philippine National Police headquarters. There was a command conference and the first presentation of agenda item number one was the continuing transformation program of the PNP which was started by none other than Chief PNP Edgardo Aglipay. In other words, Egay, for you to know, even if you are no longer Chief PNP, the programs you started are still being implemented by the PNP now. So congratulations!

So, I appreciate Egay for his leadership and I appreciate all of you for your true and sincere patriotism so worthy of your ancestors. And now again I ask for your support, as I put my foot down for the sake of the people, for the sake of enabling the government to work rather than be disabled by the politics of insult that are done in these inquiries in aid of destabilization, where the situation is manipulated by projecting speculation, hearsay and half truth as proven fact in contribution to those who would want to grab power.

They did not win in the impeachment. They did not win in the streets also because of the good discipline left by Egay to the good police. Now, the battleground is being moved to the senate. We have to put our foot down. And I ask you to stand and be counted as guardians of the law and civility in a democratic society that works for the people rather than impedes their prosperity.

Yes, we all want the truth, but the truth must be found in the forums where the rule of law is observed, where the rules of evidence are observed, where those accused have the right to present their own defense in accordance with time tested regulations. Otherwise, what happens? Kangaroo court. Confusion leading to a situation where it’s easy to have a power grab. It’s a pity for the sacrifices of your ancestors.

That's why I am grateful that we have the opportunity to be together now. Kaanak is very important. What you are doing to uphold our sense of nationhood through stories about what your ancestors did for our country. Because what is the truth? The truth is that we are such a divided nation. It’s like we are two Philippines, not one Philippines. The Philippines that is poised for economic take off, that’s why our unemployment rate is decreasing, from 8.3 percent to 7.7 percent. That’s why our growth rate is higher than Malaysia, Korea, and Taiwan. That’s why self-rated poverty is also decreasing from 57 percent three months ago to 49 percent in August. But despite that, is the other Philippines, the poisoned Philippines, the poisoned political system and manifested by those who seek in fact to use this situation to grab power. We will not allow that. We will not allow the sacrifices of your ancestors to be wasted.

And I am happy to be with you in Kaanak. You are on your eighth anniversary as a foundation but Kaanak has been around for a long time. I remember, when my father was still alive, I would go with him to Kawit, to Los Baños. When I became a senator, you yourselves made me a guest of honor in the house of Jose Rizal. Really, for our family, we are already part of Kaanak.

One reason is because my father gave great value to what your ancestors did, so he said that the true day of our independence is not July 4, 1946 when we obtained our independence through diplomatic missions, but June 12, 1898 where because of the sacrifice of your ancestors, we declared that we are a nation and we will fight for our independence even if our blood is shed. And that’s what your ancestors said.

Another reason why my father always felt close to Kaanak is because we are descendants of Lakandula who was feared by the Spaniards so they did not enter the sovereignty of the Spaniards and allowed it to be an autonomous fiefdom, not paying taxes, not paying cedulas to the Spanish government. But perhaps because one of your goals is to tell the stories of different ancestors. If I may, I can also tell you the story of an ancestor, not mine directly but that of my wife Mike Arroyo who is living… There in America because she wanted to reduce the intrigue in our family. My wife’s grandfather was General Aniceto Lacson, and he led the revolution in Negros and his revolutionary forces won. He won against the Spaniards like the ancestors of Attorney Villegas, General Malvar, also won in the revolution. But we weren’t a nation yet. There were many pockets of revolution that won and they declared themselves as the president of that area. So Aniceto Lacson was declared as the president of that area. Until the Philippine-American war came so Aguinaldo and everyone were arrested so we went back to a colonial master after which the fight was diplomatic initiatives.

You have so many stories to tell. That’s what I’ve told and when we have family reunions, that’s what we always talk about. We tell our children, our grandchildren. Perhaps when they grow up, they will tell the same thing, a very good thing that Kaanak does, storytelling about the great feats of our heroes.

Because there are two Philippines: the Philippines that is ready for economic take-off, but the Philippines that is falling apart due to a terribly rotten political system. One way to become one Philippines again and become one nation is to be inspired by what your ancestors did so that we will be one nation — the Republic of the Philippines.

That is why it is just right that we celebrate today the deeds of your ancestors, and I hope that, as Egay said, every year we will remember the deeds of your ancestors, our ancestors, and we will swear to them that the country they built we will strive to truly become one nation — one nation.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the 8th Anniversary Celebration of the “Kaanak 1896”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092631/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5118&Itemid=38