Thank you very much Secretary Dureza for your introduction.

Thank you very much Governor Cerilles for your warm welcome to us, Congressman Vic Yu, Congressman Cerilles, Mayor Bulahan and all the officials here in Ramon Magsaysay, our principal here Mr. Logdonio, our academic head at Cerilles State College, Dr. Valeria — where is Dr. Valeria? She isn't here because this school is a high school in the morning, a college in the evening — to all of you, good afternoon, good morning, afternoon, afternoon, good afternoon to all of you.

I am happy to visit your school which is a high school in the morning and a college in the evening. In the morning, Ramon Magsaysay National High School, in the evening JH Cerilles State College named after the mother of Congressman Tony Cerilles. I am also happy to know that 22 of your municipalities now have extensions of JH Cerilles State College because it's like what Congressman Cerilles said, the poor who used to have to go out of town now don't have to, they can work in farming in the morning, and go to school in the evening.

So, I also know that since the opening of your campus in 2006, more than 100 young people have completed courses here and they have good performance in the board exams, congratulations!

Visiting provinces like Zamboanga del Sur is one of the most important tasks of my presidency. We will continue to work actively until the last day of our term. For that, we have promoted the major initiatives advanced by our administration since we took office. There are three aspects that we prioritize:

One, to give each region more power and development, not just in Manila.

Two, to continue promoting the importance of our three E’s: Education, Economy and Environment — in our efforts to achieve sustainable and equitable progress.

Three, to continue focusing on the youth of the nation as our greatest hope for a brighter and better Philippines.

We have made progress in many areas. Governor Cerilles, Congressman Yu and Mayor Bulahan has told us some of those. And throughout the country in the past twelve months, I’m happy that we were able to create a record 1.7 million jobs even in the middle of a global economic crisis. And that brings now to about nine million jobs created during my administration.

And Governor Cerilles told about the various projects we prioritize here in Zamboanga, the Pagadian Airport, and is it true Au that there are commercial flights, are there? Next month, congratulations! So next month the commercial flights will arrive.

And the repair of what they call the ‘longest road,’ the Pagadian-Zamboanga City Road, is now complete. Longest road because it’s been the longest to construct, perhaps since the time of Marcos it was constructed, our administration completed this road.

The total length of the roads we built in Region IX reaches 1,295 kilometers. These roads greatly help the farmers, so they can transport products from the mountains to centers like Pagadian and even perhaps outside of Region IX. It also greatly helps the businessmen, so prices don’t rise too much. Because one of the things we want to happen is that the price of food is affordable for families. And transportation, logistics for this goal, is important.

So today I have with me our new Trade and Industry Secretary, Secretary Jing Lapus; used to be Secretary of Education, so this used to be his jurisdiction. Now, his jurisdiction will be our next stop, the public market, because we’ll look at how the prices are here in Zamboanga del Sur.

Indeed, more needs to be done. Everything our administration has worked hard to achieve has been to make the future brighter for you, the next generation of Filipinos. The youth of our country are our hope and inspiration. Everything we need to do, we must do for building a better life for every youth in our country.

While we are proud of what our government has accomplished, what was done yesterday is only effective with the country’s ability to continue to develop and progress. May the progress we have made not stop; that what remains to be done will be done by the next generation of leadership, you, the next generation. As a nation, we should focus on our future, fill it with well-being and strive even harder to face the challenge of what remains to be done.

The youth of the nation are the bridge between yesterday and the future. For you, we corrected the mistakes, we stood for change, and we strived to make a better day.

We have come a long way as a nation, just like the roads – you can reach far thanks to our beautiful roads now. But there is still a long way to go. You, the youth, represent the aspirations of our nation. We offer you our efforts to lift up the Philippines.

Education is the foundation of opportunity. It is the key to a better life. It opens the mind and opens doors. So you are very lucky that many of your cities now have extensions of state college campuses. The people of Zamboanga del Sur are also lucky because, compared to other provinces, you have more schools here in Zamboanga del Sur. Congratulations!

And today, in this world, the power of education must be coupled with a strong foundation in technology. To build the mind and connect to the world. Education and technology are the twin pillars upon which… (there must be a micro… maybe there’s a radio connecting to a microphone. Is it closed? Okay.) Therefore, in the recent months of our leadership, we continue to pour efforts into tasks for better and stronger education and technological infrastructure. I would like to know if you have internet connection here in your school? You do, congratulations! Congratulations, Principal! Because that is truly the most important technological infrastructure. So, I’d like to congratulate also former Education Secretary Jing Lapus because he left the DepEd with 5,500 high schools now with internet connection.

We have come a long way. Since 2001, we have provided scholarships in Region IX to more than 6,500 college and graduate school students. Here in Zamboanga del Sur, 5,000 have benefited from various technical and vocational scholarships, including 551 in Ladderized Education.

What is ladderized education? Perhaps you enter agri-tech for six months, one year, two years and return to farming. Or like what you do here, you study in the evening, work in the morning, work in the morning and if you want to finish your certificate, you continue to college, Bureau of Agricultural Science, your learning in agri-tech can be used as credits or units for your college degree. That is ladderized education.

And I am happy that this Ramon Magsaysay branch of JHC State College offers not only internet connection, but also diploma courses in education, and you also have technical certificate courses such as agri-tech, automotive tech and computer tech. Because these courses are very important because they represent technology. Congratulations to our academic head!

But as I said earlier, we still have a long way to go. We should not rest yet. I hope you, the youth of today, will use, value, value your education, value modernity, use these instruments to improve your lives and our nation and your very beautiful province of Zamboanga.

My grandfather, Juan Macaraeg, when my mother was young, she was only in primary school, he worked here in Zamboanga as manager of Sta. Clara Lumber and he often came here to what later became Zamboanga del Sur in Margosatubig — there were various ports in Margosatubig — so the Zamboanga Peninsula is close to the heart of my family.

And I would also like to say that as my national politics comes to a close, my gratitude to Au and Tony, because since my first candidacy in 1992, ‘95, ‘98, 2004 and my senatorships in 2001 and 2007, in the beginning, especially when I became president, we ____ within the same party, but their support was always with me.

So, thank you Au, thank you Tony. Thank you all, our brothers and sisters, I hope that what we have done together can truly be a way to further the progress of Zambales del Sur.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during an Education Event: Visit to Ramon Magsaysay National High School / JH Cerilles State College (New Town Visit). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080240/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27754&Itemid=38