General Yano, Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces and the other officials of the Armed Forces; Secretary of Social Welfare, Secretary Cabral and the other members of the National Government; ARMM Regional Director Zaldy Ampatuan and the other officials of ARMM in the provinces herein; Bishop Bacatorio and our other community leaders; ladies and gentlemen.

First of all, my salute and congratulations to you, our valiant soldiers! (Applause) The government and the Filipino people appreciate and recognize your sacrifices in the pursuit of justice for the victims of the lawless MILF Groups.

And together, we thank the civic spirited citizens of Mindanao, most especially those from General Santos and Davao, for their generous donations. We also give thanks for the resolutions and manifestos of support from the LGUs, NGOs, PO’s and other civic organizations nationwide. These expressions of support, both material and moral, to the Armed Forces is, I’m sure, morale boosting. They indicate the people’s faith and support and the unity of the government, the AFP and the peace-loving citizens in bringing peace.

Congratulations to you for succeeding in constricting the movement of the LMGs. Your law enforcement operations prevent them from committing further terrorism.

But even as we pursue these criminals, we remain committed to peace. We must all work to bring peace in Mindanao in a way that is open and transparent and represents the true will of the people.

There is no alternative to peace. So I count on you, our soldiers, to work to isolate the renegades as we listen to the local communities and await responsible elements in the MILF to regain control.

I remind our troops that in the performance of your mandate against the LMGs and other lawless elements, the strictest observance of human rights of the civilians and non-combatants is paramount.

Your operations having characterized by a high moral ground. You have tempered and adjusted your operations to allow our brethren Muslims unimpeded observance of their religious practices, especially during the last Ramadan. It was the LMGs who continued committing atrocities despite Ramadan.

We fully support your sacrifices. Because of your sacrifices, I am optimistic that we will have peace in Mindanao. As I said earlier, war brings no good to anyone. And as I said earlier, it is essential that we bring the violent renegades to justice and receive assurances from responsible MILF leaders that violence will never again mar the peace.

Our gallant soldiers, to boost your morale and the welfare, your welfare and that of your families, you saw some… you read the announcement of some of the support, additional support we are giving you, and let me repeat them.

Issuance of sleeping bags for the more or less 7,000 troops of the 6th ID, including the 102nd Infantry Brigade operating in Sarangani. (Applause) Because when you go up the mountain, it gets cold at night, especially as the cold season approaches. So you really need the sleeping bags.

Cellphone loads worth 300 pesos for each soldier, (applause) so that you can contact your families from time to time.

Expedited processing and release of the Special Assistance for the families of our soldiers killed in action and for the wounded with major injuries. And we have set aside funds totaling one million pesos in loans or scholarships for your children who because of your special service in the Mindanao campaign. This is part of our “Pantawid Pag-aral” program. We also have set aside a fund of one million pesos for your parents who are not beneficiaries of SSS, GSIS or Philhealth, as part of our program “Tulong para kay Lolo at Lola.” (Applause)

Many of you are still confined; some of you who went up the stage, so we are upgrading the Camp Siongco Station Hospital to better cater to the medical requirements of our soldiers and your dependents, most especially to our battle casualties. (Applause) These are but a few gestures to let you know that the Filipino people are grateful and I lead the greater Filipino people in saluting each and everyone of you.

Mabuhay! (Applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during a Visit to the 6th Infantry Division and Awarding Ceremony of Soldiers Involved in the Maguindanao Operation against MILF Rogue Leader Kumander Kato. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135004/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1736&Itemid=38