Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the mass oath-taking of new officials of Lakas-CMD Rizal Chapter

Thank you to the son of Angono, the Chairman of the Energy Regulatory Commission, Manny Sanchez.

You know, before I greet the other guests, those on stage, I want to tell you how Manny Sanchez became ERC Chairman. When I was looking for a Chairman for the Regulatory Office of the MWSS, the Water Regulatory Office, the search committee said we found a very good biodata, his record was very good, he graduated from Harvard, he was the one we were nominating as chairman of the Regulatory Office of the MWSS. I said, who is that? They said Congressman Manny Sanchez. Wow! I said, Congressman Manny Sanchez? I know him! Although he would be suitable for the Regulatory Office of the MWSS, I also need an Undersecretary of the Press right now. I wanted him to work in Malacañang, not in the MWSS. So I made him Undersecretary of the Press. He became Undersecretary Manny Sanchez. After that, at the Energy Regulatory Commission, Chairman was Fe Barin. Then, there was… The terms of some members of the monetary board ended, so because Chairman of the ERC Fe Barin had been there for a long time in the Central Bank, I didn't appoint her as a member of the monetary board. This created a vacancy in the Energy Regulatory Commission, a very powerful position. So many people were vying to be appointed to that position. So I said, in a very powerful position and many vying for it, I remembered what the search committee said, Manny, a lawyer, from Harvard, is very suitable for regulation, so I made him Chairman of the Energy Regulatory Commission.

I also want to greet, of course, the Father of Angono, Mayor Gerry Calderon, who has been helping me for a long time. Even when I was a Senator, right? And the mayor was vice mayor then. We've been friends for a long time, so I've been a friend of Angono for a long time. I want to greet Vice Governor Jovita Rodriguez, our highest official in the Lakas party in the province of Rizal.

I want to greet the various officials who are here now. I greet Vice Mayor Villamayor. The councilors of Angono, including ABC President Armando Villamayor. You know, Mayor Calderon says I often visit Angono. Because this is an artist center, I go to your museums, I visit your artists. I buy art but there seems to be black propaganda against me. They say I come here and leave nothing. ABC President Villamayor is a witness that I have helped all the barangays of Angono. So it is not true that I leave nothing, I passed the help through ABC President Armando Villamayor. I also want to greet ABC Vice President Francisco Saginsin. And SK Chairman Anover Tiamson. We are here in what, right, Barangay Sto. Niño? So I greet the barangay captain of Sto. Niño, Chairman Roberto Miranda. And Mr. Ding Roan. And our well-known artist, Orviel Quiamson. Where's Orviel? He's the one I always visit, okay. Atty. Efren Bautista, I also greet him. And Judge Rosa Tatad.

I am also with Secretary Marita Jimenez today and she has something she wants me to tell you. Because Mai Jimenez helps me with matters of Official Development Assistance or aid coming from other countries. And I know here in Angono, one of your complaints is the flood. The complaint about the flood cannot be answered with ten million pesos. The flood control project you need is one that is truly complete and comprehensive. And according to Mai Jimenez, we are already working on a proposal. This project is called the east of Manggahan Flood Control Project. This is not ten million pesos, this project is worth ten billion pesos. This covers not only Angono but also Cainta, Pasig, Marikina, Taytay, Antipolo. And because many towns are covered, all towns must endorse to the regional development council. So can I ask Mayor Calderon to take the endorsement of the mayor of Cainta, Pasig, Marikina, Taytay, Antipolo, even from you. Because we want to pursue this if it can be given to the Regional Development Council and they approve it, it can be given to the Japanese government when I go to Japan this coming December. So I will take care of the paperwork.

Anyway, I also want to greet the brother of our national artist, Botong Francisco, his brother is here. Where is he? I saw him earlier. One of our senior citizens. Everyone! You know, Botong Francisco's paintings, Botong Francisco's sculptures, in my father's house, at our entrance and exit, there is his sculpture made by my father about our land reform, our independence day. And in Malacañang, there are three large paintings by Botong Francisco, I also placed them at the door of Malacañang, outside my room so that every day before I leave Malacañang, I look at Botong Francisco. Because we are proud of the artists coming from here.

And when I was a senator — Mayor Calderon knows this because he was vice mayor then — part of my CDF as a senator was given to build a music hall so that Lucio San Pedro's music would continue. Now, Mayor Calderon has requested two things from me regarding your culture. First, I hope to build an artists center, a gallery and museum for artists of Angono. I said, since I already started the music hall, okay, I will add 2 million pesos to it, so that it can be expanded, improved, Gerry and become not just a music hall but a gallery and museum for Angono.

And I also have a request for Manny Sanchez, because on top of being a lawyer and chairman of the ERC, since he is a lawyer, could he do a little work that isn't related to your job at the ERC? Manny, help me draft a declaration so I can declare Angono as the artist capital of the Philippines.

I am grateful for the warm greetings to everyone here today, especially to the new members of our administration's party, Lakas-CMD. This is proof of your agreement and support for the social objectives of our government. Now, because you are members of our party, I want to report to you that what our party and my administration want is reform and reconciliation. This message of reconciliation, if you will allow me, I will announce not only to you but also to the entire country because we have television covering this event.

The country has suffered enough from extreme divisiveness. I have called for reconciliation and healing as a moral duty and I will persist even if repudiated along the way. I am seeking light in the minds of our leaders so that we can breach the cynicism and hatred that is rending the nation and depriving the people of peace of mind and economic opportunity.

I am making this offer before things become worse for our people. We must not leave the Filipino people trapped in the middle of political clashes. Let us not forget, the people are sovereign and they expect more statesmanship and solidarity from their leaders.

Many of our behaviors and perspectives as a society need to be changed or returned to former good customs if we are to have reform and reconciliation in change or return within, in the view of former good customs, culture plays a big role. And in culture, Angono plays a big role because Angono is home to the most artists in our country. So if we make Angono the art center of the Philippines, the artist capital of the Philippines, this is not only for your honor, it is also for the good of the spirit and soul of the Philippines.

So, people of Angono, fellow countrymen of Gerry Calderon, fellow countrymen of Manny Sanchez, thank you for the artists you have created, thank you for the spirit that you hopefully carry to the soul of the entire Philippines.

Long live the artists of Angono!

Long live the spirit! And I hope that the entire Philippines becomes as soulful as Angono.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Mass Oathtaking of New Members of Lakas-CMD Officials Rizal Chapter. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409193516/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7455&Itemid=38 .