Dacal a salamat.

Dacal a salamat, Secretary Ed Pamintuan king pamagpakilala mu. At mayap abak karing kekatang officials na ning Pampanga ning distrito ampo ning balen Minalin y Governor Ed Panlilio, ing Mayor Flores, y Congresswoman Anna York Bondoc Sagun. Kayabi naman tamu karing aliwang Congressman keti Pampanga y Tarzan Lazatin ampo y Dong Gonzales. At salamat naman karing Provincial Board Members naning Pampanga, manibat keng 1st district atyu keti y BM Garbo, BM Halili — nukarin ya y Lina Bagasina? okay — y Art Salalila… ah y Edna David atyu ya keti, y Edna David; ampo karing keng 3rd District y Jake Quiambao; manibat king 4th District BM Calara ampu Rick Yabut; at y BM Joel Simpangco ing Federation of Barangay Captains ning ABC. Atyu keni pa y Raul Macalino ampo y Eric Tumang? Alayu oneng mayap a abac karela. At karing kegana-ganang mayors sa Pampanga atyu keti. Ana ning Mayor ning Candaba ana karakal namang biyaya keti, kegana-ganang balen ning Pampanga atin biyaya manibat king gobyerno. The egg producers, karing egg producers; karing poultry farm workers; karing farmers and fisherfolk; our bus and trucking operators that we invited here today; our national government officials who are here with us today; kekayung kabalen ko keti king Pampanga; Monsignor Mercado, mayap a abac kekongan.

Ampong mayap a oras karing tau-Minalin king kekayung egg industry, oneng ali mu keng egg industry. Uling ana y Congresswoman Anna York Bondoc, ikayu naman ing number one king crabs, karing prawns exported, ing tilapia dadalan king Metro Manila, fresh, A-rated and your other products that you have shown today. Congratulations! king masanting a production king agrikultura. Ana pin ning Mayor Flores, atandanan na pa king panahon na ning Pinatubo, nilahar ing Minalin, oneng mibangun pasibayu and now you are the “egg basket” of the Philipines.

Karakal ing ambag ning industriya ning ebun ampo king ali-aliwang produkto yu, king kekatamung agrikultura ampo maulagang sustansiya king mesa ning pamilyang Pilipino.

Inya pin, I’ve come to Minalin not only to deliver some of the support for the people of Minalin but also I have chosen to come to our province to make a very important announcement to highlight the importance not only of raising production but also lowering the cost of bringing food products to the market. Then, we can lower the cost of food through lower delivery cost. Last month through Secretary Larry Mendoza, I instructed the Toll Regulatory Board to review the toll rates of the Manila North Tollways Corporation at the critical North Luzon Expressway.

Uling, the favorable peso-dollar exchange rate has dramatically reduced the debt service load of MNTC, therefore, MNTC has been generating a financial windfall for its toll road operations. It’s clear that the MNTC can pass on a part of this huge windfall to the public via reduced toll rates.

The MNTC secured dollar-denominated loans to rehabilitate the NLEX at an average of 54 to a dollar, and now it is 43 to a dollar. The high debt service cost was heavily factored in the computation of its toll matrix. Transport groups whom we have invited today now estimate that the debt servicing cost of MNTC for its NLEX loan is now 31 percent lower because of the favorable exchange rate regime and the favorable interest rate regime.

Therefore, today, I direct the Toll Regulatory Board to approve a new Toll Rate Adjustment Formula. This shall result in a package of benefits for all types of vehicles using the NLEX. TRB’s approval of the new formula will facilitate MNTC’s conversion of its remaining U.S. dollar loans into pesos. The operation of this new toll rate adjustment formula will reduce the toll in NLEX since MNTC will realize foreign exchange gains that resulted from the favorable economic conditions. The foreign exchange gains in turn shall be passed on to NLEX motorists in the form of lower toll rates.

I hereby direct the TRB to implement the downward adjustment of NLEX toll rates as a result of the new toll rate formula to take effect on June 30th this year 2008.

A toll rate reduction will bring relief to the areas within the NLEX axis, particularly Metro Manila, North Luzon, Central Luzon kayabi na ing kekatang probinsiyang Pampanga.

It is expected to bring down the cost of rice and basic food items and construction materials.

A significant blessing is the reduction in toll fees for all those traveling on NLEX, especially with the surge in oil prices worldwide. It is also a great help in our efforts to deliver affordable food to every table.

We expect that the benefits to the public of a toll rate reduction will be immense, specifically on the cost of basic food items.

Metro Manila and the several areas in the CALABARZON depend on haulers whom we have invited today and food producers from Central Luzon and Northern Luzon for their rice, meat, poultry and vegetable needs. And being ‘egg basket’ of Central Luzon, Manila, Minalin more than 50 percent of Metro Manila’s egg supply comes from the Minalin ‘egg basket’ keti king Pampanga.

Lower rate tolls means lower transport cost for producers and haulers.

With the reduction in NLEX toll fees, we expect the cost of transporting food to Metro Manila to decrease. We ask the traders who will benefit from the toll reduction to share it with consumers and farmers. Hopefully, they will lower food prices and increase payments to farmers. It is only right that everyone benefits from our continuous efforts to reduce the expenses of people and businesses.

With a toll rate reduction at the NLEX, transport fares charged by the major bus operators between Central Luzon and Metro Manila and Northern Luzon will hopefully remain at the 2004 level.

The toll rate reduction will hopefully impact on the cost of construction materials being moved to Metro Manila, Cavite, Rizal and Laguna.

The resulting stability of the toll rates will generate for NLEX motorists these additional benefits: First, there shall be no increase of toll rates within the next two years and six months; and second, subsequent increases shall be in smaller increments owing to the new adjustment rate formula that is no longer subject to foreign exchange fluctuations.

Pasibayu, mayap a oras karing tau-keti king matagumpe a produksyon yu king ebun at ali mu king ebun karing ali-aliwang produkto na ning agrikultura. And let us thank the MNTC for agreeing to this toll rate reduction, saup-saup tamu ngan ban ayabut tala ding kekatamung paninap, asundut taya ing pamanangat ning ekonomiya at akamtan tamu ing malambat a pamanyulung.

Long live Pampanga! Long live Minalin!

Dacal a salamat kekongan.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s Speech during the Kick-Off Ceremony of the First-Ever Minalin Egg Festival. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412121525/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1574&Itemid=38