Thank you very much, Secretary Cruz.

Troop commander give “tikas pahinga.”

Vice President Noli de Castro; former President Fidel Ramos and other former Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; Speaker Jose de Venecia and other elected officials; Excellencies of the diplomatic corps; our new Chief of Staff, General Efren Abu; our former Chief of Staff, General Narciso Abaya, Former Chief of Staff and incoming president of the Bases Conversion and Development Authority; members of the Cabinet and other civilian appointees; Major service commanders; Vice Admiral de Leon; Vice Admiral Delos Reyes; Lieutenant General Adan; Lieutenant General Jose Reyes; and the incoming General of the Philippine Army, Lieutenant General Generoso Senga; Bishop Arguelles; and the other distinguished guests from the private sector; ladies and gentlemen:

It is my pleasure to bid General Abaya a proud farewell but only as a soldier. as you have applauded, I welcome him to the ranks of civilian public servants. When General Abaya made his valedictory, I could feel his pain as he spoke about being scorned, but I do not believe and I don’t think any of you believe that general scorned except by a few, by the many, he continues to be admired. In fact, his outstanding academic record, his sterling military achievements and his personal refutation for integrity were what made the private sector recommend to me that he should be the president of an important government corporation.

It is also my pleasure to welcome our 33rd Chief of Staff general Efren Abu. Twice in the past two decades the armed forces of the Philippines came to the fore front of extra political change.

President Ramos was a leader of that first change and an icon in that second change. Beside our flag, the uniform took a new and great meaning, positive change and transformation, service above self.

We had a first wave of reform in 1986 immediately following the EDSA revolution, the second followed the Davide commission of 1990, the third followed the Feliciano commission of 2003 but as general Abaya very comprehensively analyzed in his valedictory much still needs to be done.

We must be immerse in the Filipino soldier as a fighter and agent of transformation and change.

In the last 18 months, I made two important strategic decisions to drive reform deeper in the armed forces. One was the appointment of General Abaya as Chief of Staff, again because of his academic achievements, his military record and his personal integrity I felt and I’m satisfied that he had the moral ascendancy to undertake those reforms.

The other measure that I took in order to drive reform in one deeper in the armed forces was the appointment of a civilian with no career ties to the military to serve as a Secretary of National Defense, Secretary Nonong Cruz. Secretary Nonong Cruz emphasizes the civilian character of a Department of National Defense and many of the reforms still left to be done as pointed out by General Abaya are not really something that we must expect to be done by the AFP Chief of Staff but rather by a civilian Secretary of Defense and Nonong Cruz is the man to lead those reforms.

Going back to General Abaya and his moral ascendancy to undertake reforms, his theme when I swore in as Chief of Staff was, “is reform in the AFP possible?” He posed that question when he took his oath as Chief of the Armed Forces and answered it throughout his term with an eloquence of action beyond the pale of fanfare and glory.

I don’t have to enumerate the reforms he made, he enumerated many of them, let me just point out that as a result of those reforms under his watch, the military went on to score major victories against terrorists and criminal elements. Several notorious terrorists were killed or captured during his watch, among them Hamsiraji Salih, Commander Robot and very recently the bombers of Jemaah Islamiyah. Under his watch largely because of those reforms, peace has dawned in Mindanao.

And upon by instructions, he created the single bids and awards committee and the enhanced AFP grievance system, as well as implemented austerity measures in several sections to finance the full implementation of our soldiers’ pay increase, he is right and I thank him. But even if he had to take a special new campaign upon my instructions, he never asked me for additional and he has succeeded in those campaigns living within the means provided the AFP by the General Appropriations Act.

His austerity measures enabled us to raise the salaries of the soldiers in accordance with the law that I asked Congress to enact and I thank the congressmen and senators who enacted that law. And because of this austerity measures done by the armed forces, I can assure our soldiers contrary to those who are trying to drive a wedge between you and me, that your implementation of your salary increases will continue to be carried out. The efforts undertaken by General Abaya to clean up the military bureaucracy indeed are matched by initiatives to improve the benefits of our soldiers.

So I did two things to make there will be reforms, a man with great moral ascendancy to do reforms that must be done within the AFP, and a civilian with no baggage to carry out the defense reforms that must be done over and above the efforts of the AFP.

My third equally important measure for reform has been to chose General Efren Abu as the next Chief of Staff. I don’t know how well the public knows General Abu as of now, but the soldiers know him well, his exploits in the field, from Mindanao in the 1970s to a light armor brigade, to EDSA Dos, to Malacañang’s Task Force Libra in 2002 and Makati’s Oakwood counter operations in 2003 were all sterling and triumphant.

Now the wait of promulgating military justice bears heavily on the soldiers of the new Chief of Staff. He will oversee the court martial of Major General Garcia as well as the investigation of other officers similarly suspected of graft. But we have heard in his acceptance speech how committed General Abu is to fight corruption whether it be enforcement against specific individuals or reforms in the system itself like the abolition of J-6.

Indeed you have a heavy task General Abu, in this heavy task you have my full support.

Like all Filipinos I demand to know the truth about corruption, whether in the military or outside the military. But like General Abaya so emotionally appealed, neither will I allow the entire AFP to be dishonored, I can tell you that officers and soldiers because I know this to be true, the majority of our soldiers and officers are men and women of courage, integrity and devotion to duty. I am proud of the Filipino soldier.

And I am optimistic about our nation and our people. But to fight poverty and grow our economy. We purge the system of corruption, whether inside or outside the military. We must eliminate government waste, as Abaya has shown, it can be done in the military.

We must increase tax collection and invest in our nation through revenue increases dedicated to job creation, education and health care. We are moving closer to achieving our goals we have set in stabilizing our economy.

The interest payments we are making this month are lower than projected. And we acknowledge the key role played by Congress on the tax measures. Thank you very much Speaker De Venecia and the congressmen who are here today.

I appreciate the support of the House of Representatives and I am confident this will be reinforced in equal measures by the patriotism of the Senate. Thank you in advance to the senators who are here today.

Our revenue agenda to move resources to generate jobs, improve education, push health programs and broaden social reforms will continue to be propelled by multipartisan unity and a shared determination among our nation’s leaders to shed off personal and party interest and to serve the supreme welfare of the people.

I’m glad General Abaya reminded, that was one of the recommendations of the Davide commission. As I said earlier, not all the recommendations are the responsibility of the AFP. As General Abaya said, one of the strong recommendations that General Abaya ended his speech with, is that there must unity between the administration and the opposition. Not a unity that stifles debate on issues but a unity such as what we saw in the passage of the tax on alcohol beverages and cigarettes. A unity such as what we are seeing in some of our talks with leaders of the Senate.

The root cause of our situation today is festering entrenched culture of corruption, like a cancer it must be cut out if the patient is to survive. And I’m glad that Abu gave words as strong as that.

We must collect stolen riches and put people on trial for their criminal behavior, whoever they are, wherever they work and live.

We cannot ask the people to sacrifice if the government and the rich get away with crimes that hurt the people and the nation. We are all part of the cycle of corruption and despair. And we must join hands to root out this evil that is strangling our nation. The nation will grow and prosper tomorrow for the tough decisions we make today.

General Abu, you have, as we have seen in you stint as head of the army and in your previous commands, you have the political will and the decisiveness. And now you have the singular mission of transforming the insidious attempts to besmirch the command into an opportunity to execute our fresh wave of sweeping reforms.

As I congratulate you, I urge you: Maintain that steady and straight line behind the flag.

And to Gen. Abaya, you have served well, may you continue to serve well. Long live the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the AFP Change of Command Ceremony. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133015/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5699&Itemid=38