Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the First Asian Regional Forum of the Global Parliamentarians on Habitat

[Delivered at the Century Park Sheraton Hotel, Pasay City, Metro Manila, April 24, 2002]

Senate President Drilon; Speaker de Venecia; Senator Biazon; Senator Noli de Castro; Secretary Michael Defensor; Secretary Sonny Alvarez; Congressman Nograles; Congressman Nieva; Congressman Espinosa; Congressman Gonzalez; Congressman Solis; Honorable Noda; Members of the Diplomatic Corps; delegates to the First Asian Regional Forum of the Global Parliamentarians on Habitat; other distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen:

Almost two years ago, we were gathered here for a similar conference, the Third Global Forum of the Global Parliamentarians for Habitat. The Philippines hosted this from July 25 th to July 28 th in the year 2000. Senate President Drilon was a speaker and I was the keynote speaker then, as the second highest official of the government.

Now, after a peaceful transition last year, I’m here again before you, this time as the 14th president of our republic. Allow me, therefore, to welcome you in this new capacity, and to offer to you once again the renowned hospitality of our people.

This gathering is armed with renewed commitment and hope to address one of the most challenging issues of our time – providing adequate shelter for all.

The Philippine chaired the Asian Regional Council in year 2000, under the leadership of Senator Rodolfo Biazon, and we are very proud of that. At that time, the Philippines committed to convene its first meeting; so today, the Philippines is making good our commitment. We are glad that you have come in the spirit of commonality and civic duty amidst a scenario of global unpeace and anxiety.

I, therefore, take the opportunity to convey my sincere congratulations of the prime movers of this forum, particularly the officers of the council and member-countries.

Here, we aim to formally approve a body of statutes to guide the council in its future work. This is well and good. For a definite framework prevents the council’s work from drifting here and there, and therefore drifting into oblivion.

We are here to make the council’s presence felt in the Fourth Global Meeting of the Forum in Berlin this year. I am, indeed, elated that Asia will be heard as one potent voice in that very significant meeting.

We all remember with pride when the champions of shelter and sustainable human settlements gathered in Istanbul in June of 1996, under the auspices of the United Nations, to forge a blueprint for action.

This conference, known as Habitat II, was attended by representatives from 171 nations and 579 cities. They were all fired by a common idealism to provide decent homes to their peoples.

This idealism inspired many from all sectors and many personalities worldwide to lend a helping hand. The most famous symbol is former President of the United States, Jimmy Carter, who is often seen dipping his hand in sand and gravel to build homes for those in need all over the world, including the Philippines.

The Philippines is committed to the ideals of Habitat. We are doing our own building and repairs, not only of the physical ramparts of our nation, but of its social fabric.

When I assumed the presidency last year, I said that our country must be bold in our national ambitions and seek to win the battle against poverty within the decade. I told our parliamentarians – and many of them are here today – during my first State of the Nation Address last year, that to succeed in our battle our Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan calls for four components: first, the promotion of free enterprise appropriate to the 21 st century; second, agricultural modernization founded on social equity; third, a sectoral and social bias in our economic development plan; and fourth, improving moral standards in government and in society.

Housing for the poor is an essential element of the third component – the sectoral and social bias. I also appreciate the insight of Senator Biazon about agricultural deterioration leading to urban blight. Thus, even the second component, – agricultural modernization founded on social equity should improve habitat in the urban areas. In accordance with our stress on housing, we are endeavoring to implement at last the Comprehensive and Integrated Shelter Financing Act sponsored by no less than our esteemed Asian leader of the Global Parliamentarians for Habitat, Senator Rodolfo Biazon.

My administration has adopted the Biazon law as our policy and regulatory framework for housing. To facilitate its implementation, we have simplified housing relations. We are shaping what we hope will be a sustainable housing finance system. This sustainable housing finance system will be enabled by the Special Purpose Bill as well as the Securitization Law – which Senate President Drilon and Speaker de Venecia said will both be passed before session ends this June.

We are accelerating assistance to the informal sector. We have set for ourselves the goal of empowering 150,000 urban poor families a year to own the land they occupy following the principles of Hernando de Soto; and we are building 100,000 houses a year for the working class that would require P20 B in budget every year, and 50,000 houses a year for the poorest of the poor, which would require about P2.5 B. These three goals together provide shelter security for 300,000 families a year. I’m gratified that this aggregate goal was accomplished in my administration’s first year. I hope that we will be as successful or maybe even more successful in the succeeding years of my term.

For our pro-active targeting of beneficiaries, we focus on the most vulnerable communities. We provide priority assistance to those in danger zones such as river banks, creeks, and other flood-prone areas, including those in the right-of-way of government infrastructure projects. For instance, we are going to build a railroad from Manila to Subic-Clark, from Manila to CALABARZON-New Batangas Port, around Mindanao and other parts of the Philippines. But even as the Speaker and his colleagues in Congress have been working to assist our railroad officials to acquire the financing already, now together with the local governments like the government of Bulacan – where much of the railroad to the north will go – we are already working on the relocation of the informal settlers who are living in the right-of-way areas. We also prioritize our assistance to informal settlers who are in threat of demolition arising from court orders.

The housing authority has also accredited new technologies for building houses at lower cost. Just yesterday in Bulacan, I saw a house made of bamboo built by 500 people for P18,000. I think that is going to go a long way in spreading the budget for housing among the poor as a halfway house for those that we have to relocate because of the CAMANAVA flooding, the northrail, etc.

Because we inherited unoccupied housing units from previous administrations, the National Housing Authority is selling these unoccupied housing units at discounted prices. Aside from fast-tracking the distribution of lands to urban poor families we are seeking to improve access to credit. Right now, the cost of borrowing is at its lowest point in Philippine economic history. Not because we have interest rate control but because prudent budget management, prudent monetary management, prudent macroeconomic policies have brought interest rates down as well as the exchange rate down. Usually, to stabilize the exchange rate, you have to raise the interest rate. Usually, to bring down the interest rate, you have to sacrifice the exchange rate. But we are an economy that can keep stable its exchange rate and bring down its interest rates. That, indeed, is macroeconomic stability. I believe that’s one big reason why the international credit agencies have upgraded the Philippines’ credit rating from negative to stable.

As I mentioned earlier, with simplified housing regulations and greatly reduced processing time, and to assure security of tenure, we have started proclaiming alienable and disposable areas for housing and shelter purposes. But to be sure, there are still millions of Filipinos who remain squatters in their own country. I would like that within this decade, this unfortunate situation will no longer be so.

Let me also point out that in providing the housing needs, the policy of my administration is to ensure that the basic necessities such as water, electricity and sanitation facilities are also present.

In many cases, we have been able to provide proximate livelihood opportunities – markets, schools, roads and bridges, and other infrastructure needs of the community.

Thus, I am glad that you have underscored all of these things. I’m also glad that this forum underscores the role of civil society. When bureaucrats and legislators, saddled with pressing national concerns slow down, civil society can provide the momentum to carry on.

Civil engagement remains an important conduit in the implementation of the Habitat II Agenda. This sector is a strong pillar for capacity-building, resource-generation and community rearmament. Although it is time that elected officials represent the majority of the people, civil society represents community’s conscience. Hence, its voice must be heard in policy making, decision-making, a service delivery.

We have certainly made some headway in achieving our goals, especially in empowering the poor to buy the land they occupy. But like many of your governments, we need to continually keep abreast with the latest developments in the shelter sector so that we could be more responsive to the needs of our peoples. This forum will, I am sure, provide this opportunity for our further enlightenment, and we are grateful for it.

The confluence of events has allowed our paths to cross once against to find new meaning to the commitment made two years ago – finding adequate housing and sustainable human settlements for all.

The collateral problems that impact upon this task are sometimes overwhelming and seemingly intractable. Some of these are urban unemployment, rural to city migration, environmental problems, even the plight of women in the cities, and mass transportation.

These only emphasize that shelter cannot be the exclusive task of the executive. Parliaments are indispensable in designing appropriate legislation, many times in support of government policies, but once in a brilliant while, even in designing the policies themselves. Far-reaching benefits are more readily attainable with the fusion of both executive and parliamentary efforts. There is no doubt that your presence here today signifies this partnership in bearing the burden and responsibility of the future.

The dream lives on. As we look forward to the agenda of this meeting, it is a great opportunity to recharge the deep sense of resolve that propelled our energies two years ago.

We must draw upon our common achievements to move forward. Even as the world is beset with constraints, and while conflict rages in some places, we must win the fight for shelter. This is part of the quest of human dignity. This is vital to harmony, peace, and mankind’s solidarity.

Let us again join hands firmly so our peoples can rightfully say that yes, there is a hope for a better life in the 21 st century.

Thank you and welcome to the Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). Strong republic : selected speeches of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo . [Quezon City] : Philippine Information Agency.