Thank you very much Secretary Alvarez for the introduction.

And may I also take this opportunity to introduce to you the other members of our Official delegation. We have here the Senate President Pro-Tempore Senator Manny Villar, Senator Ralph Recto. We have Congresswoman Cynthia Villar of Las Pinas, Congressman Alipio Badelles of Lanao del Norte, Congressman Plaridel Abaya of Cavite, Congressman Edmundo Reyes of Marinduque. We also have Governor Parouk Hussin of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, Governor Willy Enverga of Quezon province, Governor Josie dela cruz of Bulacan, Mayor Lito Gatlabayan of Antipolo City. At mula sa Cabinet, si Secretary Dante canlas, Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs Larry Baja, and Undersecretary of Trade Gregory Domingo.

I greet of course those taking care of you here, Ambassador Benedicto and Mrs. Benedicto. It seems you love him very much so I didn't replace him. I would also like to greet the Ambassador of Canada to the Philippines, Ambassador Collet; and former Ambassador to the Philippines, still a good friend of the Philippines, Ambassador John Treleaven; and to all of you, friends:

Good evening to all of you. We are here if we are fellow Kapampangan. And to those who are relatives on my mother's side, good evening to all of you, my dear. To my fellow provincemates, may peace be with all of you. To those from Mindanao, congressman…, Good evening to all of you. And to my husband's townsfolk, good evening to all of you.

I am happy that we had the opportunity to be together tonight in this beautiful city of Ottawa. And thank you to those who came from different places, Montreal is far away but you were able to come because you visited.

I am here in Canada at the invitation of Prime Minister Jean Chretien.

But another important reason why we are here is to talk to the 300,000 Overseas Filipinos here in Canada through you. And I would also like to thank the government of Canada for the amount they provide to Filipinos living here.

I have met Filipinos in Canada many times in the past.

But this time, I am doubly honored because for the first time I come as your president.

As your president, on behalf of all your countrymen in the Philippines, your brothers and sisters in the Philippines praise you because through your diligence in work, you uplift the dignity of the Filipino people. You show the world that a Filipino should be proud of and admired.

Throughout the world, countries, investors, parents feel the great help of Filipinos, the great help of the great Filipino worker. They put it in their minds that the Philippines is indeed the home of the great Filipino worker.

The government and the people of the Philippines recognize the contribution of overseas Filipinos to the economy and the life of the nation, such as the example you gave earlier.

Your great help invigorates the economy and drives the development of the country.

On top of the good reputation you give to our country as a home to the great Filipino worker, millions of young people are able to study or finish their education with your help through the money you send to the Philippines.

Thousands of new houses are being built and homeowners are having a new life.

Because of your help, we have been able to launch many businesses, even small businesses, throughout the country.

The successful businesses established in our country due to your remittances are a major pillar of our economy.

Many barangays, towns, cities, and provinces have flourished with the contribution of overseas Filipinos.

You know the biggest investment in the Philippines – foreign investment – is five billion dollars, the investment of Shell in the Malampaya gas fields in the Philippines. But the great Filipino worker sends six billion dollars to the Philippines every year. So we admire Shell for providing a five billion dollar investment.

What other Filipinos are providing six billion dollars investment every year? That is why you are also major economic investors in our country.

You are the new economic investors of the country.

And in my opinion, the label given to you in the country should be changed. The common term for Filipinos abroad is overseas workers, but I think your contribution, that six billion dollars a year, should be recognized, you should be called overseas Filipino investors.

You, the overseas investors who invest in the development of our country every day. You invest your “productive years” for the sake of our nation. You sacrifice, some of you are far from your loved ones — it’s good that here in Canada you can bring your families, but many really sacrifice being far from their families — to achieve their dreams for them. That is why your fellow Filipinos salute you.

And the country should simply reciprocate your help.

In my State of the Nation Address, I said that a major priority of the government is the passage of the Absentee Voting Bill so that Overseas Filipinos can be given the power to vote and choose the leaders of our government.

We have our Senators and Congressmen here. Earlier, during the press conference after our bilateral with the Prime Minister of Canada, I was asked about the status of our Overseas Filipino Voting Rights Bill which was supposedly first introduced in Congress in 1965. And our Senators and Congressmen answered and said that it is being discussed in Congress and they expect it to pass this year.

Join me in praying that it passes and becomes a law.

I also support the bill initiated by Congress and the Senate on dual citizenship.

You are a very important part of our economy as I illustrated earlier, and the Philippine economy will, for the foreseeable future, continue to be heavily dependent on overseas-worker remittances. Seven million Filipinos are working abroad, more than those working in corporations and departments in the Philippines because the number of those working in corporations and offices does not reach seven million in the Philippines.

On the basis of this and of the nation’s humanitarian responsibilities to its people wherever they are, our government will work doubly hard to strengthen overseas Filipino workers’ protection.

For instance, the department of foreign affairs is working on a “Tulong OFW” program whereby it has floated 100 million dollars-worth of “Bagong Bayani bonds” to support a new package of socioeconomic benefits for OFWs. The “Bagong Bayani Bonds” would raise funds to enable the OFWs to help them help themselves, to mobilize their savings to be invested in projects like housing programs back home.

We also have a housing program for overseas Filipinos under the housing and urban developing coordinating council. This is part of our goal to provide 100,000 housing units a year for workers, whether working in the Philippines or outside.

And I suppose by now you know that we have scrapped the requirement for overseas Filipino workers to file an income tax information sheet, and with that we have lifted the penalty for non-filing beginning tax year 2001.

We strengthen bilateral relations with countries hosting large numbers of Filipinos. This includes Canada.

You play a big role in developing the relationship between our two countries. You who work here, you who live here are the representatives of the Philippines in Canada and you are expected to further strengthen our good relationship.

In my State of the Bation Address last July 23rd, I cited the serious challenges facing the Philippines. The economy I inherited was stark and daunting. There were four million jobless. This has correspondingly led to a rise in poverty incidence to 40 percent of the population. The budget deficit threatened to balloon to 225 billion Pesos.

And the New York incident changed the global mood and world conditions became even more uncertain.

But despite the stark economy we inherited, and despite the uncertain world business conditions, in 2001, we made progress. Where richer and bigger economies failed, ours moved forward. Dante Canlas, our socioeconomic planning minister told me that we just finished accounting the figures for GDP and GNP for the year 2001. Our GDP growth rate was 3.4 percent, our GNP growth rate — which includes your remittances — was 3.7 percent — in a sea of countries that have zero growth rate, negative growth rate or even recession. Thank you for contributing to our growth rate.

And where bigger and stronger currencies collapsed, ours held firm.

Indeed, we have gone a long way to bringing our country back on the radar screens of the world. A new Cabinet, picked as much for their integrity as for their competence and qualifications, has brought professionalism in public service to new heights. Our public deficit has been placed under control.

Interest rates and inflation rates have declined. Interest rates are at their lowest in the last 15 years. Our economy continues to grow despite faltering economies all around us, as I’ve said.

Even recent unemployment rates have shown periods of decline.

But the days and months ahead will still be filled with daunting challenges, however, I do not fear as long as I have your support. And I thank you for expressing your support.

Indeed, now is once again the time to prove our mettle as a nation and as a people.

We can sustain our economic rebirth by thinking Filipino to the extent that you came from here, buying Filipino, and I know what you do very well, investing Filipino.

When I became President last January, I told the people about my vision of winning the war against poverty within the decade. Trabaho. Edukasyon. Sariling tahanan. Pagkain sa bawat mesa. This, in common sense and plain talk, is the core of my vision.

I also urged everyone listening to my State of the Nation Address last July 23rd to set aside bickering and politicking for at least one year. Instead of conflict, I asked that we work together for one year for the good of the people.

To succeed, our national agenda must revolve around four components — four elements of the struggle against poverty.

The first is an economic philosophy of free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century. Doing business to create more jobs.

The second component is a modernized agricultural sector founded on social equity. We will increase the income and harvest of poor farmers.

The third component is a social bias toward the disadvantaged to balance our economic development plan. Caring for the segments of society left behind by progress.

And the fourth component is to raise the moral standards of government and society. Morality in government and society as the foundation of true development.

We are promoting fast-growing industries where high-value jobs are most plentiful — service industries that mobilize the great Filipino worker. One of them is information and communication technology or ICT. Tomorrow I will speak before the Ottawa businessmen and the Toronto businessmen to let them know that Filipino workers are ranked no. 1 in the field of ICT, no. 1 among knowledge workers. Analysts have pointed to two developing countries as the likely world centers for ICT, software development and data management in this decade: India and the Philippines.

Aside from ICT, we also have the competitive edge in tourism.

And in agriculture, there can be a million new jobs which is what we’re trying to look for. Upang lumikha ng isang milyong trabaho sa kanayunan, taun-taon gumagastos tayo ng dalawampung bilyong piso; in fact last year we spent 21 billion pesos.

What I ask of you, my countrymen, is your continued understanding of what is happening in our country and trust that your government is fulfilling our duties to the best of our ability. I ask that we unite.

I am touched by your show of affection and support. And I ask that your unified sentiments and actions be also reflected in your continuing faith in your Philippine government. I am counting on all of you.

Again, friends, thank you very much and long live the great Filipinos living here in Canada.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech During a Meeting with the Filipino Community. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230945/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7587&Itemid=38