Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the East Asia Economic Summit

[ Delivered at the Hong Kong Convention Center, October 29, 2001 ]

LIFTING THE GLOBAL ECONOMY OUT OF LETHARGY

I have the honor to have the chance once again to address the East Asia Economic Summit held under the auspices of the World Economic Forum. This forum is the foremost global community of business, political, intellectual and civil society leaders.

We are now traversing challenging and uncertain times. The events of September 11, coming as they were in the face of a slowdown, have pushed the global economy to the brink of full-blown recession.

If the world does go over the edge, this could lead to further loss of lives over and above the result of terrorist bombs or the reaction to terrorism, aggravated by the inability of governments to provide for their people if the global economy contracts. The World Bank estimates that as much as 100,000 human lives will be lost as a result of starvation and diseases should there be a full-blown recession.

But even as September 11 brought new levels of uncertainty, it has also brought countries closer together and injected urgency to the collective effort to combat terrorism.

A coalition is being built to eradicate terrorism. A coalition can also be formed to lift the global economy out of its lethargy.

After September 11, we realize just how closely global political and economic security have become intertwined, and how we must address both political and economic security. This renewed sense of global community could be the key to early recovery.

Dealing with terrorism is our most urgent priority. Given the impact of terrorism on the global economy, our first challenge is to deal with it and make this a safe and secure world. Directly after the attacks on New York and Washington, I assured President Bush that the Philippines stands behind American efforts to eradicate terrorism. Our decision to join the American fight against terrorism was not an emotional one because it was a strategic decision. The fight against terrorism is a global fight, it touches each and every one of our nations and indeed, we in the Philippines have first-hand experience.

The principles of the United Nations under recent APEC Economic Leaders Meeting, declaration against terrorism in Shanghai stands out as our most urgent priority. And, as I said, soon after the attacks in the U.S., we in the Philippines took steps to carry out measures to join the U.S. War. We took steps regarding six specific measures in support of the U.N. Security Council Resolution No. 1368 to combat terrorism. And these are the following:

To join the international counter terrorist coalition and to work for the United Nations;

To work closely with the United States on intelligence and security matters concerning terrorism;

To make available our air space and facilities when required as transit or staging points;

To contribute logistical support in the form of food supply, medicines, and medical personnel;

To provide with the consent of Congress, combat troops if there is an international call for such troops; and

To step up our offensive against the terrorist groups in the Philippines and prevent the flow of funds to them by passing and implementing legislation against money laundering.

The APEC Leaders Meeting ordained many economic security measures, including measures designed to curve money laundering, measures to develop a collective respond to aviation and port safety and security, and measures to combat cyber crime.

In another horizon, I believe that global efforts to stamp out terrorism can best be served by promoting cohesion and cooperation at the regional level.

In this regard, the Philippines initiated the establishment of a tri-nation anti-terrorist coalition between the Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia. Through this coalition, we intend to share intelligence on terrorist activities, tighten border patrols, and when necessary partake in joint peacekeeping operations. We are looking to do more at the ASEAN Summit in Brunei.

One pillar of dealing with terrorism is socio-cultural solidarity and harmony. East Asia is a conglomerate of myriad culture and creeds. The global war against terrorism have tended to bring these differences in close focus. In Shanghai, I took the opportunity to call for meaningful steps to ensure that the continuing inter-penetration of cultures in the global milieu is rendered in impervious to the influences of political and religious extremism.

Our country has institutionalized the tools of autonomy, consensus and interface dialogue to serve this end. Our anti-poverty programs are also closely focused on the hunting grounds for recruitment, the fanaticism and irrational violence.

These unprecedented cooperation and coalition-building at a national, regional and global level to ensure security and safety could work equally well to ensure economic security which globalization has both provided and, at the same time, threatened.

The challenge we face today is the same challenge that generations earlier have faced — to bring about stability, prosperity and progress in the world. However, we do so now under vastly deferred circumstances brought about by the increasing pace of globalization and the rapid advances in information and communications technology. And the September 11 tragedies add an additional and dangerous side to globalization. But in a sense, they reinforced the message that events outside one’s border — be they economic or political — cannot now be treated as something that affects all them, not us.

The rapid export-led recovery from the 1997 financial crisis lulled us into a false sense of security that we have already mastered the challenge of adapting to globalization. Then, in just a short period of time, export markets collapsed again and exposed fundamental weaknesses in many economies. Many of the antidotes to a repeat of the 1997 financial crisis have not yet been administered. It is time that they do before it becomes too late.

It is time that the appropriate reform and strengthening of the institutions and regulatory systems that are supposed to handle international flows, particularly capital flows should be brought about. It is time to reform financial sectors.

Given the fact that global business conditions are uncertain, we have also to rely on our own respective domestic efforts to stimulate economic growth and provide social safety nets.

In the Philippines, we have also taken steps to make the Philippines as safe and desirable location for foreign investments and trade.

Many lessons have been learned by both governments and international organizations, which could prove to be valuable in dealing with the current crisis. One of them is the importance of cooperation and concerted action.

The efforts of the major economies — U.S., Japan, Europe — stimulate their domestic economies will have far-reaching consequences for the global economy. The current situation provides the right political conditions to take the proverbial bitter pills of oft-postponed reforms. In our region, hundreds of millions look to Japan to resume its traditional role as the engine for growth and stability.

Moreover, we in ASEAN also have a collective responsibility to contribute to global economic security. In this light, we have to make AFTA a reality not in some distant future but in the next few years.

We have a rare opportunity to build stronger, yet more equitable multilateral trading system as Doha.

Launching a new round of negotiations in the WTO has gained importance as a way to restore business confidence and momentum in the face of the current lethargic situation. This may also be a defining moment on how we face the issue of globalization.

We have seen more and more mass actions against globalization and free trade. However, globalization is not driven by people meeting in Seattle, in Geneva, or even in Shanghai, but by developments and technology and markets. But it is in these meetings that we can address the concerns of those affected by globalization and find ways to make sure that the policies we put in place will lead to sustainable development and the alleviation of poverty.

Some quarters have dubbed the new round as a development round. And I hope that this does not turn out to be a marketing gimmick to get developing countries to sign on. I think we should have a new round but we must make sure that we have a balanced agenda that benefits all participants.

As the financial crisis has demonstrated, we can maximize the benefits for globalization and minimize its adverse effects, if we have greater coherence in how we respond to its many dimensions – trade, investments, capital and labor.

It is therefore imperative that there is greater coordination and convergence of policies among international development institutions such as the WTO, World Bank, IMF and regional development banks. Such that trade is a mainstream in the development agenda and therefore capacity-building can be focused and targeted.

The event of September 11 were both shocking and horrifying for observers around the world. These events put us all on an uncharted course, both in terms of political and economic security and personal safety, and increased our sense of vulnerability and uncertainty.

Coming as we were, in the face of a slowdown, the event of September 11 could push the global economy over the edge towards a full-blown recession. This could lead to further loss of lives, not only as a result of conflict .itself but also as a result of the inability of government to provide for their people as the global economy contracts.

The World Bank estimates that as much as 100,000 human lives will be lost as a result of starvation and disease should there be a full-blown recession. But September 11 has also brought countries closer together and injected urgency to the collective efforts. This meeting is no exception.

Just as we build an East Asia Coalition to eradicate terrorism, so too can we close rank to lift the global economy. We must address both political and economic security. This renewed sense of global community could be the key to early recovery.

It is one more manifestation of globalization and presents us with an added challenge. But these events also presented us with an opportunity to work together and come out stronger on a variety of fronts.

The coalition that has been built and the relationships that have been fortified in our collective response to terrorism can and must extend the global, regional and bilateral economic relations.

We face a rocky road ahead. That is certain. But the global economy can, and will, pull through if we approach our economic uncertainties with the same cooperative and integrated approach that we have applied to anti-terrorism.

The Philippines stands ready to work with its friends and neighbors to meet this challenge.

Thank you.

Source: University of the Philippines Diliman Library