Today, the Philippines is on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. We are enjoying many things now – a surge of investment, as announced earlier by Banyan Tree, which started Phuket tourism, and will build a five-star resort in Palawan; a strong peso, a vibrant stock market, and six million jobs in six years. We would not have achieved these without the support of vigilant champions of democracy like you.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank you all for everything you do for our country.

You are always there in times of hardship and ease.

We thank the people and the media for your careful reporting on the explosion in Batasan to avoid speculation. And we commend the PNP for their swift action to provide greater security to our legislators as they continue to serve the nation despite the tragedy that occurred.

In our fight against violence and crime, the unity and cooperation of the government and the people are very important.

I met the National Security Council Executive Committee last night and today to assess the security situation and institute immediate measures to address any threats. Please convey our message to our people and our friends here and abroad that the Philippines and your government shall not rest until we get to the bottom of this tragedy and hunt down and punish the perpetrators.

There are no words to express our disgust at this violence. But we will not be intimidated by those who planned it.

The rule of law must prevail. No person is above the law. Justice must be served and the law upheld.

I have instructed Secretary Andaya to boost intelligence spending for operations.

We assure Congressmen and Senators that measures are being taken to enable them to continue their sessions in peace and security.

We are permanently assigning bomb-sniffing dogs in Batasan and the Senate.

I have instructed the Presidential Legislative Liaison Office to identify and secure possible assassin targets in Congress. I propose that KBP do the same for the media.

We are determined to solve the killings of journalists. Of the 27 cases since 2001 that were related to media personalities, two perpetrators have been convicted and 21 are ongoing trial.

We are offering a P5 million reward for information to catch perpetrators of political and media killings, and/or foil future attacks, including tip-offs on illegal explosives.

We are creating by Executive Order a Task Force Against Political Violence headed by the Department of National Defense with the Department of Justice, Department of Interior and Local Government, Office of the Adviser on the Peace Process, Armed Forces of the Philippines, Philippine National Police, National Bureau of Investigation, Department of Social Welfare and Development and the Public Information Agency and working with the Judiciary, Council on Values Formation, Union of Local Authorities of the Philippines and non-government organizations. Its mandate shall be to harness and mobilize government agencies, political groups, the religious, civil society and sectoral organizations and the public for the prevention, investigation, prosecution, and punishment of political violence, the care and protection of people and communities victimized and threatened by violence, and the promotion of a culture opposed to violence and for the advancement of reconciliation and peace.

Your theme, “New Beginnings, New Challenges, New KBP,” shows well our efforts for the well-being of our people and country.

It is time for the nation to move on and focus on the issues that are important to our future: creating more jobs, lowering prices, providing affordable housing, and providing access to education for all our children.

The preoccupation with politics does not promote the stability, policy continuity, security and peace and order that we need to continue to move our country forward.

The people want results, not rhetoric; action, not political posturing. Thank you for reminding our leaders to get on with the people’s work.

I ask that you continue to have faith. There is still much to be done. We must not stray.

Let us sow the seeds of goodness.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech During the Top Level Management Conference of the Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster sa Pilipinas. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135938/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2279&Itemid=38