Thank you very much, Mr. President.

And to all of you, thank you very much for your expression of support. Thank you for being the very first organization to express your support for me.

Thank you for being here and for continuing to govern with me inspite of the torrent of black propaganda against me. Thank you for your continuing faith but I won the elections fair and square and nobody ever made any payoffs to anybody in front of me. I can tell you that.

We have much to do, if you remember in my inaugural address, I talked about education for all. And it is very important that we prepare our young people for gainful employment. And that’s the important work of our tertiary education, that we produce young people who will be able to find a job. And so it’s very important that we are able to do our curriculum in accordance with what will give jobs to our young people.

You know very often, I ask a bright young man or woman graduating from high school, “what do you want to do?” What do you gonna… You know, well, I wanna find a job, etcetera, etcetera, of course. But they’re gonna enter college, so what do you gonna work… What are you going to enroll with? I will enroll in customs administration.

Well, first of all, we don’t have enough plantilla item in any of the government agencies to be able to absorb all these people taking up all those courses. So I would like to advise you, you know, not to open courses like that or to close them down already. If they are not… If they’re gonna end up having no jobs. Nowadays, it’s the age of information technology and therefore… And it’s the age of technology, so it’s important that they have skills. Entrepreneurship is fine for small businesses but if your student does not have a family business ongoing, maybe management is not the best course either. Maybe we should reduce our management courses.

And in fact, I said in my last State of the Nation Address, that the great Filipino dreams a college education and you provide that. But on the other hand, it’s not so… You know, it’s as much the use of our brain as the use of our hands that provide jobs and therefore state universities and colleges must have an institutional mechanism to provide for the good use of our hands.

And that’s the reason why — but it’s already being carried out, and I thank you for that — that’s the reason why I have instructed that we do a ladderized education system where students who come from voctech schools, if they’ve taken up so many hours of vocational technical schools, they can be credited for units leading to a bachelor’s or associate degree. That way they combine a better potential to get a job and the intellectual and cultural dream to have a college education for our young people. At least one college graduate in every family. That would be our dream.

The dream of a college education has become such an important dream that a whole culture in industry develop around it, the pre-need industry, which was invented in the Philippines and which worked well for many many years. However, unlike other financial institutions like insurance companies, banks and so on, there is really no pre-need code that regulates how it uses its fund and so on. And therefore without a good regulatory framework, what happen is that many of the investments of these funds turned sour. And now we not only have pre-need plan holders, we have pre-need victims.

Rather than giving them loans to pay their tuition, which is very difficult for the government actually, difficult even for the financial institutions because it’s not part of their mandate, it’s not part of what’s allowed by law.

I have said because GSIS was going to give a one billion… It had a one billion fund, and if the law could only allow them they would have lent money to the pre-need victims or advanced the premium to be charged later to the pre-need companies. But the law doesn’t allow them. So I said, why don’t we do it this way. Why doesn’t GSIS give that dividend to the national government and then the national government allocates it to the state universities and colleges not as tuition fee but as additional assistance. So, we spread out the one billion among you. I guess proportionately as to how many of these pre-need victims you are absorbing, so that they can continue their college education.

Chairman Puno has been really very proactive about how to save the pre-need victims. So I would ask Chairman Puno to be the one to coordinate with the DBM. It cannot go straight from GSIS because there is I think no legal mandate for GSIS to give it to the CHED But there is a legal mandate for GSIS to give dividends to the national government. So, it would be Chairman Puno who will make sure GSIS gives the dividend to the national government. And it will be Chairman Puno who will work with the DBM on allocating among the different state universities and colleges, depends on the record of how many pre-need victims that you absorbed.

The reason for this is not to pay their tuition, because the pre-need companies will owe you the tuition. But rather because in the meantime, you’re absorbing them, you have to spend more. Maybe you have to build more classroom. Maybe you have to hire more instructors. So, for this reason that you have more work to do and more expenses, that is the basis of the assistance to you.

And speaking of your work and your expenditures, a lot of you have land grants. I would encourage you to use your land grants. And even those who don’t have much land, I would encourage you to go into productive enterprise and use your productive enterprise to finance your educational activities.

I remember when I received an honorary degree in Japan one time, after the honorary degree I got, I was given a reception in the hotel that was built on land owned by the university. So therefore, they earn a lot of money from the hotel and they’re able to be competitive in their rates and in their operations.

So, please be free to use your assets for productive activities so that you can use the income from your assets to add to the financing of your operational expenses. I want to empower the state universities and colleges in these various ways.

So once again, to all of you, congratulations!

Let’s continue to work on item number two of our ten-point program — education for all.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Call and Oath taking of the Officers of the Philippine Association of State Universities and Colleges. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412063050/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5113&Itemid=38