Thank you. Thank you.

Thank you, Secretary Santos for your introduction.

PCCI President Donald Dee; DOE Secretary Rafael Lotilla; Chairman Alvarez, Ad Board; members of the business community; members of the various stakeholders in energy conservation; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.

Let me begin before I talk about enercon by taking this opportunity to thank you Donald, PCCI. Thank you ad board for your support to me during this difficult times of yet another attempted power grab. Thank you for your support.

I thank you for your consistency because many of you in this room in fact supported me in the last elections. And most of you here know that I came to this office to do the right thing like improve our economic ratings. And you know it was not to improse my public opinion ratings. I’ve done things for this nation since last summer, mainly to focus on our economic fundamentals to an extent not done for a long time before this.

I had to do this drastic measures in the first year of my new term because our nation is paying for past sins. I could have neglected or perpetuated the sins of the past. The sins of greater debt that would fall on the next generation. But I didn’t, because it’s wrong to leave the next generation deeper in debt and it is also economically infeasible. These decisions have been compounded by the soaring price of oil which deeply impact on our poor.

Crude oil prices are about to reach the 60 dollars per barrel level. Just last year they were 30 dollars. In just a year crude oil prices have doubled. Remember ’74. Remember ’79. Remember ’91 when we all got together to face an energy crisis. Well, this crisis is worse than any of those three crises. The price is higher, much much higher than ever before, and we should get together more than ever before.

We’re in the midst of a threat larger than what the world expected. And the world has something to do with it. The world must also have something to do with looking for its solutions. The fact that oil prices are now rising to historic levels further underscores the importance of the world community working to reduce oil price volatility while increasing supplies. Only then will the negative impact on global economies be mitigated.

You know I have always been affirmed in my faith in the perfect timing of the lord. Look at Tarongoy’s release yesterday. It was the third anniversary of his wedding.

And when the oil price was announced a few days ago, two days after that, the President of Gambia came to visit the country. And one might ask why are we entertaining the President of Gambia. Well, he came to thank us because we had provided their Philippine Peanut Pink which is their main export. We have provided education for 70 percent of their experts. They feel we are responsible in a very big way for the viability of their independence. And now they’ve come back to reciprocate because they have just tracked oil and they have five blocs that they are bidding out for concessions. But they’re giving the Philippine oil exploration company one bloc without requiring us to go to the criteria of the other proponents. Of course, these are ways by which we can be more independent in the medium and long-term.

But right now — I remember what President Bush said even before this very big increase in the price of oil. He said, “I wish I had a magic wand to bring down the high price of oil. If I could, I would.” And that’s the most powerful man in the world. What about me all the more or all the less. I have no control over global oil prices, but with your support, with our partnership, we can only help blunt the impact here at home. But of course the people don’t appreciate that. I’m in charge, and as such, I have to answer their frustrations.

We acknowledge the growing hardship of our people especially during this oil shock, and the government in partnership with you continuously seeks all means to lessen the impact of socioeconomic pressures by growing the economy to generate more investments and job opportunities, instituting reforms to maintain fiscal stability, and implementing pro-poor programs. One of the blessings of our good revenue collection is that we have a deficit that is way below what we expected.

And I talked to Emi Boncodin today and I said, “Emi, because we have a deficit way below what we expected, I think we can afford to be a little bit looser with our pocket on something that will directly benefit the poor, so that the sooner they can feel the benefits of our Phase Two.” And she said, “yes.” And her recommendation, which I approved is that, she will release 300 million pesos immediately so we can roll out completely our supplemental school feeding program in the areas where there is great malnutrition in Metro Manila and all over our country.

We’ve remained focused in achieving our economic goals and no amount of political squabbles and attempts to discredit the government will stand in our way to improve the living conditions of ordinary people, especially in the face of this unprecedented oil price increase.

It’s no coincidence that my would-be destroyers came after me within days of the completion of the first phase of my economic reform plan which so… You so most valuably supported, and within hours of upgrades to our credit rating outlook. It’s a sadly an age-old game in the Philippines where keeping the nation divided for purposes of grabbing power has worked.

But what’s important to me is the economy. What’s important to me is to do the right thing so that our nation, our future as a nation will be brighter. And I am optimistic that the people will in due time — the lord’s timing is always perfect — come to realize that my decisions and your support are the best way forward for our nation.

On this day, I ask the Filipino people together with you to heed the foreboding signs in the horizon. I ask our politicians to pause from the controversies of the day to face the grim realities ahead. If we don’t act as a nation now, we face serious consequences. Let’s take energy conservation seriously and without complacency.

I am grateful for this crucial partnership between the private sector and the government. I laud the PCCI, Ad Board, DDB Philippines and the other business organizations for driving the ENERCON train forward. We need the active participation of the entire industrial, commercial and transport as well as residential consumers in this nationwide effort to reduce our dependence on imported oil.

I want to thank the representatives of the transport industry who are here, particularly the Philippine Jeepney Operators and Drivers Alliance Foundation, and the Confederation of Truckers Association of the Philippines. They’re committed to convince the rest of the industry to adopt best practices.

Gusto ko lang sabihin, yung unang apat na taon ng aking administrasyon, hindi ba, Orly? Kahit minsan hindi niyo tinaas ang presyo ng inyong pasahe? For four years, they held on to the rates even if the price of oil was going up. But now, with this price so unprecedented, hindi naman dapat ang jeepney drivers at bus drivers lang ang kakarga ng kabigatan. And this is the reason why as in many parts of the world the LTFRB finally said, it’s time for our transport groups to share that burden with the others. At the same time, because transport is the most important cost item of a worker, we’ve also had to ask for wage adjustments from the regional wage boards. And the regional wage board being tripartite have try to come up with wage adjustments that will not be anathema to continued job creation. It is a very difficult balancing act, all the more we all need to work together.

On the part of the government, the DOTC and the MMDA, shall embark on an improved traffic management program that will reduce, if not eliminate traffic congestion, and I call for public cooperation. Can Orly, and other members of transport groups, speak?

And I want to welcome the pledge of the Department of Education, Meralco, the Philippine Lighting Industries Association, the U.P. Association of Valuers of Energy Resources, and the Philippine Product Safety and Quality Foundation, to reduce electric consumption by at least 10 percent in nine weeks, and the move to get grades 5 and 6 pupils to monitor this program.

I also appeal to everyone to use compact fluorescent lamps or CFLs instead of incandescent bulbs because CFLs use less electricity for the same amount of light you get. Personally, as a housewife, I always weigh the options, because fluorescent lamps can cause fires if the ballast is not good. That's why, when the price wasn't too high, I preferred incandescent bulbs because they were reliable. But the solution to that is to ensure that the CFLs you use are certified by the relevant organization.

Let’s make energy conservation and efficiency not only a standard of responsible conduct across all ages and sectors, that would have been in normal times. Those who conserve energy become more efficient, more competitive. But this time it’s not just a question of efficiency, competitiveness and being above everybody else, it must be now a way of life for all Filipinos.

We’ve already gained ground but we must drive the impetus from our gains. Some of our gains — last year, we saved 1.2 billion pesos from best energy efficiencies in households, governments and industry.

Twenty eight government agencies are using coco-diesel for fuel. Thank you Ito Carlos for being an innovator in coco diesel. And when fully implemented across the transport sector together with CNG which we hope to launch Johnny, Popo in August, and Ethanol which we hope to have rolling out in a year and a half, ‘di ba a year and a half? Thank you for our proponents and investors, we can have a potential savings of a 177 million pesos a year.

We saved 144 million from the implementation of a 4-day work week. And the Napocor is expected to reduce fuel utilization to the extent of 5.9 billion as a result of systemic improvements in power generation and delivery. Right, Popo?

We will all end up losers if we ignore the call to focus on energy efficiency and conservation. If we neglect the call to address the needs of the economy and we neglect the call to pursue our much needed reforms. This issue of an oil price crisis more severe than 1974, 1979 and 1991 is certainly an issue far more important than politics, and its impact will hurt the entire nation.

At this time, help me not only call for energy conservation, help me in the call to put an end to divisiveness and political warfare.

Those who plot against the government in this time of clear danger from external factors are no better than economic saboteurs. They have nothing good to contribute to our country but to bring about misery for one and all.

Heed my call. Heed the call of all the private sector leaders who are here today. Let’s address this monster of an issue together, as one nation with one mind and singleness of purpose. And lets pray to God the almighty to lead us toward the right directions that we may pursue the reforms that we have laid out and address a challenge that’s now laid before the whole world.

The excellence of the Filipino must be combined with the will of one nation, not two nations, not a devoted nation to beat this challenge.

And I thank you private sector for your leadership in energy conservation, reform and moving forward as one nation.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during “Galing Pinoy” Energy Efficiency and Conservation Summit. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412080914/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5071&Itemid=38