Thank you very much Dr. Garcia.

And first, I would like to greet and congratulate once again former President Fidel V. Ramos, who is here not only because he’s former President of the Philippines but because he belongs to the family of awardees of UNESCO. We remember him and we congratulate him once again for receiving the 1997 UNESCO Peace Award. Congratulations again, Mr. President.

Director General Matsuura; Madame de Cano; Mr. Nyarota, our Awardee for this year; Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps; Mrs. Soliven and Mrs. Elizalde; the journalists and delegates of UNESCO World Press Freedom Day International Conference on Terrorism and Media; the Commissioners and Officers of the UNESCO National Commission of the Philippines; distinguished guests; Ladies and Gentlemen:

Thank you for this opportunity to be with your distinguished group.

I welcome the fact that we are here together celebrating World Press Freedom Day in the Philippines. The Philippines is honored to have been chosen by the UNESCO as the host of this year’s celebration. And as both Mr. Matsuura and Mr. Nyarota said, our country has earned the reputation of being one of the ‘not-so-many’ havens of press freedom in the world today. And with all humility, I nevertheless claim in behalf of our country that this is a well-deserved reputation for press freedom in the Philippines.

Today we celebrate good journalism, which means we celebrate the responsible exercise of press freedom. We celebrate principled disagreement, enlightened debate, productive controversy. We celebrate the light that shines through events and mirrors them in the firmament of truth.

In the Philippines today there is avowedly a growing interest in the media about playing up the good news. And this seems to go against the report that the tradition of reporting the seedy part of the day. In the Philippines, we are known not only as a free press but having a licentious press. But in the Philippines, speaking for the government, we would rather have a licentious press than a bridled press. That is our press policy. Nonetheless, i am glad to know that there are reformists within the press, and I hope that this celebration of world press freedom day will inspire the reformists to demonstrate that press freedom can also mean the freedom to report good news.

And as a public servant and therefore the subject of press reports, I really appreciate the good news. Good news about personal heroism — such as the heroes that we in fact honor today — values, human worth and community triumphs. Sometimes we tend to gloss over these things, even if they are the real stuff of nationhood.

I see no reason why press freedom, for instance, should not mean that a good provincial story makes page one, or a good metro report lands on premium space. I believe that press freedom means that the press is free enough to give credit to a small-town mayor who helped the military and the police recover a terrorist hostage or a hometown entrepreneur who develops a 15,000-peso core shelter for calamity victims. Press freedom should mean also giving credit to the people because the people deserve a break.

But by all means, press freedom should mean letting the media take down the spotty woodwork. God knows there are many under performing public servants and there are many lousy programs. But press freedom should mean letting the battle focus on issues, on policy, on principles. Our societies need relief from personal attacks so that the issues will surface in clear light.

Press freedom means getting to the heart of a controversial policy. Press freedom means doing it with fervor and a genuine penchant for chronology and detail. Indeed, done this way as our awardees have demonstrated, press freedom is one of the grindstones of policy.

In the world press, Mindanao has become a media focus of the global war against terrorism, especially now with the participation of American forces in training exercises. I believe this attention is as it should be because we must defeat terrorism not only with force but with enlightenment.

But there is a deeper reason why the press must be deeply involved in the fight against terror. It is accepted that terrorism is aimed at an audience beyond its immediate victims. Terrorism operates in the broad arena of public awareness and discourse molding a psychological landscape of its own. Terrorism breeds fear, doubt in the efficacy of institutions, suspicion, hatred of authority, and most of all, irrational bases of conflict.

We took this into account early in the day in the Philippine battle against terrorism. In September last year, I laid down a 14-point counter-terrorism program, and this is what I said about the press:

I said then, “The mass media assumes a paramount role in the overall strategy to defeat terrorism. I seek the media’s support in the implementation of our policies and programs, in enlightening the public of the rationale behind our actions, in promoting consensus and constructive criticism, in depriving terrorists of the benefits of glorified coverage and publicity, and most of all, in maintaining calm, sobriety, prudence and solidarity in our society. We must bring the media into the loop of collective action and information.”

Let me cite a few areas where common action between the government and the press is indicated:

First, informing the public of the full dimensions of the terrorist threat, especially the relationship between physical and psychological action, and the transnational nature of terrorism. The public must appreciate the common interest involved in such alliances as Balikatan, and our Trilateral Agreement with Indonesia and Malaysia to check the movement of terrorists along our common sea borders.

Second, mustering the cooperation of the public with the executive, legislative and judicial authorities in meeting terrorist threats through operational programs, criminal justice programs and legislative measures. For instance, now, we have a pending Anti-Terrorism Bill in Congress I consider urgent.

Third, strengthening local institutions and civil society to bolster the vigilance of ordinary citizens in the streets and in the countryside, which makes the big difference in the war against terror.

Fourth, enlightening the public of the constitutional issues involved because the war against terrorism requires strong measures such as the power of the commander-in-chief to call upon the armed forces to quell violence. The nature and breadth of these measures must be clear in the public mind, so that we can allay the perception that constitutional guarantees such as the bill of rights are being eroded or set aside in favor of martial imperatives.

Fifth, supporting broader interfaith dialogues to promote Christian and Muslim solidarity. Terrorists wish to instigate a religious war. We must instead take every opportunity to forge religious understanding, ecumenism and solidarity.

Sixth, improving support for and confidence in the law enforcement agencies. We need strict vigilance against movements of suspected persons, firearms, explosives, raw materials, toxic materials, biological materials. We have already put a money laundering law in place to check questionable and dirty money transfers.

Seventh, coordinating public preparations and actions in the event of a catastrophic terrorist attack, however remote this may be.

Eighth, enhancing public vigilance in securing critical infrastructure including power plants, power transmission and distribution facilities, oil and gas depots, key public works structures, vital communications installations, public buildings as well as private buildings, and facilities in the nerve centers of commerce and industry.

Ninth, pushing forward the anti-poverty campaign, with focus upon the perceived roots of fanaticism and irrational violence.

I consistently mention poverty side by side with terrorism because there is a need to put terrorism in a wider perspective. Poverty is a form of lingering terrorism — one that slowly kills on a daily basis; one that condemns its victims to a lifetime of pain and misery.

This is not to say that poverty is the cause of terrorism. Osama bin laden is not a poor man. It is evil not poverty that causes terrorism. But poverty and the sense of powerlessness it brings provide the fertile ground where terrorism can more easily spread its evil ideology. So, if we must defeat terrorism, we must defeat poverty with equal resolve and fervor.

The Philippines did not need to join the war on terrorism; it was in that war already, in the southwestern part of our islands. The Philippines could not have done otherwise than renew its commitment to fight terrorism in a wider field in the wake of September 11.

This is a fight between tolerance and bigotry, between reason and fanaticism, between law and anarchy, between justice and murder pretending to be just.

The fact that the Abu Sayyaf bandits, who once freely roamed the entire Southwestern Philippines, have ended up with their last stand in Basilan — the province with the lowest human development index in our country — reminds us of how closely national security and economic prosperity are intertwined.

In this context, I welcome the call made by President George Bush for a new compact for development defined by greater accountability for rich and poor nations alike. This call echoes an initiative I proposed to form a global coalition against poverty, just as we have formed a coalition against terrorism.

The developed nations must recognize their duty to open markets, transfer resources and reform international institutions. These will all help to win the war against poverty.

I hope that we could soon remove the scourge of terrorism. But, more than that, I hope that we could soon have tangible results in our war against poverty, and that media would find our continuing struggle worth covering.

Thank you for inviting me to celebrate press freedom day with you. I would like to welcome all the journalists who took part in the international conference on terrorism and media. I understand that you had a successful conference and that the agreements are very good. You have agreed that journalists have the right to report on terrorism and that journalists have the right to be protected against terrorism. I hope indeed, that those who participated — whether they are in media, in the government, in civil society — will work together and also work in their own fields to carry out and ensure that these resolutions can be implemented.

I would also like to congratulate the recipient of this year’s UNESCO/ Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom — Mr. Geoffrey Nyarota, Editor-in-Chief of Zimbabwe’s Daily News. He told us of his story and as he was telling us about how in his journalism, he has been the subject of so much terrorism upon him, his institution and his colleagues. I suppose our journalists here must thank their lucky stars that we are a country with a very free press.

And I would also like to pay homage to the man after whom the award is named — Guillermo Cano, a martyr of terrorism perpetrated by the syndicates who try to spread the evil of drugs all over the world. That is political terrorism and there is also criminal terrorism. It doesn’t matter who causes the terrorism, it is the act that constitutes the terrorism. And here we have, we’ll remember him, when the awards are given, we must always remember him and thank him for giving up his life for the cause of journalism.

We also remember Daniel Pearl because we all saw on TV his martyrdom, not that we saw how he was martyred but we all know how he disappeared and we all know how he surfaced again because everything was covered by the free press. And we pay homage to him as we pay homage to Guillermo Cano.

On this note, I would like to thank all the journalists who are here today and all the diplomats; to thank all the representatives of the different countries who believe in press freedom, who believe in a war against terrorism. I thank you for a fervent and lasting partnership against terrorism and poverty and in favor of world press freedom.

Congratulations and thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the UNESCO World Press Freedom Day Celebration and Awarding Ceremonies. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225830/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8314&Itemid=38