Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the Gridirion Night with the Press

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, October 11, 2004]

GOVERNMENT AND THE PRESS: PARTNERS IN REFORMS

On my way here, I just could not believe what I heard about our newsmen being an endangered specie. For as long as they can keep their sense of humor, I firmly believe that they will not only survive, but will outlive even the ancient crocodile.

If they could keep their noses close to the grindstone and be able to enjoy and laugh at themselves, newsmen will go on, outlasting many of the institutions they are reporting on. I was told by a former newsman, that you have to be a little out of the ordinary, if not a little crazy, to earn a living by ferreting out the truth and peddling them to the public. It is not a job for the fainthearted.

I therefore tip my hat for that genius that invented the Gridiron. Over the years it has become a tradition, one that makes newsmen feel like newsmen by their capacity to make fun and laugh at themselves. By making light of even our most difficult problems, and making us laugh at our antics, sparing not even the President of the Republic, we somehow make it easy to accept that we may not be the closest of friends, but we are not enemies, and that we can approach our individual and collective responsibilities in a more joyous and generous spirit.

I came here in that spirit, eager to share with you the fun and merriment of this Gridiron, without of course forgetting that while laughter is the best medicine and should make us feel better in dealing with our problems, laughter by itself will not make our problems go away. Of course, when I come home from this dinner after hearing the best jokes of the night, I would not want to be like the man, who when asked what he felt after painfully stubbing a foot, said,” I felt too old to cry, but it hurt so much for me to laugh.” I also came here to congratulate you for doing your work, which Joseph Pulitzer aptly described as “comforting the afflicted and afflicting the comfortable.”

The first 100 days of my administration have come and gone, but I have to remind you before this night is over that we have yet to have our honeymoon. I would not accuse you of not doing your work, but our first 100 days together was short of being a honeymoon. Perhaps we were too riveted on our problems not to pay much attention to the fact that cure is on the way.

By practice, this so-called honeymoon between the press and the new administration comes from a feeling that a new president has to be given the benefit of the doubt, a small window to set the tone and direction for his or her government, and to recognize that it is inevitable that being new, he or she can commit mistakes, that the new President has yet to find his or her sea legs. Thus the press is inclined to be more generous in its comments, to be more constructive and helpful in a way, to make this period more like a wait-and-see period until clarity is achieved in public policy.

Perhaps the reason lies in the fact that this is not an entirely new administration, but a continuation of my first three years in government. As we have said, we have made a down payment in the past three years to correct what was wrong in our country, and the next six years will see us paying the balance until our goals are achieved. Perhaps, the press felt there was no need for me to enjoy the bliss of another honeymoon, because I was not a newcomer but an old pro.

The truth is, we have had a new beginning. In this fast-changing world, we have had to deal with our problems with a plethora of new ideas, initiatives and new directions. When you come to think of it the only thing that remains constant is change. And to bring this about, and to make sure that change will be our friend rather than an enemy, we have to summon what is basically good and positive in our people to keep our country on the move. Perhaps, our honeymoon will come later.

All of us, I believe, are for change in general. But many of us are against change in particular, especially if it involves change in ourselves, if it means a dose of our own medicine.

It has been little noticed and largely unexplained, but in the past 100 days, we have reaffirmed an old ethos of more opportunity for all and more responsibility from all. We have called on our countrymen, especially those who are better off, to help us strengthen our sense of community and mutual obligation, by getting to be more willing to give than to receive, in thinking not only of ourselves but of others, too. Again, we tried to impress upon every citizen that any personal pursuit cannot be separate of the needs of others.

Without much fanfare, we are pushing change in the area where it is most needed in these critical times – within ourselves. Perhaps we have to reimagine ourselves as capable of dealing with our problems, that we are to compete in this harsh and competitive world, that we are in this together as one nation and one people. Only then, can our best-laid plans to eliminate poverty be fulfilled. If we can only assume our responsibilities as citizens, we need not make “sacrifices” for our country; it would be sufficient for each to contribute commensurate to our ability and means.

A change in values takes time and requires patience. Its clarity and meaning comes only after months and years. However, when I announced that we are facing a fiscal crisis, I knew that we do not have the luxury of time. We need brave hearts and the resolution to change now if we are to cope with the problems at hand.

In making our people more hopeful of their future, more confident of their ability to survive and prevail, and to remain confident of their capacity to make themselves a part of a larger community, we have to have a sympathetic press that can and will understand not only the difficulties that stand in the way of their success, but will have them believe in themselves. This the press can do by giving scope to their accomplishments, to their seemingly small and insignificant victories in the daily struggle for survival.

I know that in a nation like ours that is riddled with pockets of deprivation, it is not easy to give space for those small victories that taken together constitute nation building. I must repeat that I am not here to blame the press for the cynicism that is rampant in our society. But it is in the power of the press to dispel so much of the indifference and skepticisms that have often held back even the most dynamic and vigorous of societies.

What I ask the press is a modicum of fairness, a nudge in the angle of the news, an ounce of objectivity in the run of opinion to reflect the big picture – that of a nation coping with a crisis and winning the battle against poverty, of a people valiantly fighting for change and beating the odds.

This request assumes critical proportion when we consider that certain quarters are bent on using media not as an instrument of truth, but as a tool to twist the truth like a pretzel. These are the people who would not rest in turning the people against their government, at every opportunity, with slogans of hate and conspiracies to deceive or to inculcate fear.

There is no substitute for leveling with the people especially on questions that directly affect their lives. I told the truth about our fiscal situation, saying the people deserve to know how High the bar that is set before them. As President, I feel it was my duty to tell the people what they ought to know.

I also invite the media to remain vigilant against those with self-serving interests who would mislead our people with lies dressed as legitimate news.

Needless to say, I am foursquare behind a free and independent press. I will be the first to be disappointed by a cloying press and a press with no backbone. But the government and the press can also be partners in pushing those reforms needed to change society.

In the task of making people feel proud of their accomplishments, in highlighting their positive nature, in helping them prepare for the future with hope and confidence, and helping voice their desire for good government, there is no quarrel between the government and the press have no quarrel. They can very well share the same objectives. Otherwise, we either have a bad government or a bad press.

Thank you.

Source : Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2004 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].