Thank you very much, GM Cataquiz.

Let me greet the officials of the governments surrounding Laguna Lake, the governor of Laguna, Ningning Lazaro; the congressman of Laguna, Boy San Luis; our mayor here in the town where we are holding this celebration, Mayor Lajara; Vice Governor Fernandez; the barangay captain where we are now, Captain Giliaco.

Those city and town mayors around the lake, Mayor of Muntinlupa, Mayor Fresnedi; Mayor of Taguig, Mayor Tinga; Mayor of Binangonan, Mayor Ynares; mayor of San Pedro, Mayor Vierneza; mayor of Taytay, Mayor Zapanta; mayor of Baras, Mayor Garciano; mayor of Cardona — isn't he here? — mayor San Juan, also with the same name; mayor of Sta. Rosa, Mayor Arcillas, including all the mayors of the entire Laguna because he is the president of the Mayors’ League. And I don't know if all these checks are here because I don't see the others who are here. So, I'll just greet the different mayors… Oh, mayor of San Pablo, Mayor Boy Aquino; mayor of Calauan, Mayor Berris.

Those who I didn't see earlier, please forgive me, but I greet you even if I didn't see your names because everything is checked here, but I know some aren't here. Okay, let's wait a moment because… Mayor Aguillo, there he is; Mayor Ramos; I don't see Mayor Perez of Los Baños, okay; Mayor Rebong; Mayor Quiat; Mayor Badulis; Mayor Afurong; Mayor Sombilla; Mayor Acero; Mayor Diwajon. That's it, because we have two Mayor Perez. I don't see the one from Los Baños — there, okay, alright. Mayor Magana; Mayor Rodillas. Okay, thank you, thank you. If there are any I haven't mentioned on the list, please forgive me, but I thank you for being here. Whether you are part of the lake or not, thank you for being here.

And all the fishermen, farmers, children who have been waiting since earlier. I said, “Ningning, we really agreed on twelve thirty.” but teachers, thank you for coming early.

I wholeheartedly greet LLDA on your anniversary.

I also greet the partner agencies that help LLDA fulfill their duties. I also greet the business and industry sector under the jurisdiction of LLDA, as well as the fisheries sector represented by the Laguna de bay region’s fisheries and aquatic resource management council or FARMC. Where are you? Where is FARMC? Okay. We all know how important Laguna de bay is to our community. In our region, Laguna de bay is the second largest inland freshwater body in all of Asia. Only Lake Toba in Indonesia is larger than it in Asia. Indonesia is obviously much larger than the Philippines. The Philippines is the twelfth biggest country in the world. Indonesia is number four. The Philippines has 7,000 islands, Indonesia has 18,000 islands. So Indonesia is really much larger. But next to it is this, the largest freshwater body of water.

The center of our celebration today is promoting the welfare of the fishermen in the lake and introducing tilapia as food for the masses. Because galunggong (round scad) is caught in the sea. Some galunggong are even imported, but we can raise tilapia in the lake. We can raise it in our fishponds. And it's cheaper because we can control the supply. We can increase the supply. We can culture it. So it's right to make tilapia a daily food. I don't know, for me, tilapia is tastier than galunggong. It's really my favorite, ask the DSWD when I was there. So until now, when I visit them, they feed me tilapia.

And the sale of tilapia breeding is high for our fishermen compared to other countries. So let's expand tilapia so that our food remains affordable.

Just now we released ten thousand tilapia breeders into the lake. This is part of the expanded fish dispersal program of the LLDA.

In the first semester of this year, more than forty-eight thousand tilapia breeders were reportedly dispersed in the LLDA.

And I am happy that the quality of the water in the lake is improving. You know, I always monitor the water in the lake when I fly in a helicopter to see if it is brown or turning blue. Thankfully, many parts are turning blue again.

We are also strictly preventing illegal fishing in the lake, especially within the five thousand hectare fish sanctuary of the LLDA. Just now I threw a buoy, that will mark our sanctuary. Illegal fishermen are not allowed to fish there.

Our care for Laguna de Bay also receives help from organizations outside our country. For example, when I was – even before I was president – I went to a celebration in a hotel in Makati where Laguna de Bay was named a member of International Living Lakes. It is now recognized that our Laguna Lake is alive again. It also has a sister lake partnership agreement with Taihu Lake in China and Sun Moon Lake in Taiwan.

When I was young, touring in Taipei, Sun Moon Lake was always included in our tours. Now Laguna Lake should always be included in our tours.

The mayors of the areas know this, especially during our tour, because the lake is so beautiful when you drive around the lake. The artists are there. The old churches are there. The craftsmen are there. The waterfalls are there. The small lakes are there. The plants are there. The spas are there. You can visit all of these if you go around Laguna Lake. So we can compare the beauty of Laguna Lake and its tourism diversity to lakes like Lake Lanao in the Philippines and Lake Geneva in Europe. This is what I want to happen to our lake.

In the coming January, LLDA will reportedly begin a project to strengthen the participation of communities around the lake in their development.

And despite all of this, Laguna de Bay — why do I always look at whether the water is blue or brown, why do we emphasize its natural state, its being a living lake — is because of its surroundings, because Laguna Lake is in Calabarzon, and it also faces environmental hazards that threaten to destroy it and the livelihood of poor fishermen who rely solely on the lake.

The increase in industries around the lake — and not just industries, but also residents, subdivisions because our population here in Calabarzon is growing due to urbanization — this is the reason for the continued erosion of the watershed here.

So we have a challenge to ensure that the lake remains alive. We don't want it to become like the Pasig River, which died when industrialization occurred in Metro Manila and the number of houses in Metro Manila increased. And there are no more fish in the Pasig River now except for those fish that we no longer want to eat. And the waste from factories and houses along the lake can damage the water quality and ecosystem of the lake if it is not prevented.

This is what we expect LLDA to address quickly. They just need to coordinate with the industries because the industries also complain that sometimes they are used, subjected to bureaucracy and harassment to prevent them from doing their proper work. So, on one hand, we need to take care of the lake, and on the other hand, we shouldn't use it to harass our factories that also provide livelihoods for the people. I know that the staff, the rank and file employees and officials of LLDA can do this.

The theme of today's celebration is, “A Prosperous Lake, A Strong Republic.” This is fitting for the achievements that LLDA has made in the past. You are taking care of the lake's natural resources. You should also promote the interests of our poor, especially the fishermen, but do not harass the industries.

From the very beginning of my term, my goal has been to end poverty and achieve a peaceful and prosperous nation.

Freddie Tinga knows what we did so that we could organize our dike, our flood control on the other side so that the lake would give life and not give conflict to our people.

In the two and a half years that I have been president, I’ve gained the experience to make me realize on the ground what fundamental reforms we must make in order to achieve these goals. For example, many were greeting me about the roads leading to the North and South Expressway this past Holy Week — or, All Saint’s weekend — they said the traffic was not like in previous times. And yet we have construction — we have construction on the North Expressway, we have construction on the South Expressway — but the traffic going to the provinces was smooth this past weekend.

That came from the experience in the past two years. And I have gained enough experience to make me realize that we cannot achieve these goals unless we achieve unity and reconciliation as a nation. There in PNCC, there in DPWH, there in DOTC, there in PNP, they have different territories but we made them unite to organize traffic. And this is what we need to do throughout the country. The same reconciliation of the interests of fishermen and industry here in CALABARZON, here in Laguna Lake.

We must do these reforms, but we must also achieve reconciliation of interest if we do not want to be left behind by our neighbors who are again accelerating their growth in the aftermath of the Asian crisis.

Thank goodness for the past two and a half years, while other countries were still struggling with the Asian crisis, SARS, and terrorism, the Philippines, among 21 economies in Asia and the Pacific, had the number six growth rate.

Thank goodness that the Japanese, the number one investor in the world, in their latest list of preferred investment sites, the Philippines is number three.

But the others are beginning to recover from the Asian crisis. They are beginning to recover from the SARS. Let us not be left behind. And what we need is reform. We also need reconciliation and unity. Not just the unity of the PNP, DOTC, DPWH, PNCC on the roads. Not just the unity of fishermen and factories on the lake. Unity also of the great institutions of our government.

That’s why this past All Saints Day I prayed intensely about the controversy of impeachment. And I consulted with the leaders of the great branches of our government. And as I saw it, we have surpassed the political threshold where the president can intervene to find a principled solution to our impasse.

In the past few days, it was even headlined in the newspapers that I was calling for this solution to be in the form of a covenant around… The large branches, the three large branches of our government. This covenant may come from basic principles: first, we must respect that the welfare of the people is paramount, and this welfare is enshrined in our constitution and in our political traditions.

Secondly, we must emphasize the equal and independent but necessary cooperation and unity of the three great branches of our government.

Thirdly, we must strengthen the principle of checks and balances as an instrument of national unity and stability and not as an instrument of politics.

Fourth, the executive, the legislative, the judiciary, the authorities must work together as trustees of the public interest and find resolution to controversies within the law. Fifth, democratic governance must be based on mutual trust – respect, civility, responsibility, transparency in all its leaders.

And I believe that these principles now are already leading us towards the path to resolving problems and towards the path to stability and progress of our politics. We need a united stance that this will characterize our collective statesmanship. Although the president needs to intervene, I cannot do this alone. Everyone involved, and you local officials, you government employees, all of you are involved in finding unity. And all those directly affected, everyone concerned will have to bend backwards a bit without sacrificing principles.

But what I can say about our efforts, we are already seeing a solution where everyone wins.

Let us pray that our efforts succeed so that, employees of the LLDA, government employees, elected officials of the people, all of us pray, unite. Because by the grace of the Lord, the resolution of our current problems is near.

To all of you, Happy Anniversary!

Congratulations to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the 34th Anniversary of the Laguna Lake Development Authority (LLDA). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615141134/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7532&Itemid=38