Thank you very much Secretary Lapus for your introduction.

Other Cabinet members; other officials of the DepEd including our principals and teachers; Governor Espino and the other officials of Pangasinan; Mayor Guico and the other officials of Binalonan. And we have here on the… in our platform, Secretary Cabral, Secretary Esperon and P.A. for Education Mona Valisno: Dagiti kakailiak iti bangir ni mamang ko, naimbag nga bigat yo amin apo. (applause)

And so, another opportunity to greet you, a reason to celebrate again. (applause) Please also give recognition to the projects in education that will surely help our town.

Lucky is Binalonan because our forebears valued intellectual pursuits and education very highly. We have, for instance, so many of our townmates became successful earlier than other Filipinos, and they gave opportunities to other townmates as well. For instance, we have the famous Filipino-American writer from Binalonan, Carlos Bulosan, who wrote America is in the Heart. There was also my mother, the late First Lady, Doctor Evangeline Macaraeg, who was a doctor, the daughter of Engineer Juan Guico Macaraeg. An engineer, one of the first Filipinos who have completed an education in the United States.

My grandfather’s name was given to a school, the school along the highway. Today I thank you for supporting the new library hub in Binalonan as the Doña Eva Macapagal Memorial Library Hub. (applause) I thank everyone who helped fund this project. And so, I’m glad to hear about this library hub. At first I thought that it had 35,000 book holdings, they say it has 60,000 book holdings, but a lot of them had already gone out and 35,000 are inside the library right now. And a benefit for the schools in the entire school division. Is it Northern Pangasinan Monching or Eastern Pangasinan? Ah, Eastern Pangasinan. It will surely provide students with much-needed education. I am also happy for the students of Juan Macaraeg National High School who can connect to the internet for free through our new e-library.

In education, I’m glad that Monching made this theme education, with the invitation to the e-library and our two-storey school building here. Because it is a time for us to give a message that we can generate more social impact from education if the efforts are targeted and consolidated. This year, we have begun the effort to cluster the programs of DepEd, of CHED, of TESDA to create a forward-looking National Education Program.

Monching mentioned that Presidential Task Force on Education which I organized sometime ago. They submitted recommendations on improving the different states of the main education highway, that starts from pre-school, to elementary school, to high school, to voc-tech, to pre-college for some courses, college, and for some specializations, master and doctoral education. That is the education highway. And earlier today diay bangir, ano? Wen diay bangir, we showcased our reforms in pre-school education, particularly Executive Order No. 685 on the Standardization of the Pre-school Curriculum for 5-year olds with the goal, as Monching says, “increasing the participation rate for Grade 1.” And Monching was talking about the drop-out rate. We’re going to bring it down to less than 5.0 percent by 2010. And according to Jing Lapus, that’s really a challenge, because Jing was telling me when we were in the audience that UNESCO has given up. He said the world will not be able to achieve one of the Millenium Development Goals and that is universal primary education. But even if the world may not be able to achieve it by 2015 with all our efforts here in Binalonan, Binalonan will be able to achieve it. (Applause)

Our special audience in the presentation of Secretary Lapus on the pre-school curriculum, the new pre-school curriculum was your Local School Board, because an active and supportive local school board is very important. The Local School Board is chaired by the municipal mayor and the district supervisor. The members include other key local officials; it’s good that we have Governor Espino there with us also as well as representatives of the PTA and teachers’ organizations.

The Local Government Code allot a special education fund of 1.0 percent tax on real property to Local School Boards for expenses related to school improvement and development. I was listening to how we want to use the budget — the Local School Board now I’m addressing them. But I waited for this program to announce that whatever the Local School Board will allocate to implement the pre-school curriculum, I will give Binalonan an equivalent amount. (Applause)

The people of Binalonan… Ah, okay. So, how much will you allocate? (laughter) Okay. So, if I know how much you allocate today, before I leave I can write the check today. (applause/laughter) But the people of Binalonan will always have a reason to feel optimistic despite news about the global economic recession. The structures that enable us to improve our lives, we’ve started even before anyone noticed that a global recession would occur. We already had our shields in place. We had installed programs that would increase our yields and allow us to help other provinces even more. Dagiti tattao iti Binalonan, you have always been supportive of our administration’s goals.

And so, I’d like to take this opportunity once again to thank you. Thank you for the unity that you show our local officials and the national government, just like what you are doing for this week’s fiesta celebration.

Isu nga tatta nga fiesta manen tayo, ti mensahe gapo kenyak ket let us commit ourselves to helping our townmates, our provincemates, and the rest of our countrymen who are not as fortunate as the professionals that abound here in Binalonan.

Let us celebrate the unity that allows the people of Binalonan to offer beautiful fiestas every year.

I remember kadda tawen, I remember thirty years actually since I became a senator, I’ve only missed one fiesta. But every year I come, in some form or another, I even invite guests usually. I remember the many years that I was crowning guest iti rabii Secretary Esperon came to look at the poultry industry here, and he ended up being the crowning guest. So, he was very happy about that.

I join you in our fiesta today because I want to thank you, my townmates, for your love for me and your love for our people. So to all of you, happy fiesta and may God continue to bless you all, my townmates!

(applause)

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the inauguration of the 2-storey, 4-classroom schoolbuilding of the Binalonan South Central School, Poblacion South. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412105136/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=21254&Itemid=38