Thank you very much Congressman Joson for your very kind introduction. Governor Joson, that is. Thank you very much Governor. Later, I will greet Josie.

Thank you very much Governor Joson for your kind introduction and for inviting me to celebrate ‘Sigaw ng Nueva Ecija’ once more.

I also greet your fellow governor, Chairman of the Regional Development Council of Region III, Governor Josie Dela Cruz; I greet our host Mayor, Mayor Sonia Lorenzo; and all the mayors of the province of Nueva Ecija; now I greet Congressman Joson, yes, Josie Joson; Congressman Violago and Congressman Villareal are also here; I also greet former Congressman Rico Fajardo; and former Congresswoman Julita Villareal; and former Congressman Rene Diaz; Rene, Rico is now in my administration along with Cabinet member, Secretary of Agriculture Leony Montemayor.

Our peacekeepers are also here, the head of our Philippine National Police, General Ebdane. He didn't deliver any kidnap syndicate to me today, so Namiesta instead; General Rodolfo Garcia is our Northern Luzon Commander; here in the 7th Division because Northern Luzon has two divisions, our awardee today is General Boysie Braganza, congratulations!; We are also awarding General Oscar Calderon as one of the outstanding people from Nueva Ecija, and I have chosen him as PNP Chief of Region III. Congratulations also; representative of the local government, Undersecretary Al Fernandez; a very important agency here in the province is the NIA and our Administrator Jess Paras is also here. I want to greet Jess Paras because despite our budget deficit, the NIA, according to Secretary Montemayor, his collection so far – user fee – so far half year to date is bigger than the whole year last year, so congratulations for your contribution to our budget. It also means that the NIA is operating efficiently and I thank the farmers who pay the user fees.

Barangay captains of Nueva Ecija, you are all 100 percent present just like the 100 percent present town mayors; and the Sangguniang Kabataan who took their oath earlier, congratulations to all of you; and our awardees, I also greet you; distinguished guests, children of Nueva Ecija, good afternoon to all of you.

Have you eaten yet? Huh? Hey, not yet. I will hasten my speech. Sonia said you have eaten. We haven't yet, so I will still hasten my speech.

Anyway, this is the second time in two years that I have attended this celebration, the commemoration of ‘Unang Sigaw ng Nueva Ecija.’ This is just proof, as Tommy said, that I have been here four times already in my 18 months as president. Tommy probably didn't count that time when Jun Ebdane and I went to Cabiao. That was the fifth time. That's how much I love Nueva Ecija and how important it is for us to give importance to this occasion.

‘Unang Sigaw ng Nueva Ecija’ reminds us that there were many brave people here in Nueva Ecija even before, during the Spanish period. During the Spanish period… Earlier, I was trying to remember what the 8 first provinces were that revolted against the Spaniards. We almost don't remember anymore. Of course, there's Pampanga – Bulacan, Josie is from there, right? – Manila, that was a province before; then Cavite, of course Aguinaldo was there; Batangas; Laguna; Rizal, the name of the province then was Morong, yes. But it's hard to remember if it's not celebrated. That's why it's good that it's celebrated here in Nueva Ecija, we don't forget that it is one of the eight first to revolt against the Spaniards.

And a difference also, according to Rene Diaz, those who protested here were the Cabezas de Barangay. They themselves. And because the Cabezas de Barangay protested, they controlled Nueva Ecija. Because in other provinces there were parts of the revolutionary army that started the revolution but they didn't hold it for long. But here the revolution was mass-based so the Filipinos held Nueva Ecija for a long time. So we really should celebrate the day of Nueva Ecija.

And those brave generals, aren't many of our towns named after them — Gabaldon, Tinio, Llanera, Natividad. All of them were part of this revolution. But Nueva Ecija was brave not only during the revolution but also during this time in our current part of history.

Those who were honored earlier — Arnel Santiago, De Leon, Talavera – well, he wasn't here earlier but he will also be honored — De Guzman, Mesina, De Castro, Arthur Cruz – these are those who will be honored and they are some of the brave people from Nueva Ecija.

And earlier, many of those who received awards were from Nueva Ecija. Among those we consider modern-day heroes who we honored were Tirso Santiago, Juan Buen, personnel from the D.A. and the Department of Agrarian Reform who showed excellence in implementing programs that improved the situation of farmers here in San Isidro. So it's not just those given on stage, many are being honored here in Nueva Ecija. I just don't know why my advance party wasn't allowed. So I will have a revamp of my advance party. Because I want us to honor them here. To all of them, those on stage and those not on stage, my heartfelt thanks and greetings for good service to the country.

Nueva Ecija is close to my heart. First of all, there are many Macapagals here. Rico Fajardo, he's a Macapagal. Calderon, General Calderon, he's also a Macapagal. I have many cousins, aunts, uncles, grandmothers and grandfathers. And besides that, Tommy's father, the late Governor Danding Joson, became governor in 1959 because he was the candidate of Vice President Diosdado Macapagal as an opposition candidate. And he was one of the closest companions of my father in politics.

There are members of my official family who are from here. Rene Diaz is here. Rico Fajardo is there, my representative in San Miguel. Our very capable NBI director, Rey Wycoco, from Cabiao, isn't here. And, they say my Undersecretary of Press, Ching Suva — isn't it true, Ching, you entered during my father's time? Now, until today, I still have him in the OPS. And they might get upset if I don't attend and I don't come here. But I am grateful that they are here. It is important that we are always together.

There are other people from Nueva Ecija, not just Wycoco who is absent, my close ally in politics, City Mayor of Quezon City Sonny Belmonte, he is from Zaragoza.

And the leader of the government's guidance of the private sector, our partner in progress, the leader of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Sergio Ortiz-Luis, is also from Cabiao. And the flagship project of our agricultural modernization throughout the Philippines is hybrid rice made here at PhilRice in Nueva Ecija. So we can say that Nueva Ecija has a very big role not only during the revolution in 1898 but also now in the administration of President Arroyo.

Today, we take pride in the role of Nueva Ecija in regaining our freedom during the revolution of 1896. As I said, it was one of the eight provinces across the country that initiated the revolution back then. We may not remember those eight, but we see them in our flag, with eight rays representing the eight suns in our flag, and Nueva Ecija is one of them.

And now we can say that, just like in 1896 after the revolution, there is peace. Now, the turbulent part of our history is over and it is time for us to unite again and face together the true enemy of the hardship experienced by thirty million Filipinos out of the 80 million Filipinos in our country.

Peace and order are improving. I congratulate the Region III Regional Peace and Order Council for the peace in Region III, and its leader is none other than Governor Tommy Joson.

And because he is the Chairman of the Regional Peace and Order Council, I want to convey that our target now is the drug syndicates. These drug syndicates are almost the same syndicates involved in other heinous crimes. The key here is to remove the active and retired soldiers and police officers involved in drugs. And I expect the Peace and Order Council, under the leadership of Tommy, to help in this matter.

Now that peace and order are in motion, I will return to the economy. Of course, if Jun Ebdane invites me to have my picture taken with the arrested police officers, I will still go. But my focus now is back to the economy because we have already done a lot in terms of peace and order.

We will return to the roadmap because we see the world's economic recovery, which we expected, still isn't arriving. So I am looking at who among our successful neighbors and fellow countrymen have successfully recovered. I see a good example in what Prime Minister Thaksin of Thailand did this past year, what economists call consumption-based managed-asset reflation.

In simple terms, this means we will rely on, and shift from relying on, exports because America, the number 1 importer in the world, has not yet fully recovered. So we can't rely on it yet. Therefore, instead of an export orientation, we are moving towards the recovery of domestic demand, and especially the most efficient in using capital, which are small and medium enterprises. That's what we will focus on in the coming times. Because they will be the key to our economic recovery.

Actually, I already did this last year with the allocation of 1 million pesos per municipality for agriculture, along with the assumption of the debt from the previous administration. We did all of that to boost domestic demand, and we succeeded. But now we still need to, because our exports might still fall—they are rising so far. But let's recognize that world exports will fall due to hardship in America. We did this last year because we saw exports falling, and we succeeded. Now exports are rising, let's not be complacent. And what we did last year was done even more effectively by Thailand, and Thailand has shown that it remains effective until now. This includes—because if we want to help small and medium enterprises, interest rates must be low. Therefore, monetary policy must be prudent. It shouldn't be too… It should be careful in using funds. And the budget deficit should be lowered. Because if the budget deficit is large, the government will borrow from banks and interest rates will rise. We need to aim to balance the budget within three or four years.

Banks will be encouraged to avoid lending to unproductive sectors. For example, luxurious properties – loans should no longer go there. And also factories with large excess capacity, loans should not go there either. Loans should go to small and medium enterprises because they are very good at using capital.

This was identified by Thaksin even more so than in the Philippines, although we also did this and succeeded. Thaksin identified this, even more so than in the Philippines. They said he couldn't do it but he showed within a year the huge turnaround of the Thai economy. So if we act now and focus our attention there, we can do it too. This is also being done not only in Thailand, not only in the Philippines, it is being done in other economies especially but not only in South Korea. This is considered a thorough response to the severe collapse of the modern American economy. Asia’s domestic demand is now the talk of the town. Asians are now looking to self-reliance, and that is what we need to do.

But while we are focused on the economy, we still need to monitor the current troubles, for example, the Sabah refugees. I was delayed today because I first met with the team leaving for Sabah. The other day I went to Tawi-Tawi last Thursday, I saw there the bitter experience of thousands of our countrymen who were returned by Malaysia from Sabah. This is a major tragedy that requires our sympathy. Thank goodness there was a moratorium after my phone call to Prime Minister Mahathir. Even so, the deportees who arrived here and up to the last trip are weak, have no homes to return to, and have no jobs waiting. So I appeal to everyone to donate food, medicine, clothes, money to alleviate their suffering. Send it to the national disaster council in your area or any private organization willing to help our fellow citizens. Their plight is worse than those affected by the typhoon, so they need our charity. The government is doing everything to solve this problem but we cannot do it alone. Before this worsens and causes a more terrible situation, let us work together to face and end it.

I am pleased that since I said this on Saturday, many have responded. WG&A is willing to send a ship. Cebu Pacific is willing to send a plane. Mead Johnson is willing to send milk, and Metrobank will donate 2 million pesos tonight. I thank them all.

And a child who had a birthday party with a photo opportunity with me at Malacañang also gave everything he received as gifts of cash to me for the refugees from Sabah. I thank them all.

Another thing we need to monitor is the exchange rate of the peso and the dollar. As of now, it is under control. But even now, because sometimes when there is a budget deficit, businessmen get nervous, speculation begins. So I just want to remind you of what I said last year when speculation was severe, speculation that seriously disturbed the value of the peso is economic sabotage. But thank God, this year, so far, no one has been found guilty of it.

Another very important issue where Nueva Ecija has a big role is the issue of rice. We should have zero tolerance for a rice crisis. So earlier, although I haven't been ballistic lately, Gloria's temper flared up again. Because we have zero tolerance for a rice crisis. I don't believe in calibrated solutions. It is better to overreact before a crisis occurs.

And Nueva Ecija has a big role in rice, Nueva Ecija has a big role in our national development. This province has long been dubbed the rice granary of the Philippines, so it is clear that it contributes greatly to our economy. And because our major thrust now is agricultural modernization.

I just came from the NFA warehouse in Cabanatuan. Why did I go there? Because the NFA warehouse with the largest volume is here in Cabanatuan. I want to expedite the milling. I want to expedite the delivery to the markets because I want there to be regular-milled rice for only 16 pesos for the poor.

It doesn't matter about the 25 pesos for the wealthy. But for the poor, there should always be 16-peso regular-milled rice available in the markets. That is the specific objective of my visit to the National Food Authority.

And so, I saw earlier, I finally saw 16-peso rice there in the Cabanatuan market. Finally, because for about a month now I've been going to the markets and I haven't seen the 16 pesos. There was 16 pesos but not in the market, now it's in the market. Tony Abad is constantly being followed up by me, so now I am grateful because I said, “Tony, where is the most rice?” “Cabanatuan, sir.” Well, if there wasn't 16 pesos there, we really have a problem. But there is. Not only 16 pesos, there's also 15 pesos. So congratulations to the NFA here in Cabanatuan.

I asked Tony Abad, “okay, if this is the most organized rice milling and distribution with 16 and 15 pesos, let's look at the situation where the supply is the lowest. Where is that?” Tony Abad said, “in Cordillera and La Union.” So that's what I expect from the NFA, that even there, regular-milled rice will be 16 pesos for our poor. The rice for the wealthy is the problem of the wealthy. The rice for the poor, all the problems of the poor should be the problem of the government.

And this is what I also expect here in Nueva Ecija. Tommy said I shouldn't worry here in Nueva Ecija. I saw that there is 16 pesos, and now all the LGUs will monitor to ensure that there is always 16-peso regular-milled rice here in Nueva Ecija.

I expect that all LGUs, all mayors, all barangay officials, you will ensure that in your markets there is 16-peso rice for the poor. If it's not there, the NFA is there. And they have a lot of stock in the warehouse. I checked the stock in the warehouse, there is still a lot of palay that hasn't been milled, so there should be no reason for the price of rice to increase in Nueva Ecija.

So again my friends, when Nueva Ecija was one of the eight provinces that initiated the revolution, I hope that Nueva Ecija now is also one of the provinces that will lead in ensuring that the poor always have rice to eat, that the poor always have food on every table.

Thank you very much and Happy Anniversary to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 106th Foundation Anniversary of Nueva Ecija “First Cry of Nueva Ecija”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412222245/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8398&Itemid=38