Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Thanksgiving Lunch for the Heroes of St. Bernard (men, women and governments who took part in the massive search and recovery operations in disaster-hit Brgy. Guinsaugon, St. Bernard, Southern Leyte)

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, March 15, 2006]

Thank you, Secretary Cabral and all the government officials and workers who participated in the rescue.

German ambassador and all of our friends in the international community who helped out; Senator Gordon, who is here not as senator but as head of the Red Cross and all of the NGOs in the Philippines and all over the world who helped; Governor Lerias; Mayor Lim and all of the people of Southern Leyte and Saint Bernard; ladies and gentlemen.

The men and women who went to Saint Bernard to search for the living and the dead have gone home with the spirit of a proud, and hardy community remains in that place. We give thanks to the Lord for the gift of life and ask his blessings for the peace of the departed.

Many of the people of Saint Bernard when they have a chance to chat with me say the painful memories are somehow eased by the thought of the deep compassion that poured from all over our land and the world. And while we console and condole with the survivors, we convey our appreciation to the gallant men and women who rose to the call of duty and beyond the call of duty in those terrible moments.

The rescue workers, the policemen, the soldiers, the medical professionals, the social workers, the government volunteers, the average citizens, local and international NGOs and agencies, foreign governments and local, national and foreign media — you were all there in an exemplary show of oneness and love for the bereaved and the dispossessed.

Today’s event is our modest way of expressing our gratitude to you, our modern heroes from all walks of life from the four corners of the globe. Some of you dug the mud with your bare hands upon hearing signs of life in the drenching rain.

In behalf of a grateful Filipino people, I salute your heroism and sense of humanity. I am sadden though by the indifference of some of our countrymen to the plight of the landslide victims that instead of extending a helping hand during those difficult moments for our country, they busied themselves with their agenda of division and destabilization. I decry their utter insensitivity, those who noisily rattled the body politic, when we were all listening to the faint cries of life, in the hope of pulling out a survivor from the mud and the rain. But we shall hope against hope against these incorrigible destabilizers.

These even as we continue with rebuilding sturdy homes for the survivors of the tragedy in a community farther away from harm’s way and undertaking what is necessary to prevent more disasters from happening to our people.

Secretary Cabral told me a few days ago, that we will need 1,800 houses for the new lives to begin again. And no sooner had she said that, then we received offers for 2,000 houses. Thank you to the whole Philippines and the rest of the world.

But over and above these donations also, I thanked god that we in the government now have additional revenues to repair the damaged infrastructure and build more to effectively respond to the imperatives of public safety. Thank you, Senator Gordon — now as senator — for your fellow legislators who gave us the wherewithal through our tax reforms.

The heavy rains brought about by La Niña continue to pose danger, so we must be alert and take the necessary precautions. Glenn Rabonza and Tony Golez don’t really have much time to rest because they now have to prepare for the mitigation measures for disasters that may still come upon us especially as a result… The cumulative result of the global warming that has been taking place in these last several years.

What happened at Saint Bernard is also a wake up call for a comprehensive response to what we need to do with the environment in close partnership with the communities, the church, the business sector, the academe and the local government units.

We will never prefer profit over a sound environment. There were no mines in Saint Bernard, so thank goodness! That’s out of the controversy. But let me take this opportunity to say — and I thank the mining industry because of your participation in the rescue — but let me take this opportunity to say that we will only consider mining investments which commit to faithfully abide by stringent policies to keep our rivers and ecosystems clean and safe. And violators shall be dealt with heavily.

To the heroes of Saint Bernard once again, please accept the gratitude of our nation for being there when we needed you most. The trying moments that as a people we surmounted through will and unity have proven once more the inherent capability and character of the Filipino to overcome. And also have proven once more that the world is a kind place to live in and people are good.

Thank you once again and good day.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Thanksgiving lunch for the Heroes of St. Bernard (men, women and governments who took part in the massive search and recovery operations in disaster-hit Brgy. Guinsaugon, St. Bernard, Southern Leyte). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412214534/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2420&Itemid=38