Thank you very much, Governor Parouk Hussin.

Thank you very much, Governor Yusop Jikiri; His Highness Sultan Ajimodin Abidin; Vice Governor Hadji Abdel Anni; Mayor Hadji Soud Tan and the various guest mayors today.

With me today are various Cabinet members who are helping me take care of the province of Sulu. Here is DSWD Secretary Dinky Soliman; here is the Chairman of HUDCC Mike Defensor; here is the Secretary of the Anti-Poverty Commission, Ging Deles; here also is the one helping us take care of our peace under the leadership of AFP Chief-of-Staff General Narciso Abaya.

I would like to greet the various companions of Governor Hussin, officials of the autonomous region, especially the speaker of the Autonomous Region Legislative Assembly, Speaker Ishmael Abubakar. To all of you, my friends, assalaamu alaikum mangapagariya.

You know, last year, I was in Manila at the Malacañang Palace, with the heirs of the Sultan of Sulu. We were having lunch there. Then I had a question to ask Governor Jikiri, I called him long distance here in Sulu. And Governor Jikiri said, “oh, how are you, Mrs. President? You know we are here now and we are celebrating the foundation of the sultanate of Sulu.” what a wonderful opportunity.

Now again, before I go somewhere because on Wednesday night I will be going to the United Nations. I will be talking to Prime Minister Mahathir about our peace process. And I will be talking to the Ambassadors of the OIC to discuss the application of the Philippines for observer status in the OIC. So I said before I go there, before I talk to Prime Minister Mahathir and the Ambassadors of the OIC at the United Nations, I should first visit Sulu to see and report on our development programs in Sulu. Well, it's good that it coincides again with the anniversary of the sultanate of Sulu.

Yesterday was supposed to be the visit because that was the actual day of the sultanate of Sulu. But yesterday, Regional Governor Hussin tried to come here earlier, he couldn't fly because the weather was bad. But now upon my arrival the weather is good, a blessing from Allah for our gathering today.

So I am here to see the projects. And I thank Allah that He blesses our gathering here. It happens to be the anniversary of the Sultanate of Sulu again and I am grateful for this wonderful opportunity. And I think the reason why Allah timed your anniversary with my visit before going to the United Nations and why He timed it with good weather even though it rained heavily yesterday is to bless our efforts for peace and development in Sulu and in Mindanao.

We shall not take the bait of martial law just to look for peace and order because our democratic institutions are strong enough to withstand the onslaught of destabilization and we have adequate constitutional powers to pursue justice and reforms. Peace and order can be attained through the instruments of democratic vigilance, criminal justice and good governance. And not necessarily through military rule.

Martial Law is an anachronism that goes against the world wide trend of openness and liberalism. Martial Law is only a weapon of last resort that we don’t need and we don’t seek to wield. In our search for peace, Martial Law is not what we need. What we need are some principles: first, peace and development are twins; second, the search for peace must be within the constitution, sovereignty and integrity of the Philippine land; third, let us recognize that we are a multi-ethnic society.

I, when I was young, I lived in Iligan City in Mindanao for a long time. And there where a large part of my childhood took place in the 1950s, I felt what it meant to be a multi-ethnic society. My grandmother was from Pangasinan, her husband, my grandfather whom I never met but many cousins went with him to Mindanao in the 1920s so I have many cousins in Iligan, they are Ilocano. My playmates outside the house were Visayans. Our regular customers at the market and the head of the Philippine Constabulary were Muslim, and their children were my playmates too. Those who bought our copra were Chinese. Those who sold us electricity were mestizos. Christian, Muslim, Visayan, Ilocano, Pangasinan, Chinese, Spanish mestizo, different cultures but we in Iligan were just one community, we were united. That was Mindanao of my youth. That is the Mindanao I want to return here in our time.

The land my grandmother called in Iligan is Timoga. Maybe some of you have swum there. And I, as a child, like all children in the world, had idols. The young girls, I remember in the 1960s the idol of the young girls was Jacquie Kennedy, because she was beautiful, intelligent, elegant. In the 1980s the idol of the young girls was Princess Diana, because she was beautiful, educated, elegant. When I was a little child in Iligan, in Timoga, my idol, beautiful, educated, elegant was Princess Tarhata Kiram of Sulu. My grandmother even called me Princess Tarhata of Timoga. And I remember that because Princess Tarhata's ancestor Saed Abubakar was the one who started the Sultanate of Sulu, 613 years ago. And during that time Sulu became the center of Islam throughout the Philippines and this is also important in our business with other countries.

The Sultan of Sulu is well known in other countries. When I went to China, I learned in the history of China during the Ming dynasty many, many centuries ago, the emperor of China invited the Sultan of Sulu to visit him in Guangdong as a state visitor. That's how important the Sultan of Sulu is in the history of Asia.

And so today, what we want to do, we would like to bring back the glory of Sulu. But we must begin by working together for peace and development in Sulu. So please excuse me for taking a little time to tell you about the various parts or examples of what we are doing here in the development of Sulu.

Sulu, in the past as I said, was very educated, even going as far as Guangdong, equal to the emperor of China. But now, due to the long period of conflict in Sulu and teachers were afraid to go to remote areas to teach fulltime, the literacy rate of Sulu is only 82 percent. That is very low so one of the things we are doing is to further improve the education system here in Sulu. So later I will study the student-classroom ratio of Sulu and all the towns — ah, no — all the schools where there are more than one hundred students per school or per classroom we will add classrooms in the various towns of Sulu. And in remote areas where teachers are afraid to teach fulltime we will put distance learning or education by television. That's what we will do to raise the literacy rate again in the province of Sulu.

There are many areas in Sulu that have poor irrigation, relying only on deep wells for water, which are sometimes dirty. So, one of Ging Deles’ projects is irrigation for around 100 or more, 200 waterless municipalities. Ging Deles will include the towns of Sulu that lack proper irrigation to add to the irrigation projects.

And earlier, Governor Parouk Hussin mentioned that the Sulu hospital and the Pangutaran District Hospital are being repaired, these are the ones that need fixing. And I don't know, it seems the ARMM and the local government are implementing the repair of these very important hospitals. And the ARMM-DOH is also conducting a vigorous campaign to eradicate tuberculosis and malaria. And there in Patikul, where many were victims of the war – that’s why Mike Defensor and Dinky Soliman are here – the construction of the core shelter project continues because it is the government’s responsibility to rebuild the homes of those who lost them due to the war.

We are also providing livelihood assistance to our brothers and sisters. Livelihood is truly what is most needed. So, I told Dinky Soliman, all social welfare offices will be conduits for our microfinance to reach our poor people here in Sulu.

And your production is also important. Earlier – or, no, later – Governor Hussin and Governor Jikiri and I will go to see some USAID projects. And one of the biggest projects is the Carrageenan or Agar Agar project. This is the key to the future of Sulu for our development because the Philippines is now the favorite supplier of Carrageenan in the world. So, all of you in the coastal areas, let's start planting Carrageenan.

There are also many other marine products here. Earlier, we were in Luuk because I gave projects there as a thank you to Luuk because since Jeffrey Schilling’s rescue, Luuk has always been catching the Abu Sayyaf who get lost there. So, we gave them a project. They fed us lobsters and crabs as big as plates. So, what you need is cold storage so that the price of your fruits or marine resources is always good.

That is what we will try to have the Department of Agriculture do. The Department of Agriculture also has various accomplishments here, not only expanding the carrageenan but also coffee and cassava. The coffee in the Parang area, for example, is bought by Nestle, the plant in Cagayan de Oro, because Nestle’s plant in the Philippines feeds breakfast to all of Asia. So, the coffee that Nestle makes can come from other parts of Mindanao, like Sulu.

And the cassava, according to San Miguel, they can buy even a million hectares of cassava products. So, brothers and sisters, if you are looking for what to plant, plant cassava because there is someone who will buy your product. These are the various things we can say that are good keys to the future of Sulu.

And that’s not all. Not only USAID is helping for our development and peace, but the Asian Development Bank is also helping here in agrarian reform communities, for example, in Patikul. And the ADB is helping to put up a Halal slaughterhouse and culture of Abalone and sea horses, which are export products. And they are also putting up – USAID – USAID is also putting up solar driers not only in Panglima, where we will go later, but also in Indanan and various other towns.

So, these are some of the things we are doing. The ADB is also helping in the construction of farm-to-market roads and cementing in Patikul, in Siasi, and in the cementing of Jolo and Jolo trunkline roads which are almost finished, and access roads. And the ten kilometers of Jolo circumferential road will also be cemented soon. Isn't that the last one? Before the national highway here in Jolo is finished.

So, friends, these are the things we are doing. And the feasibility study for expanding the Maimbung seaport will also begin so that it can trade not only with Zamboanga but also with other countries in BIMP-EAGA. So, friends, these are some of the things we are doing for the development of Sulu, but we can do all of this if we have peace. As I said, development and peace go hand in hand. If there is no development, there is always war; if there is always war, there is no development.

So, here we are now. We need to fight the enemy together. We need to fight poverty together. Our approach must be comprehensive – with a left hand and a right hand. The right hand is the firm hand of the law, the left hand is the open hand of our development. With the right hand, I want to greet our soldiers for the great work they have done in dismantling another Abu Sayyaf camp yesterday. Congratulations to you, our soldiers. And with the left hand, thank you because we are united in various projects from large roads to small loans for Carrageenan and housing for victims of the war.

We really must not forget: there is only one Philippines even though there are many cultures. We have only one goal – simultaneous development and peace. There is only one country. One flag – the Republic of the Philippines.

Thank you very much.

Happy anniversary to the Sultanate of Sulu!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the 613th Foundation Anniversary of Sulu Governance and Public Administration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194246/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7105&Itemid=38