Today we remember once again those historic events of a hundred and eleven years ago when a band of patriots announced to the whole world the birth of a new and sovereign nation, one with full rights to dream its own dreams, choose its own leaders, and work towards its own goals and aspirations.

Our freedom, paid for by the blood of heroes, has been challenged several times since. But our people rose to the occasion at every turn, defending their liberty with everything they had, prepared to render the ultimate sacrifice if asked to do so.

Those external threats to our freedom are no more. Our former conquerors have become our close friends and allies in our quest for development. Yet we must remain united and vigilant as ever, not only against foreign domination, but—more urgently–against a familiar enemy who continues to eat away at our people’s capability to exercise their free will. That enemy is poverty, and the hunger, ignorance and despair that it brings.

We have fought poverty for decades, and we were starting to gain the upper hand through strong political will and our people’s full support. But factors not of our own making are now eroding those gains. The Filipino people are called to action once again to fight off these threats before they reverse our development and return us to our economic Dark Ages.

Where before our heroes fought to gain political freedom, today we must rely on our sense of community and solidarity to gain freedom from economic deprivation in the face of the global economic crisis.

No nation is immune from the impact of the global crisis. A few are faring relatively better than the others. The Philippines fortunately belongs to those few, not because of luck, but because we chose years ago to prepare for an emergency like this by taking the bitter pill of fiscal and economic reforms.

On those reforms we built our growth, the fruits of which we invested in turn in long overdue physical and human infrastructure. We worked hard to bring increasing balance to our national economy. Pumping more money into infrastructure and welfare, we expanded our domestic demand, which decreased our reliance on exports. Our export to GDP ratio now is only 28.5%, compared to 49% in 2000.

We moved quickly to diversify our trade partners as well as the overseas destinations of Filipinos going abroad. At the same time, we worked to build up new industries and develop new sectors, and encouraged our people to build up their skills in accordance with shifting demand. All of these measures, among other things, helped loosen our ties to the fortunes of the world’s biggest economies when they started going down last year.

I am proud to say that the Philippines is now one of only two countries in the region whose growth rate remained positive the first quarter of this year, albeit much slower than before.

Nonetheless, I do not mean to diminish the pain and disruption the global crisis has brought upon our economy. We are feeling the pain just like the rest of our neighbors. And the poorest among us are the ones being hurt the most.

We must continue to focus here at home on creating jobs and keeping prices low, while rescuing the poorest among our people with targeted subsidies of food, fuel and rice.

Government has tightened its belt and put a stop to wasteful spending, just like the average Filipino household. Government must pour more of its savings and revenue into programs that help the poor and the middle class, without neglecting the investments in education, healthcare and infrastructure that will be the springboard of our growth when the global economic rebound happens.

We are tackling many challenges all at once in order to keep our economy and way of life going strong. Running on a lean and efficient machinery, government must continue exercising fiscal prudence and working towards a balanced budget, even as we continue to invest in key programs for the people.

It is not enough for us to celebrate our day of freedom by remembering our heroes. We must also think about their hopes for a better life for us, and commit to work even harder to realize them. Only then can we say that we deserve the gift of freedom our forefathers gave us.

During these trying times, the Philippine spirit and commitment to caring should prompt every Filipino to count his blessings and share them with the less fortunate. Now is the time for pulling together and focusing on family and community. We must start a new era of volunteerism and community spirit that embraces all sectors – government, the religious, civic groups, non-governmental organizations as well as our foreign friends. The nation needs all of us pulling in the same direction.

I believe that when the rebound occurs, our relative position within the region and the world will continue to improve. Not only do we have the resources to absorb the global shocks, but we also have our economic resilience and continuing fiscal reforms that will enable the nation to pull ahead when the global recovery begins.

We are heartened by pieces of good news from all over the world indicating that this global economic slump may already be bottoming out. There are growing signs of recovery in some of the biggest international markets. We earnestly hope there will be more of these positive signs pointing to an early global turnaround.

We must look at the present with clear eyes, ever mindful of the goals that we hope can be realized soon. Courage, Excellence and Industry will lead us towards True Freedom. Courage, Excellence and Industry – the Filipino has all these qualities, in abundance. Add to these the unity of a people determined to rise from poverty once and for all. They are the building blocks of our new growth.

We hope our foreign friends, whose friendship we continue to cherish through the years, will continue to be with us, as the Philippine Ship of State navigates through the murky waters of the global crisis towards the sunlit port of prosperity, security, and sustainable growth.

Let us all work together to apply the lessons learned from this global crisis, so that together we may create a global village that celebrates the sovereignty of each nation even as it works as one in pursuit of our common goal: a world that is free from fear and free from want.

May I invite you now to raise your glasses in a toast to international solidarity and mutually beneficial growth, and a bright future for the Philippines.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). Speech of President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo Independence Day reception. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412101715/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25337&Itemid=38