Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 21st Bishops-Ulama Conference and General Assembly and Asian Gathering of Muslim Ulama and Christian Bishops

[Delivered at the Luzon Ballroom, Westin Philippine Plaza, Pasay City, August 18, 2003]

Thank you, Secretary Gonzales.

Archbishop Capalla, Dr. Mutilan, Bishop Gomez, Dr. Shariff, Archbishop Fitzgerald, Cardinal Darmatmajah, fellow workers in government, excellencies of the diplomatic corps, ladies and gentlemen.

Assalamu Alaikum Warahmatullahi Barakatu! Welcome to all of you! Welcome to the Philippines!

Many countries in Asia experience internal conflicts among ethnic communities. But this is something that we should always resist and resolve, for our respective creeds — Islam and Christianity — are both founded on the love of God and the search for peace.

The task of rebuilding our nation is made more clear and hopeful with the presence of godly men and women like yourselves. I, too, strive to promote godliness in our nation and in my family. The first family welcomes a lifestyle check and other lawful checks on our godliness. We have led a life of dignity and simplicity. This is part of leading by example and I consider it a natural part of being president. This also accords me the moral armor to act decisively on corruption and extravagance among public servants. I invite the media and the people to join me in the crusade for good governance.

In his opening address at the World Day of Prayer for peace in Assisi in 1986, Pope John Paul II pointed out the significance of gathering so many religious leaders, including those of Islam and Christianity, in the following words:

He said and I quote: “Our meeting attests that in the great battle for peace, humanity, in its diversity, must draw from its deepest and most vivifying sources where its conscience is formed and upon which is founded the moral action of all people.”

For the first time in Asia, the Muslim Ulama, Ustadz and Imams, protestant bishops and pastors, as well as Catholic bishops, priests and lay leaders are convening to discuss common challenges affecting them and their relationships as Christians and Muslims in Asia; and how to address these problems and concerns from the standpoint of their faith.

As reflected in your theme: “Seeking peace and development through an authentic Christian and Muslim dialogue of life in Asia,” this conference also aims to formulate a firm consensus against extremists and fanatical groups from using religion as a justification for acts of terrorism. This reminds me that I must greet Speaker de Venecia because he has been among the earliest exponents and proponents of this dialogue of civilizations.

In this light, allow me to share with you the principles that govern our search for peace and development in Mindanao.

The first principle is that peace and development are the twins that always go together.

Second, all our actions for peace and development are founded on the imperatives of sovereignty, national integrity and constitutionality.

Third, we are a multi-ethnic society with a variety of religious and ethnic traits and traditions. Our multi-cultural and multi-ethnic society can thrive only through social justice for all and institutionalized accommodation of ethnic traditions.

To these three fundamental principles, we add a fourth for this day and age: we unconditionally reject terrorism.

In our search for peace, I’ve authorized the holding of the peace talks with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front to be hosted by Malaysia.

The United States is also committed to provide diplomatic and financial assistance to the peace process, especially the rehabilitation of conflict-affected areas in the Philippines, and thereby increase the dividends of peace.

The support of the Islamic world for the Philippine peace process goes back a long way. And through all the efforts, up to today, the organization of the Islamic conference has stood by the Filipino people.

Today, we aim for a holistic resolution of conflict. We want a peace that is just and honorable and allows our people more space to develop their human potentials and values.

Indeed, peace cannot be limited to a mere absence of war. Some months ago, I visited barangay Inug-ug in Pagalungan, Maguindanao, where Christians and Muslims, along with several non-government organizations and religious leaders, took the initiative to ask both the military and the MILF to leave their community. As this experience shows, the will of the people and god is always ascendant in the search for peace.

I know that each one of you in this conference pursues peace and development in your respective communities and societies. And together with you, I call on all armed groups in the region to join us in a quest for peace that is just, honorable and enduring.

Through your conference, let us collectively strive to finally dismantle the culture of divisiveness and self-centeredness threatening humankind.

May god’s peace be upon us all in this room and through your work. And with God’s grace on all the peoples of Asia and the world.

Mabuhay! And welcome once again.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the 21st Bishops-Ulama Conference and General Assembly and Asian Gathering of Muslim Ulama and Christian Bishops. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194635/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6509&Itemid=38