Thank you.

Thank you very much Secretary Claudio for your introduction.

And I would like to also congratulate and thank Vice Mayor Mike Rama and the other officials of the Vice Mayors’ League, (applause) including our host vice mayor, Vice Mayor Yap of Tagaloan; (applause) our other hosts in this gathering: we have Cagayan de Oro Congressman Uy and Congressman Rodriguez, (applause) from the province of Misamis Oriental; we have Governor Moreno and Congressman Emano; (applause) and their neighbor here in Northern Mindanao Congressman Pancrudo from Bukidnon; (applause) and to all of you vice mayors, first of all, happy 20th anniversary to your League! (Applause) And thank you, congressmen, governor, vice mayor for hosting this important event — the 20th Anniversary of the League of Vice Mayors.

And I’d like to take this opportunity first to convey a message to the people of Misamis Oriental and Cagayan de Oro through Secretary Ebdane because we had been here several times due to the recent floods; but since the DPWH dredger that was here was in need of repairs during the time of your great floods, DPWH has instead deployed a Cebu-based commercial barge-mounted dredger and reported that it started its operation last February 16. So, I hope that that is solved. (Applause)

So, I came here to Cagayan de Oro not just to make sure that that dredger is already here and working, but also, of course because the vice mayors of the Philippines are crucial partners… are an important player in the country’s fight against poverty and therefore an important player especially now that the nation is warding off the fall-out of the global economic crisis.

I thank Vice Mayor Yap for pointing out that we’ve so far been able to weather the global crisis quite well. And Governor Moreno who was a banker before he entered politics, was rattling off to me all the indicators that show how well our country is doing during these very bad global times.

Along with all other countries, developing and developed alike, we are working very hard not to get swamped by the world financial meltdown. In many respects, we were prepared for this global crisis. Our preparation has mitigated some of the hardships that have arrived with this global challenge.

The Philippines generated 8.0 percent GNP growth in 2007; and in 2008 when two-thirds of the world went into recession, we still managed a 6.1 percent GNP growth. All around us, we see countries having a much more difficult time.

In the fourth quarter of 2008, Japan’s GDP declined by 12.7 percent, U.S. by 5.1 percent, Thailand by 4.3 percent, Singapore by 3.7 percent, and Korea — Hanjin’s home country — by 5.6 percent. But our fourth quarter GDP went up by 4.5 percent. (Applause) And up to late last year, Filipinos had no difficulties finding and keeping the important jobs overseas that were helping their families and contributing to our economy; food prices were coming under control; inflation was being checked.

But since that time, the global financial turmoil has continued to spread and it has jeopardized the well-being of billions of people across the globe. Just before our meeting here, I had a meeting with the vice mayors of Metro Manila and they said that they want to help to address the needs of the displaced workers. Well, as far as OFWs are concerned, it seems that the Filipinos are the first to be hired and the last to be fired. That’s why since November up to today, (applause) of our 8 million Filipinos abroad, only 5,500 have had to come back because they lost their jobs. Here in our own country, we have 39,000 domestic workers mostly in the export sectors of electronics, auto parts, garments and mining who have lost their jobs, although 3,000 new jobs are being processed daily. That is why after this event, I will proceed to an event with the TESDA where they are working on jobs that are already connected to the recruiters and the employers.

Well, we are here and you’re all tourists, most of you because you’ve come from all over. I’d like to let you know also according to Ace Durano, the province mate of Mike Rama, that tourism is bucking the regional trend; and I hope that the hotels here, this hotel and the other hotels in Cagayan De Oro are sharing the experience of other hotels and resorts which are fully-booked for the first quarter of this year. (Applause)

Our domestic strength comes in part from our early response. In January 2008, we approved a stimulus of 1.4 percent of GDP. We implemented it in March when the global food crisis erupted. And in spite of that 1.4 percent of GDP stimulus, our deficit was less than 1.0 percent of GDP. We reacted to this first wave of the economic downturn. We worked hard to manage, I’m sure you remember, the huge spike in the prices and accessibility of food, fuel and rice. So, we spent 11 billion to augment the D.A. for its rice self-sufficiency program to be completed in five years; P24 billion for National Food Authority subsidies; P36 billion of tax relief to the middle-class which increased their take home pay because of the tax exemption for minimum wage earners that our congressmen here worked very hard to pass; P5 billion of conditional cash transfers; P7.5 billion of various cash grants; and P32 billion that went to a 10 percent salary increase for government employees. That was our response to the first wave of the crisis.

But there was a second wave of the world crisis, no longer food and fuel but now financial — the crisis that has come to be called the global tsunami. But through this time, because our GDP and our GNP have been growing, it shows that fiscal stimulus works and that should work not only for the national government but also for the local governments and you are in charge of how to spend the budget of your localities. (Applause)

We have acted to protect the poor as we have also worked to protect our nation. But while our efforts have been reasonably successful, no country can be totally insulated from the pain and hardship being felt throughout the world. That’s why we must all be vigilant in our efforts to respond quickly to changing circumstances.

We’ve been relatively lucky because we worked hard to be lucky. We’ve been able to cushion the blow today because of the pain and unpopularity that we have had to endure. But with the support of your Congress and you, our dedicated public servants in the local government, we took the economic reform medicine, we improved our banking system. You helped us crack down on smugglers; you helped us streamline our revenue system. That has allowed us to have the resources to make significant investments in our country for the first time in a generation; new money for roads, bridges, and ports — maybe some of you were able to travel here using the RO-RO Nautical Highway; new investments in healthcare, education and social services.

And these programs successfully bore fruit because you, our local government officials supported them. You, the local governments have helped build our economy’s reputation as “an island of stability in an otherwise global sea of economic troubles.” You, our local government officials have played a crucial part in the country’s impressive growth. And I thank you for that.

I’d like to point out one of the benefits — well, anyway, among the immediate benefits from our reforms — I’d like to point out one of them because you have 40 percent of every increase in internal revenue; 40 percent of every increase in the Value Added Tax, and that amount you get your share has a three-year lag. What you get this year is your share of the 2006 collections. Well, because we had about a 100 billion-peso increase in Value Added Tax every year since 2006. This year for the first time, you’re going to have your biggest increase in IRA of 40-billion pesos. (Applause)

Of course, when Gabby Claudio said that I’m the best friend of the local government units, it is because giving the IRAs due to our LGUs is a top priority for me because… (applause) because you handle the budgets of your LGUs. You already know even before the VAT increase years before when we were very short of funds in the early years of my presidency. We still managed to pay your allocations in full and we even paid the debts owed to you by previous administrations. (Applause) That is because I realize that the IRA is your primary tool to serve your constituencies. And used correctly, it will go a long way towards ensuring that our people will get the kind of local government they want. The vice mayor as the chief legislator of her town or city holds great power in directing how the IRA will be used.

And it is clear that our success will only come if it is a true team effort. National government will do its part, but we count on the local governments to step up and seize the opportunity we have created and that is that local governments today are more empowered than at any other time in recent history. We have worked together on many things. In Metro Manila, again, because I had just had a meeting with our vice mayors there, all but three of the vice mayors are in-charge of their anti-drug campaign; and that is very valuable because we have put the anti-drug campaign on the forefront of our crime fighting and fighting against corruption.

And because they handle their budgets, in charge of allocating the budgets, they have been able to allocate budgets for innovative livelihood programs and urban agriculture that can help their people. A great example that I’m sure is being done under your own circumstances in the different municipalities and cities of the Philippines.

Together, we have created a better deal, if you will, than many countries in the region, which have not yet devolved power to the local governments. I remember early in my administration, in Thailand they had this one-million baht for every locality as microfinance, but I found out the reason why they have to do that is because they don’t have an internal revenue allotment. So, you don’t have to beg from the national government. You can do it on your own and especially the vice mayors who are the heads of the local government legislators.

So, on this, your 20th anniversary in very auspicious economic times for the world, the challenge for you is to continue to allocate your increased revenues to invest in the future of your local government units because if you invest in your cities and municipalities’ future, the sum total of that will be the nation’s future.

So, let us all work together to ensure that our nation’s resources which are finite even if they are bigger than before are able to meet the objective of improving the lives of the people of your constituencies and therefore the entire Philippines.

Let us all band together to shoulder the responsibility of bringing your cities and municipalities, and therefore, our nation through these challenging times. As mentioned by Vice Mayor Yap, to date we have been successful. But now is not the time for being laid back or being inactive. Now is the time to step up to the challenge — work hard to ensure our nation’s bright economic future.

Kangina nga Governor Moreno was talking about, ibang klase talaga yung ating mga OFWs; the way they keep sending remittances back to the Philippines. An example of being a tough proud and resilient people. And I was telling him, you know, in New Zealand — which incidentally is another country with a negative growth rate right now — 25 percent of their population works overseas. Imagine first world country but 25 percent work overseas. So, it’s not a sign of poverty that you have people working overseas. We have 10 percent of our people living overseas. But with the case of New Zealand, even with 25 percent are working overseas, many of them are yuppies because New Zealand is a rich country, well, mom and pop from New Zealand still send additional allowance to their yuppies abroad.

In our case, even if your mother, father, uncle, brother, sister will sacrifice in Dubai, Milan or wherever he or she is, they will still send money home. That is the kind of people the Filipinos are — (applause) tough, proud, and resilient. And our resilience has proven its worth these past few months. And your support to our administration, vice mayors, heads of the legislatures of your municipalities and cities has also been very clear because you have aligned your own priorities with our national economic priorities. And I thank you for that.

So, for your commitment to the economy of your constituencies and therefore to the economy of the Philippines, a commitment that will continue to pay dividends for many years to come — I thank you , I wish you all the best and I congratulate you!

Thank you very much to all of you. (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 18th National Convention of the Vice-Mayors’ League of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412104605/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=21493&Itemid=38