Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, During her visit to the housing project for the urban and rural poor

Thank you very much, captain. The Honorable Mayor of Quezon City, Mayor Sonny Belmonte; the Congressman from the largest district in the entire Philippines, Congressman Chuck Mathay; our Cabinet Members, Mike Defensor who manages housing; Secretary Sonny Alvarez, who manages the issuance of titles from the national government; Secretary Dick Gordon, godfather of many of the poor from here in Commonwealth; Percy Chavez, the Chairman for the Commission on the Urban Poor; here is my provincial mate who is building homes, NHA Manager Ed Pamintuan; officials of the barangays that are covered by our beneficiaries, the 1,300 families who have graduated from being squatters, congratulations to all of you.

My goal was for 150,000 families to graduate from being squatters each year. This year we have completed that. So congratulations also. If you have graduated, Mike Defensor, is on the boundary. So he has a new one I will pester, housing is also needed. But I know you have a home, that's not what you're looking for. What you are looking for is security in residing on the land. So what was given to you today are transfer certificates of title. Whatever papers you are holding are the same papers held by those from Forbes Park. So you will become full homeowners.

And in the coming days, I expect to go to the other side, to the National Government Center East because that is the next one we will give TCTs to. So thank you and we worked together. Isn't it true, Chuck, that you are funding this technical working group, so during the in-between elections and your other oaths, Congressman also gave funds so that the operation could continue.

And I know that when we have large communities of urban poor, there are many people’s organizations. Many are helping. Many urban poor leaders. What we are doing is, because I am president of all the people, all the people’s organizations as long as they have been established for a long time and have many members, we recognize them as leaders of the urban poor.

So to speed up our work, our work, to speed up the papers of proclamation; to speed up the papers of distributing the titles, I hope you will no longer fight among yourselves. And if a group is being talked to because there are members who will be beneficiaries, the other groups should not be jealous, because they are all being talked to. All groups are being talked to.

One day, this organization; in a week, that organization. We recognize everyone because your servant is President of the entire Philippines. So let us unite. And I am also pleased that above 1,300 families today have graduated from being squatters and are becoming full homeowners. I am also pleased that before we came here, we with the mayor, congressman, secretaries came from a new complex of ours, the fourteen buildings. And there are new apartment units for almost 700 families. And with the 1,300 now, almost 700 there, so 2,000 families we are giving security of residence.

So within two weeks, we expect that the new apartment units will have occupants and they will stay there.

And don't forget…, we have ten thousand, those that are unoccupied. For those who are really looking for a home and are not picky about location, apply now. Because we have 10,000 housing units in different parts of the Philippines. They are already built, no one is occupying them. So if you are willing to relocate as long as you have a house anywhere, tell our housing authorities so that they can go there and start your new community.

As Sonny said, why since your servant took office, we are all newly seated in our positions. Sonny is newly seated as mayor. Chuck is newly seated as congressman. And our cabinet members, they are all new, because our main goal is to fight poverty. And even before, we know that in this city, the main request of the urban poor is security of land. That is what we are focusing on. Even if we make mistakes in other programs, even if we fail in other programs, as long as we succeed in the distribution of housing security to the urban poor, that is important.

Thank you all very much!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during her Visit to Urban and Rural Poor Housing Project. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409213353/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8710&Itemid=38