Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines On putting people ahead of politics

[ Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, June 12, 2007 ]

Putting people ahead of politics

One hundred and nine years ago, a nation in Southeast Asia pushed the threshold of freedom to the limit for the first time, bravely and boldly defying nearly four centuries of colonial rule.

One hundred and nine years later, the struggle for freedom still rolls forward — freedom from want and freedom from fear — as we March together in the fight against poverty and terror.

But freedom and independence in the borderless world of the 21st century are no longer a struggle against colonialism but a closer, principled and mutually rewarding engagement with other nations.

With the help of sincere allies like you, we shall continue to break free from the shackles that pin us down — poverty, divisiveness, terrorism, despondency—until one day, perhaps twenty years from now, we shall join the ranks of the first world nations among you.

Last month, Filipinos demonstrated our political stability through the mid-term elections.

The Philippine economy is strong and stable. Our economy has reached a new level of maturity with some of the strongest macroeconomic fundamentals in a generation. And we offer one of the best values and best places to invest in Asia today.

We broke the back of our lethargic economic legacy by a combination of tough fiscal measures and equally politically difficult decisions to raise more revenue. In one bold stroke, we were able to stop our backsliding and move forward towards balancing our budget and more importantly towards making long overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure.

We will continue on the path we have set for putting people ahead of politics by focusing relentlessly on the economy Our administration will focus on pro-growth, pro-trade and pro-investment strategies that help lift up our people from poverty and help the Philippines finally in contention as a real investment destination.

To keep reform growing, we are determined to engage all parties to move forward in a unified way to stay on the path of economic reform and discipline. It is our deepest hope that the various parties will set aside politics for now that elections are over and continue to vote for programs that have made our nation a new destination in Asia for business and investment.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library