I am happy to be with you all again.

The tricycle is the favorite mode of transportation in many provinces, as well as here in Metro Manila, especially in areas not reached by jeep and bus routes and on narrow roads.

Once when we were together, I recounted my experience, when I was still a Senator and my plane was forced to make an emergency landing in Romblon. I rode a tricycle from the airport to go to the mayor's house. That's why I understand your value.

In my last Congress that I attended, I mentioned that everyone should work together to fight poverty in our country, and to improve the livelihood of the majority. We discussed how we could increase your income as tricycle drivers and operators, if you recall.

Much has happened since then. Some of you drivers have worked hard and have been able to acquire your own tricycles. Others have saved up and started small businesses, and others have been able to send their children to school.

Many things have happened since then. There is a global economic crisis that is responsible for the increase in the price of oil and rice worldwide. We are not in a crisis here at home, but we are facing strong challenges. During these troubled times, it is the government's duty to ease the burden on the Filipino people brought about by these sudden price increases and the hardships of the global economy.

Your government is doing everything in its power to provide food on every table, and to protect your income against high prices and high inflation. The government is also continuously strengthening the health, education and social services system.

As part of health services, one thousand of you drivers, operators and families will be given PhilHealth Cards.

In education, you will be given scholarships for technical and vocational training called TEKBOK. This will help you acquire skills that you can use for livelihood, such as hairdressing, manicure and pedicure, mechanics, and massage. The total value of these scholarships for you is P2 million.

For those of you who have children in college, I have instructed the DOE to coordinate with the relevant agencies to teach you how to obtain scholarships or student loans for your children's education. I also instructed the DOE to coordinate with the relevant agency on how you can be helped to receive a discount on the drug-testing fee.

Compared to others, the Philippines' situation is relatively light, thanks to our fiscal reforms that manifested in 7%+ GDP growth last year. Were it not for the painful reforms of the past seven years, the impact would be much worse as it is in other developing countries. Instead, according to economic experts, in a very stormy sea of global economic uncertainty, the Philippine economy is a relative island of calm.

We are grateful to Shell for establishing their Pepeng Pasada Club program. Tricycle members will be given a discount of one peso per liter for regular Mogas and other types of gasoline you use, two pesos for 2T gasoline, and five pesos per liter for Advance used by scooters. Thank you, Mr. Ed Chua.

The DOE is finalizing the details of the Palit Makina program, to provide loans to jeep drivers and operators for engine replacements with LPG, which is cheaper than gasoline. While plans for the jeeps are being finalized, the DOE is also starting to talk to agencies to determine what the policies should be for converting tricycle engines, and so that you can also use LPG and other alternative fuels. Thorough discussion is needed to ensure that the LPG tank is properly installed and to ensure the safety of passengers and drivers.

The LTO will lower the fee for emission testing by P 40.00.

There is a moratorium on their MMDA Ordinance No. 6, so you were allowed to cross EDSA. You saw that there was full support in your congress. I heard that there was even a motorcycle escort for the tricycles that came here from Quezon City, Pasay, and other distant cities of Metro Manila.

And we will give TODA one million pesos as payment for rice.

Today, we are ALL-OUT SUPPORT, as your theme states, because you are also all-out in promoting the economy. Long live and thank you!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech: Congress of Tricycle Drivers Associations. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134916/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1731&Itemid=38