Thank you, Secretary Ermita.

Regional Governor Ampatuan; Regional Vice-Governor Adiong; Regional Assembly men and women; our congressmen; governors; other officials from the different provinces and districts of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao; excellencies of the diplomatic corps; others officials of the Philippine government; ladies and gentlemen.

Peace be upon you, and God’s mercy and blessings be upon you!

Great imperatives mark our national horizon today. And in all of them, Muslim Mindanao plays a vital and indispensable role.

For one thing, there is the imperative of peace. The guns have been silenced in Mindanao and we are negotiating a peace settlement with the facilitation of Malaysia forged in honor, dignity and justice for all.

But one cannot speak of the peace process in Mindanao without mentioning the enduring role of Libya since the Tripoli agreement in 1976, Saudi Arabia that spearheaded the Jeddah Accord of 1987, Indonesia that led the OIC committee of the six and then the eight towards the signing of the Philippines-MNLF final peace agreement of 1996, and indeed the entire OIC for their support to our peace process.

Another great imperative is understanding among peoples. Interfaith dialogue is part of our comprehensive national development plan for peace and is our contribution to the United Nations.

Political change, economic stability, interfaith dialogue, the security of our homeland — all these are hallmarks of survival in this age and time, and all these greatly depend on what happens in Muslim Mindanao especially under the new leadership.

At this time, I am focused on the economy as we are hit by a storm of unabated oil price hikes. We are able to face this among other things because we have kept our fiscal house in order and spurts of growth are extant in the countryside. Our growth rate so far this year is in fact higher than some of our more prosperous neighbors.

The cycle of peace, economic growth and political stability must be pushed by the combined weight of leaders and constituencies, and this is the challenge placed before all of us today. We, in the national government, and you, in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.

The people are completely exhausted with politics when so much remains to be done in the nation and in that land of Mindanao.

The people want a government that brings better service to them on a local basis, with more power in the provinces. And that is why your autonomy is so important as a prototype for other autonomies. The people want more accountability by the politicians. The people want less power concentrated in Metro Manila.

The people are dissatisfied with the current form of government, though they are unsure of what type of government should replace it. They have fears and rightfully so, that there will be a rearranging of the deck chairs in the titanic, but that the boat will still sink.

I say that we need a new ship. But in the end the people will decide the charter change.

In the meantime, we must pass a national budget to help the poor with new schools, more rice and a better education. And what I am saying about the country as a whole is more crucial in Muslim Mindanao. And we must pass an anti-terrorism law that keeps the nation safe and strong. And I thank the governor, the autonomous region governor for his commitment to the fight against terrorism and also to the pursuit of the peace process. But we must all, national and autonomous governments, generate the revenue to pay down our debts so that our children live without fear of poverty.

I’m deeply concerned that the pressing issues of the people will be lost in the noise of our degenerated political system. I must repeat: we need a stronger, more responsive government to serve the people tomorrow; and we need a stronger, more caring solution to poverty today.

We cannot abandon our commitment to solve the problems of the people as we go about salvaging and even savaging institutions in this severely degenerated system.

So today, I issue these challenges:

One, to all supporters of charter change: please involve the people. The people must be heard.

Two, to certain senators: stop your mindless preoccupation with all things political and do something — pass our national budget, create jobs, build up stockpiles of rice, bring health insurance to the poor, construct new schools, stop your wrangling and get to work. Time is wasting as the people suffer.

Three, to members of the business community: Get the economy moving. Be part of the solution, not part of the problem. Get off the sidelines and onto the field. Roll up your sleeves and join us in public-private sector partnerships to solve the nation’s problems.

And of course, to our newly inducted officials of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao: all that we are calling ourselves to do in the country, in the national government, in the national scene, you are also challenged to do in your autonomous region.

We cannot expect things to happen overnight. But given time, we in the nation as a whole, and you in the autonomous region will prevail over seemingly insurmountable odds.

I say this with great affection and sentiment because as a child growing up in Mindanao, in Lanao, I personally saw the plight of our countrymen in this land of promise. I consider it my filial duty and my duty now as your sister to work hard with you to fulfill that promise.

Once again to all of you, congratulations! And in this holy month of Ramadan, we especially pray for your great success.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Oath Taking of the Newly-Elected Officials of the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092419/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5217&Itemid=38