Speaker and Mrs. De Venecia and the congressmen, governors and city mayors who comprise the Philippine delegation to our United Nations activities; Secretary and Mrs. Romulo; and all of the appointive officials in the Philippine government who are here today; members of the Filipino community.

There are so many El Shaddai here, praise the Lord!

Most reverend Cantillas who takes care of the overseas Filipinos; Reverend Monsignor Kevin Nelan, representing the archdiocese of New York, thank you for giving this wonderful pastoral center to the Filipino community; my beloved countrymen:

It is a great honor that we are here. It is a great honor for me to be here so that we can dedicate this church to San Lorenzo Ruiz.

San Lorenzo Ruiz was also an overseas Filipino in his time. So it is fitting that he is not only the first Filipino saint but we can also consider him as the patron saint of overseas Filipinos.

We are proud of overseas Filipinos when businessmen around the world ask me why they should invest in the Philippines. The first thing I say, as you all know, is how skilled our Filipinos are because we have Filipino excellence.

There are eight million Filipinos all over the world. That is why one of our most important contributions to our outcome document of the general assembly at the United Nations was the paragraphs about migration. Congratulations! Ambassador Baja for having that part of the outcome document. And you are truly an ambassador of Filipino excellence around the world. And not only that, while you are helping the economy of your adopted land like the United States, you continue to help our country, the Philippines.

Of the eight million Filipinos all over the world, the Filipino-Americans are about three and a half million, less than one-half of our overseas Filipinos but you send two-thirds of the remittances to the Philippines. And because of your remittances, so many of your relatives are getting a good education, capital for their own small businesses, housing. And I am grateful because according to our data in our latest statistics, your remittances to the Philippines have increased by 19 percent. Thank you very much for your continuing support.

Because of you, the excellence you show in America and around the world, the world respects us. And one of the most symbols of the world's respect for our country, the Philippines, is what happened yesterday — the meeting of the U.N. Security Council. The most powerful institution of the United Nations where the most powerful countries are members, the presiding officer was none other than the representative and president of the Republic of the Philippines.

Of the world's respect for the Philippines, they accepted the Philippines' offer that at the 60th Jubilee Summit of the United Nations, there would also be a Summit of the U.N. Security Council. This is only the third time in the history of the U.N. that the U.N. Security Council has held a Summit.

Because New York is the financial capital of the world, we also used this opportunity to meet with some investors in the Philippines, aftercare for current investors, and promotion for those who might have a good chance of investing in the Philippines. And we expect that this respect of the whole world for the Philippines will translate into more investors in our country so that there will be more jobs for our fellow Filipinos in the Philippines.

Today, I received a text message from the Philippines that our unemployment rate has gone down to 7.7 percent from above 8 percent in the last _____. But that is still not enough. We still need more jobs because millions of our brothers and sisters are still unemployed.

Kaya kinakailangan ko hindi lamang yung remittances that you have been so generously sending but also your prayers that we will be able to bring about the conditions in the Philippines that will be able to solve our problem of poverty and divisiveness once and for all.

The problem of divisiveness in our country reached a point — now, didn't we read in our studies “A Tale of Two Cities” by Charles Dickens — it's as if our Philippines is a tale of two countries. It's as if there are two countries living in the Philippines with the same name, called the Philippines. One is the Philippines of our economy. Your remittances have helped, for instance, to give our country a very respectable growth rate.

Last year, 6.1 percent, the highest growth rate in the history of our country. And now even with the oil crisis, it's still 4.8 percent. Very decent. And even if we are an oil-importing country and our import bill for oil has become bigger, your remittances have helped to keep our peso stable. And we are also one of the 26 countries with the lowest price increase in the price of fuel.

And also, your help with housing is huge. Our housing industry is bustling. Our deficit is below the ceiling by 35 billion pesos. Our revenue collection is above target by 7 billion pesos. So our interest rate is lower compared to many years in the past.

Our tourism business is growing up double digit. Ito ang Pilipinas ng ating ekonomiya, ready to take off, not because of what I have done but because of what you do and because of that cumulative improvements in our economic policies over these years.

But just as our economic policies have been improving over these years, yung ating political system naman over the years has been deteriorating to the point that now it is so difficult to survive in this system and yet keep yourself ‘Lily White’ as everybody would want us to be. Somehow it paints us some shades of gray, some shades lighter or darker but it is so difficult to survive pure white. And that’s why we say, “who is without sin, let him cast the first stone.”

The system must be changed. Fundamental change is needed. We have our legislators. We have our local government officials. They must be the main instruments for change. But not only them, the people too must be the instruments for change. And we are only instruments. The one who can truly bring about change in our country is the Lord. And therefore, we have to dedicate our country to the divine will.

My fellow Filipinos here in New York, here in America, help me with your remittances, with your prayers. Help me so that we can achieve one Philippines, not two Philippines. The economy that works and the political system that doesn’t seem to be working anymore, but one Philippines. Under our patron saint, San Lorenzo Ruiz, and under the love and care of Mama Mary, Santa Maria de Dolores, that we celebrate today, the mother of the Philippines, Pilipinas Amante ti Maria.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s speech during the Holy Mass with the Filipino-American Community and Enshrinement at the Chapel of San Lorenzo Ruiz. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615132715/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5138&Itemid=38