Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Cocktails with Filipino community leaders

[Delivered at the Crystal Room, the Fairmont San Francisco Hotel, San Francisco, California, U.S.A., May 22, 2003]

Thank you very much, Ambassador Del Rosario.

Mayor Willie Brown, truly the mayor of the Filipino-Americans in San Francisco. Thank you for your frequent welcoming of me whenever I come. Thank you for the key to San Francisco that you’ve given me twice, once as vice president and once as president. And of course, thank you for saving our stockmarket with your strong advocacy with calpers.

I would like to greet also, of course, Consul General Bella Rosal. And I would like to introduce to you our Congressman from Bacolod City, Congressman Monico Puentevella. I thank also Attorney Rodel Rodis for his kind words as well as Attorney Rene Pascual and, indeed, they are familiar faces that show that the Filipino-American is an important member of the San Francisco community. Other leaders of the San Francisco community, distinguished guests, mahal kong mga kababayan.

As you very well know, President Bush honored me but honored the Filipino people by my state visit in Washington. I came to the United States this time on this state visit with the view in mind of formulating a new framework for our friendship with the United States. This is a new framework that is necessitated by the new needs of the 21st century. And in this new framework, aid is welcome but it is not central to the relationship.

When I went to the state visit, President Bush and I discussed the four range of global and bilateral issues, and we reaffirmed how deep and how far reaching is the relationship within the Philippines and the United States. Relations between our two countries are deeper and warmer today than at any other time in recent history. Although, those ties are rooted in shared history, shared values at common interest in global peace and prosperity. And yes, we both agreed that the Filipino-American community is the personification of the close ties between the Philippines and America. You are the personification of those ties.

What Rodel said about the Jews in the United States has become true about Filipinos in the United States. Therefore, because of you we have a revitalized and a maturing alliance.

The Philippine-U.S. alliance continues to play a vital role in ensuring our mutual security. It’s not a one-way street. America’s alliance with us is good for America as it leads in the fight against global terrorism. Its alliance with us is also good for our security because of the way that we can work together to fight terrorism in the Philippines.

President Bush announced his intention to designate the Philippines as a major non-NATO ally. Many asked what is the meaning of this. Hi! Dennis, how are you? Thank you for calling up mayor brown. Many have asked what’s the meaning of this. And I suppose it’s important for us to know what this means because this is one of the aspects of that framework of the new relationship, the revitalized and maturing relationship, in the framework that we are putting together for the 21st century.

Designating the Philippines as a major non-NATO ally will allow our countries to work together on military research and development, and give the Philippines greater access to American defense equipment and supplies. Something we lost when the bases left about a decade ago. I guess it is easier to illustrate the meaning of a non-NATO major ally by naming some other major non-NATO allies of the United States, namely: Israel, Egypt and Australia. That is the league in which we are today.

I am grateful that president bush recognize my leadership and strength in confronting terrorism in the Philippines and beyond, because after all our Filipinos have been victimized by terrorism in other parts of the world including lately, in Riyadh.

He reaffirmed the u.s. commitment to support Philippine efforts and defeat terror in all its forms. We reviewed recent progress in the war on terror and agreed that the effort is far from over. President bush emphasized that the United States will continue to provide significant security assistance to support the Philippines in this war on terror.

I welcome the additional counter-insurgency or counter-terrorism assistance for the Philippines in the 2003 supplemental budget. As I said, our relationship is a mature and revitalized relationship, a maturing and revitalizing relationship. Aid is not central to that relationship but if there is aid, it’s welcome.

So let me… Now, because this is the last leg of my visit to the United States, give you some idea of the magnitudes of the aid that we welcome.

Our foreign military financing budget for 2003 and 2004 — this is just one part of the defense assistance, it’s called foreign military financing. It used to be 1.9 million dollars in year 2000 — now, for the 2003 and 2004 budget, it’s 80 million dollars. This consist of military financing and also training for the military counter-terrorism and law enforcement agencies of our country. Incidentally, when I said that we had supplemental budget. The Philippines was the only country specifically mentioned in the add-on budget.

We recalled last year successful deployment of U.S. troops to southern Philippines. We agreed that we will hold another joint military activity. And I’d like to let you know that when the U.S. troops go to the Philippines for Balikatan, that’s 10 million dollars exclusive of the soldiers’ salary.

We also agreed on the need for efforts to alleviate poverty and other socio-economic grievances which can create breeding grounds for terrorism. For this efforts, over 300 million dollars will fund the efforts for socio-economic assistance.

This includes the u.s. food for peace program. The most popular of which is the PL 480. Economic and development assistance to Southern Philippines including 96 million dollars for child survival assistance in the conflict areas. And a continuing 20 million dollars of assistance for The MNLF rebel returnees.

All these assistance is meant to reinforce my efforts to heal the divisions in Philippine society. And to further advance this agenda, the u.s. will trade and equip to the tune of 25 million dollars a Philippine engineering unit capable of performing civic action and humanitarian projects in the conflict areas.

The U.S. will also provide diplomatic assistance and financial assistance of 50 million dollars to a renewed peace effort with the MILF provided that the MILF renounces terror. There is a carrot and a stick in our approach to the MILF. The stick is going on now because I have before I left I instructed the armed forces to conduct aerial and artillery attacks on embedded terrorist cells in Mindanao. And I will go there on Monday to check on the progress but I understand, I hear from the reports that the campaign is very successful. That’s the stick and the carrot is if we had peace U.S. will provide 50 million dollars to help in a mini-Marshall plan for the former conflict areas.

President Bush also agreed to help address the armed forces most pressing need by providing 30 helicopters. First time we’ve gotten thirty helicopters. We only have nine by the way, right now. As well as ten million dollars worth of spare parts. And the ten million dollars came from president bush’s using 15 percent of his entire presidential draw down for foreign countries.

I welcome the U.S. decision to provide tariff-free generalized system of preference benefits for specific items worth 1 billion dollars of market access.

The U.S. is also going to help us in terms of technical and capacity building assistance for the protection of intellectual property rights. That one I don’t know how much it will cost.

Other economic assistance includes special credit lines from the overseas private investment corporation and Eximbank worth over 500 million dollars. By the way, two million dollars of that will go to the investment of Loida Lewis in the meat processing plant in Cagayan de Oro.

I spoke about Eximbank combining with OPIC to give investment and export guarantees of over 500 million dollars. Eximbank’s participation in this means that almost forty percent of its total budget for Southeast Asia is now allocated to the Philippines.

President Bush congratulated me for my leadership and pursuing needed economic reforms in the Philippines. Hopefully, these reforms will strengthen the Philippines eligibility for the millennium challenge account when it is open to non-member countries of the International Development Association in the year 2005.

Right now, this millennium challenge is only open to countries that have… That are very very poor, less than a thousand dollars per capita income. But by 2005, they will be available to the relatively better off or middle-class countries provided these countries do certain economic reforms. And those are the reforms we happen to be doing, not because we want to qualify, but because we feel they are good for our country. and of course, president bush had a lot of Filipinos in the White House welcome. We had Filipinos even from San Francisco in the White House State Dinner because he recognizes the key role played by, as our Speaker said, 8 million Filipinos spread across a hundred forty nations. That’s why the U.S. is launching a project to facilitate the flow of your remittances to the Philippines. This project is similar to a project the U.S. did with Mexico. And basing it on Mexico’s experience, this project if … When we implement it after maybe three to six months of the study will save you, the Filipino-Americans, an estimated 300 million dollars in transaction costs a year.

And, while I was in Washington… I remember when I came here two years ago you said, Veterans Bill, Veterans rights. Well, when I was in Washington, President Bush sent Congress an administration measure extending new benefits for Philippine veterans amounting to 76 million U.S. dollars. Aside from include… And continuing his contribution of half a million dollars to the Veterans Medical Center in Quezon City, or the veterans base in the Philippines, something he started to do after my 2001 visit to Washington.

Secretaries Ople and Powell signed an agreement on science and technology cooperation not yet quantified in terms of dollars and cents because from that agreement framework will come the specific projects. That is as far as the joint communique is concerned.

But in my visit to Washington, of course, I had the chance the receive the leaders of the World Bank and international financing corporation.

The Philippines and the World Bank signed two loans amounting to 84 million dollars for the ARMM social fund and agrarian reform. The world bank also programmed 290 million dollars in loans for judicial reform, rural power, rural electrification, health, environment, urban slum upgrading, land titling so that we can, you know, we have a very very, messy messy land system with multiple titles and all. So we’re gonna fix that with this World Bank loan. That’s for this year.

And for next year, it will program… Ah no, that was for this year and 2003 and 2004. And then after that, another 360 million dollars program for 2005.

We also triggered discussions on 350-million dollar program loans to strengthen the public sector including the finance sector. And I’d like to say, I’d like to happily say the World Bank noted that during the last two years the Philippines doubled its rate of absorption of foreign assistance. This means we are more efficient in utilizing capital.

The international finance corporation reported to me on a 147 million dollars worth of Philippine projects that they are ready to fund including the Cavite coastal road and also small and medium enterprise programs.

After the World Bank call came the IMF. Well, we have no loans from the IMF. We haven’t borrowed from the IMF since I became president. In fact, we’ve been paying our old loans diligently so that by November our loans will be less than 85 percent of our deposits. We will be a net depositor in the IMF and eligible to graduate from IMF tutelage after 40 long years.

In my meetings with the private sector — because, of course, every visit of mine anywhere includes an investment mission — three large corporations are in the final stages of their decision to invest a combined 750 million dollars in the Philippines. But of course, you, our businessmen here in San Francisco, you know that we cannot name the corporations until their board makes the final confirmation. But we will be announcing them as they proceed because they are in the final stages. And investments are probably imminent.

The Ross Perot Group signifies its intent to consider a 500-million dollar investment in Batangas, an economic zone in the Batangas port, and transforming the Lipa airport into a joint use commercial and military airport.

The PNOC entered into a partnership and the sea solar power — these are two different investments on energy. The two investments will be 290 million dollars. That was in Washington.

In New York, I met with U.S. companies projected to invest in the reconstruction of Iraq. And also with organizations engage in business process outsourcing. According to the Department of Foreign Affairs who was monitoring, who has been monitoring the negotiations, we have a possible early harvest, just the early harvest not the totality of over a hundred million dollars worth of projects from them.

Tomorrow, I will meet the top officials of BechTel which was the first company to actually get a contract from Iraq and which is so far still the only American company on the ground in Iraq.

In sum, the economic benefits of my state visit amount to over 4 billion dollars and still counting.

I had a question earlier about the defense covering the military financing, training, regular training, counter-terrorism training, Balikatan, the support for the peace process, the engineering brigade, the helicopters, the spare parts, the veterans benefits, the defense and security component is at least 300 million U.S. dollars.

This is a partial accounting, because it excludes the commitments made during my state visit to add to the 2004 proposed defense budget. It also excludes the full cost of Balikatan 03-1. And we have not yet quantified the value of technical assistance for intellectual property rights as well as the science and technology cooperation. We have not yet because it was only… Because the contracts of USaid are not yet out. We have not yet also quantified our very big chances of being sub contractors and workers being hired in the Iraq projects as well as the further fruits of the investment mission on business process outsourcing.

Also, we haven’t started to avail of our privileges as a major non-NATO ally and the millennium challenge account will still be there for us in 2005. So, therefore, that’s why I say, I’m still counting.

And I would like to thank the Filipino people both in the Philippines and in the United States without whose faith and support and without whose clout, the Filipino-Americans political clout today, without your clout I think my state visit would not have succeeded…. Including you, the valued constituents of Mayor Brown.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Cocktails with Filipino Community Leaders. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412200941/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6260&Itemid=38