Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the State Dinner in Honor of President George W. Bush and Mrs. Laura Bush

[Delivered at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang, October 18, 2003]

REVISITING RP-US RELATIONS

First of all, I would like to say, welcome to Malacañang!

American leaders also lived and worked here. This home is a monument to the relationship between the Philippines and the United States of over a century. This relationship has been warm and deep in the hearts of our peoples and nations. And today Mr. President, you saw in the thousands of people who were in the streets to meet you with great joy, how much the Filipino people love and admire you. And I am sure that you have seen that I can speak for them when I say that we are proud you are here.

We have a revitalized and maturing alliance rooted in shared history — exemplified by this monument in which we lived and worked — rooted in shared values, a common interest in global peace and prosperity, as well as a real commitment to combating terrorism and advancing freedom. We know the pain of terror, we know the relief brought by knowing we have faithful partners against terror. We appreciate that the United States has delivered indispensable support and assistance to our efforts to marginalize terrorists, and also to drain the breeding places of their recruits and push the frontiers of development and social justice to win the peace.

Today, we agreed to work on the recommendations of the Joint Defense Assessment, towards a realistic security cooperation program in which the Philippines takes greater responsibility for its own political and economic security, even as strong support from the U.S. will contribute to peace and prosperity, stability and security especially from terrorism.

We also take pride in the robust economic and trade ties that bind the Philippines and the United States. And tonight, we had in our midst American chief executive officers, who came to the Philippines just to be with you tonight in this dinner, Mr. President.

Our friendship has ripened into a maturity befitting the information age of the 21st century, largely practical with just the right tint of sentimentality and warmth by a growing people to people solidarity here and in the United States. For the Philippines, our friendship takes into account the three million of our men and women who lived in and contribute to the development of the economy of the United States. It also takes into account the young soldiers of World War II, now senior veterans, who fought side by side with American soldiers in defense of democracy.

Mr. President, Congress gave you a rousing welcome as well in Congress, and the Philippine nation heard your speech at the joint session. It was inspiring, many have said. And so I can say that our meetings today in Malacañang and in Congress will lead us forward.

We shall continue to respond to the manifold threats and challenges we faced in the spirit of a blossoming covenant that lives in the realities of the 21st century, especially the conjunction between security and development that has become a paramount reality in the developing world.

On this note, friends I invite you all to join me in a toast for the continued success and good health of His Excellency President and Mrs. Bush, and the strong partnership between our two countries.

Mabuhay!

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].