Thank you Congressman Arroyo. Iggy is what the people here call him, and Ignacito is his nickname because little Ignacio is our… we have Ignacio, Sr.

Governor Zayco, thank you very much for your words in your speech; Vice-Governor Yulo and members of the Provincial Board; the neighboring congressman here, Congressman Jeffrey Ferrer; of course our host mayor, Mayor Nazareno, thank you for your invitation; to all the officials of Moises Padilla; the neighboring mayors; the mayor of our town here in the district, Mayor Malabor; another neighbor, Mayor Bascon; various officials; the people; our fellow citizens:

Happy anniversary to the people of Moises Padilla!

It’s good that the weather is good here while you are celebrating today, because Mayor Nazareno’s invitation reached me and in the scheduling I thought I could come not only to the celebration but also to a relief mission. Thank God that the weather is good for our celebration today. In Metro Manila, Central and Northern Luzon, they are still recovering until now from the effects of the worst floods in forty years. And thank God that the typhoon that was supposed to pass here, it stayed away, it went for a short while to Bicol and Romblon but did not stay and went out right away through Palawan.

I still remember my last visit here in 1994, when I was still a senator, I visited here, Mayor Garcia was the mayor, during the inauguration of your new Municipal Hall. Now that I am president, thank you for the opportunity to visit again for your celebration. And now my brother-in-law is your congressman, Congressman Iggy Arroyo, so I am the sister-in-law of the district and Moises Padilla.

I immediately saw that the electricity service here needed to be expanded, so when I became president, in my first year in office, electricity was brought to two barangays that didn’t have it. So, now all the barangays in Moises Padilla have electricity.

And to further increase the income of the farmers of Moises Padilla, as Mayor Nazareno said, they benefited from his 5-year Agricultural Development Program which includes the national government with 2,500 beneficiaries of CARP from here. Where are they here, are you not here today, our CARP beneficiaries, huh? Where are our CARP beneficiaries here? Congratulations to all of you.

You have heard that there is an economic crisis around the world since last year. All countries are affected, but thank God the impact is not the same for all countries. And the Philippines is one of only a few countries in the world whose growth rate did not turn negative, thank God. Because we implemented difficult but necessary economic reforms before anyone else. On taxes so that we can spend on your needs. Like for example, the electricity and also the help for our land reform.

Before the global crisis, we already started a new path for the economy. This path of the economy was made by our reform agenda which is why we were able to create eight million jobs across the country. Here in Moises Padilla, there are already many people employed here because of our economic reforms.

We continued to stand firm even during the time of the global crisis. We are more prepared than other countries. Today, I ask you to follow the dream of the founders of your town to make it progressive and make a great contribution to the progress of our country. I am very glad that as part of the celebration today we have a ceremony that honored the founding fathers of your town. The mayors, from the first mayor elected in 1951 to the last mayor that sat up to 2007. They are the founding fathers of the town of Moises Padilla. And we congratulate also your outstanding municipal employee because he represents the hardworking people of Moises Padilla who will bring your town to greater heights of progress.

When the invitation to your celebration today reached me, someone told me, why are you going to go to Moises Padilla, a very very small town. I said it is important to reach Moises Padilla. Especially now, today October 16 up to October 18, we are celebrating the International Day to Fight Extreme Poverty. That's why I didn't want the celebration of the Fight Against Extreme Poverty to be in Manila. I wanted to go to one of the small towns. And so, it was very providential that the invitation of Moises Padilla came so that I can celebrate the Day for Fighting Extreme Poverty with this small but very hardworking town of Moises Padilla.

So, I want to congratulate, welcome our new mayor, Mayor Nazareno because he already has his 5-year Agricultural Development Plan, he already has his prioritization in fighting poverty among the residents.

And so on this day, I am glad to hear about what the good mayor has planned. And I hope that we can all work together to fulfill those plans to fight poverty, extreme poverty especially in this town of Moises Padilla. I trust that you will heed my request because your support for me has always been strong.

So, thank you so much for your support to me all these years since 1992 when I first ran for senator until now. And I’m very glad to be able to spend this important day, important day for the whole world fighting extreme poverty, important day for this small but hardworking town of Moises Padilla. And on this day again, thank you for your support and Long live the people of Moises Padilla!

Thank you very much to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 58th “Handurawan” Charter Day Anniversary of Moises Padilla Municipality. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134103/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26547&Itemid=38