Thank you very much. Thank you very much to all of you.

Thank you very much, Secretary Cito Lorenzo.

Thank you very much, and I also greet my colleagues in the government. And I greet of course all of you from the private sector. Thank you, Chairman Danilo Garcia of PGIC. Thank you for the manifesto of support from the entire council that you gave to me, and thank you to Grecon because you will give a 50 centavos discount to the poor who buy rice when they have this card.

I also thank Raul Montemayor, the president of the Philippine Farmers Advisory Board. I remember when Raul graduated as valedictorian from Ateneo. I also graduated with my masters there, right Raul? And I am happy that he used his skills for the benefit of our farmers.

Thank you, Mr. Joji Co, a leader of the Confederation of Grains Association that I have known for a long time. Thank you and here we are united. Caring Cabalen, my Capampangan, good afternoon everyone. Especially our outstanding hybrid rice farmer from Bacolod, our farmer. To my relatives from the Ilocos region and Pangasinan, good evening to all of you, esteemed ones. To all of you, especially our farmers from Tagudin, who won the award as one of the five Outstanding Hybrid Rice Farmers.

To those from Mindanao where I grew up, a warm welcome to all of you. To the Ilonggos, the province of my husband, good afternoon to all of you. To those from Tagalog region, especially the number one Outstanding Hybrid Rice Farmer, Mr. Pablo from Mindoro Occidental, congratulations! To all of you, thank you because we are all working together for the aspiration of the ordinary Filipino to have food on every table. And I know that you haven't eaten lunch yet, so I won't prolong my speech because you are the ones who feed the Filipino people, and you haven't eaten lunch yet. After all, Cito Lorenzo has already expressed our programs, I just want to emphasize that we will start another new program for our farmers in March, and that is a program of affordable fertilizer and equipment from China.

This is part of… This follows the hybrid rice, this is part of the 60 billion pesos spent by my administration for the modernization of agriculture. No one has spent that much in the past. And I also want to let all of you know that because of our modernization, because of unprecedented irrigation, because of hybrid rice that our farmers have proven how yields are doubled, tripled. Don't worry that no one will buy your palay. In the past, the NFA had a fund of one billion pesos to buy palay, this year, we will increase it to four billion pesos procurement program.

So maybe that's all so you can eat. I know you had breakfast at ten o'clock but it's already almost noon.

So thank you, thank you to the retailers, thank you to the millers. And part of our milling program is the check given earlier by DBP. That is the first of the DBP loans for the rehabilitation and modernization of our milling facilities.

So from the farmer to the millers, to the retailers, we must all be together always, we must all be together so that there is food on every table.

Thank you very much and now let's eat our lunch.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Rice Industry Summit. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090750/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5653&Itemid=38