Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Grand Opening of the Largest Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) Center of Teletech

[Delivered at the Level 2, Robinson’s Place, Ortigas Ave. Ext. cor. Imelda Ave. Cainta, Rizal, May 12, 2006]

Thank you very much, Secretary Favila.

Mr. Craig Reines and the other officers and his co-workers here in Teletech. I’d like to introduce to all of you also our new chairman of the ICT commission, Secretary Mon Sales; our local officials headed by Governor Ynares and Mayor Ilagan; Lilia de Lima, Director General of the Economic Zone, which this is now an economic zone.

To all of you, congratulations! To everyone involved in this opening of Teletech here in Cainta. Congratulations! To Teletech for being the largest BPO center in our country. Congratulations!

One of the brightest spots in our economy is the development of call centers and outsourcing because it uses our greatest resource in the Philippines — our people. Our people are our greatest resource whether they are our one million workers in Saudi Arabia or our 100,000 workers in our Business Process Outsourcing industry. The Philippines has developed a strong track record in BPO because we have demonstrated the ability to move up the value chain. And this very very efficient and very nice looking center really shows how high in the value chain Teletech is. Congratulations!

The country will continue to support the growth of call centers and BPO with policies that encourage the location of right infrastructure. For instance, the infrastructure we’ve spent on in order to reduce the cost of connectivity. And on policies that upgrade the technical skills of our human resources, particularly at the high school and grade school levels where we have made English as the medium of instruction and the technical levels.

We have released 500 million pesos for high school vouchers so that our young people can study in private high schools. We have released 500 million pesos for scholarships to what we call the call center finishing schools to make your job easier when you’re looking for customer care agents. And I’m very happy that Teletech has a very high… a hiring rate of 21 percent of your applicants. Congratulations! For that very very much higher than the national average.

That our call centers and business process outsourcing centers are the symbol of our new competitiveness. The growth of Philippine competitiveness is evident in the strong growth of our BPO industry and incidentally in our 26 percent export growth rate. Congratulations! Peter for that great news of 26 percent as your growth rate.

They are our 26 percent export growth rate for year to year is part of our strong macroeconomic indicators that have caught the attention of the world. We’re making headway as far as the various facets of competitiveness are concerned, whether this be in the area of good governance and liberal and consistent investment policy, and fiscal discipline. Our economy is on a winning streak driven by many tough decisions we have had to make. The payback to the people is starting to flow down in terms of more jobs like the jobs that Teletech is making available. Craig says that in… maybe in 18 months they may romp up from the 6,000 you have today to 25,000 in 18 months.

Infrastructure like the cost of the telecoms infrastructure which drastically reduced the cost of connectivity. I remember in 2001 when I first came in and I said we have to reduce the cost of connectivity. We have to spend in infrastructure connectivity to the U.S. was 38,000 dollars, now it’s 4,000 or less. So with that drastic reduction, I think that one was the key to spurring the BPO business. And of course part of the payback is basic social services for the segment of the population that cannot expect to be hired in such high-paying jobs as what the BPOs offer.

All of this also on the back of an expanding e-governance platform that’s cutting graft and enabling greater efficiency and social impact for every peso spent. I enjoyed talking to your chairman and CEO over VOIP because I want the whole national government to be VOIP and that’s going to be part of the work of Mon Sales.

And just like the BPO centers, the cabinet is working 24 by 7 on the areas that need improvement in governance and the economy. We know there are no quick fixes but the opening of centers like Teletech Cainta makes us confident that the competitiveness and enterprising drive of the Filipino will carry us through.

To Craig and all the great Filipino workers that are making up Teletech Cainta, congratulations to all of you!

Mabuhay! And may you be many many more. Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Grand Opening of the Largest Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) Center of Teletech. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213318/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2773&Itemid=38