Thank you very much, Secretary Joey Lina for your consistently wonderful introduction of me.

Police Superintendent Salvacion, Director of the Philippine National Academy; Undersecretary Corpuz, OIC of the Philippine Public Safety College; General Ebdane and the leader of the Philippine National Police; all officers of the Philippine National Police who are here today; I would also like to greet the mayor of Silang, Mayor Madlansacay; as well as the president of the City Mayors of the entire Philippines, Mayor Francis Tolentino; and the spouse of our Speaker of the House of Representatives, Mrs. Gina de Venecia; I would also like to greet your future boss, in addition to General Ebdane, Fire Chief Superintendent Francisco Senot and Jail Chief Superintendent Arturo Alit.

And those who help take care of your welfare, the president of the PNP Alumni Association, General Pete Bulaong; parents; siblings; friends of our graduating students today; members of PNPA Class 2004, guardians, accept my heartfelt congratulations on your graduation.

I also congratulate especially Cadet Decena and the top ten. And I am pleased that six of the top ten are women. Class 2004 is special to me because you trained with the PSG.

And, therefore, let me also take this opportunity to commend the Class of 2004, who, as part of your training with the PSG or part of the security force that did an admirable job of ensuring the safety of U.S. President George Bush during his state visit to the Philippines last year.

By the way, stand at ease.

Along with my greetings is my warm welcome to you as members of the Philippine National Police, Bureau of Fire Protection, and Bureau of Jail Management and Penology.

You are now my fellow agents of change. We all want change. The change we desire is about a better life, including economic well-being and safety.

Even police officers, firefighters, and prison guards are ordinary Filipinos who aspire to a better life. That's why, as Secretary Lina said when I became president, I raised the salaries of police officers and made them equal to the salaries of teachers. And I am just waiting for it to arrive on my desk from Congress – thank you to Speaker de Venecia and Senate President Franklin Drilon, and all the Congressmen and Senators – I am just waiting for it to arrive on my desk so I can sign the increase in salaries for firefighters and prison guards. I wanted to sign it today, but it hasn't arrived on my desk yet. There's a process for that. After it's passed, it goes through the Office of the Speaker, the Senate President, it's enrolled then it's transmitted to Malacañang. Yesterday it was transmitted, it will go through the Legislative Office, it will be reviewed by… Ritual, it will be reviewed by, by the legislative lawyer to see if it should be signed or vetoed or allowed to lapse into law and then it will be given to me. But it's already there, it's arrived at Malacañang, so it will arrive. After that, after the salaries of police officers and teachers have been equated, we can then raise the salaries of teachers and other government personnel again. That is our next platform when we return to Congress after the election.

To those who are graduating today, join me in the change I am fighting for for the ordinary Filipino. In a short period of time, we have made a strong start. We have stabilized the chaos we inherited. We have made an unprecedented advance in housing, including housing for police officers. During my short presidency, we have built almost three hundred thousand housing units for workers, and this includes housing for the police.

For your livelihood, in addition to salary increases, I know you have many needs. Your alumni association has a foundation called Kampilan Multi-Purpose Cooperative of the PNP Alumni Association to help alumni with special needs. So today, in addition to helping the ordinary police officer, I will add a seed fund of one million pesos, I will give it to General Bulaong, the president of your alumni association.

We have made progress against corruption, including a crackdown on corrupt police officers. That's why our fight against crime is strong, especially against drugs. More than twenty thousand drug lords and drug pushers have been arrested, including number one, William Gan. We have confiscated almost twenty billion pesos worth of drugs.

And we went after the terrorists. For the first time since the Sipadan incident, the Abu Sayyaf are on the run. Famous terrorists like Abu Sabaya, Robot, Al-Ghozi, Global have been killed or imprisoned.

But these are just down payments. The next installment is still needed. Especially decisive leadership is needed to suppress the forces that are trying to divide us.

That's why I need you, those graduating here at PNPA. I am fighting for unprecedented change that will make us safer, strengthen our families, and eradicate corruption. I will fight to change the culture of corruption, stop the scourge of drugs, and eradicate terrorism.

We will expand housing for police officers.

I hope that you, new public safety officers, we who serve in the government, and all of us Filipinos will work together to overcome poverty, suppress criminality, and achieve peace throughout the country.

To you, my advice, new police officers, new firemen and women, new guards in the prisons — be exemplars of public service.

Let us unite in being each one of us an agent of possible social transformation and lasting progress.

I desire your cooperation in my objective to provide a good life for every Filipino.

Again, to my special Class of 2004, congratulations to the graduates, their parents and their teachers.

Thank you very much. Long live us all!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 25th Commencement Exercises of the Philippine National Police Academy (PNPA) Tagapagsanggalang Class 2004. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090424/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5663&Itemid=38