OPENING THE DOORS OF UNITY AND RECONCILIATION

Friends, one of the things that truly gives me joy as President and mother of our country is to welcome our countrymen who are returning to the government. I am pleased because this is also a sign that our efforts towards unity and peace are succeeding.

My administration continues to stand firm on a peaceful and democratic way to solve the problem of rebellion in our country.

We are fighting the rebellion, which we consider organized crime, and I am glad that you, we are together in this fight. We are also fighting terrorism, which is also organized crime. Sometimes we no longer see the difference between rebellion and terrorism. We are also fighting other organized crimes, such as drug syndicates. Here in Southern Tagalog, because you are returning, the problem is even more intense than the problem of rebellion. So, although this is an occasion of return because we are in Southern Tagalog and there are National Government officials here, I want to use this opportunity to raise awareness that we will also fight drugs more intensely.

I want to report to you that earlier I signed an Executive Order directing various agencies, especially the police under our Chairman of the Dangerous Drugs Board, Joey Lina, to form a task force to help the Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency to suppress drug syndicates. In that Executive Order that I signed this morning, I also directed the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office, whose Chairman is here, Honeygirl Singson de Leon and the Manager, Reggie Uriarte. My order to the PCSO in that Executive Order is to set aside one billion pesos from the gross receipts of the lotto to be used by the PDEA and the police task forces and various other agencies that will help the PDEA to fight drugs.

Well, if we look at our OFWs in Iraq, didn't we set aside money in OWWA for them to return home if needed or to be rescued there if needed? We only spent a small portion of it. Didn't we also distribute one billion from the PCSO during the SARS crisis to fight SARS, but how many victims of SARS were there in the Philippines? Ten, maybe even less than eight because the two who had… their blood tests were returned yesterday, and it turned out to be negative. So, only eight had SARS, two died. How many are dying from drugs? So if we can provide… we can set aside one billion for OFWs in Kuwait and the Middle East, if we can set aside a billion for SARS with only eight victims and two deaths, what about drugs? So many, especially in Southern Tagalog are becoming victims of this terrible disaster of our country. Drug syndicates do not discriminate based on race, religion or belief. And so does terrorism. So we must fight both equally. We have seen terrorism, it has decreased and anywhere, anytime. You know that, because your former comrades, I think, are one reason why some of you have returned to the fold, you cannot do terrorism. Terrorism happens from the farthest barangay in Mindanao to the capitals of the world.

In the world, in the post-Iraq war period, we have achieved greater strategic stability. But this also drives militant cells into deeper desperation. So all Filipinos must be alert everywhere. We must show terrorists – whether terrorists in the NPA, terrorists in the MILF – that humanity will not be intimidated, that life goes on and you terrorists, whatever other names they use to make them glamorous, will be brought to justice.

We will intensify our intelligence work at home and strengthen international security cooperation.

And I hope that our fight against terrorism will greatly add to the peace we seek, a peace that is now closer because you, my friends, are returning to the fold. Let us forget your violent past. You are no longer with our organized enemies. Let us start your life anew. You are now free to live in peace.

I know that this was not an easy decision for you. That's what our siblings, the couple who shared their story, told us. So I am even more grateful for the trust you have given our government.

You know that the root of rebellion is poverty. The accomplice of crime syndicates and terrorism is poverty. So we are fighting not only rebellion, not only crime syndicates, not only terrorism, we are also fighting poverty.

I know, friends who are returning to the fold, that you came from lives of extreme poverty before you joined the movement. I want you to overcome the poverty in your lives.

So, you will receive as a start to your new life, 4,500 pesos each, as a start. Here, we see this rice, this is also a help from the DSWD and Provincial Government so that you will be given one sack of rice as a start to your life. Mike Defensor told us that you also have land. I also asked the son of Laguna, Ka Lix Cataquiz, is that true? He said it was true, because in Calauan in the town of Mayor Berris there is a place where you can live if you want. And for those who will build a house, you also have coco lumber, right Danny? to be used to build your house. You already have a starting point for expenses, food, housing. You will also be made members of PhilHealth. What does this mean? It means you will be helped to have free medical treatment, consultation and even surgery if needed. Of course, we are all going to die, so for our loved ones, you also have free life insurance. Isn't it free? And we talked about our loved ones, because there are so many in Laguna in the countryside who are loved ones, you will also be given coco seedlings to start your livelihood again. For those who plan to be fishermen, I suggest that you form a cooperative and Alix of the Laguna Lake Development Authority will immediately give you a permit to build fish pens.

But I want to express to our officials that the assistance I have announced is not only for the returnees. This is help for the poorest communities throughout Laguna. You know that the Province of Laguna is very rich, one of the richest in the Philippines because many investors are in CALABARZON. It's just that, it's like there are two worlds in Laguna. There is a world of many industries and rich in CALABARZON, the area of Mayor Arcilla. Sta. Rosa is the Detroit of the Philippines. The son of Mayor Arcilla is even a leader of our country because he is the President of all SKs in the country. That's one place. Leadership in the country – that's SK – economic and political. There is also the other world of Laguna where the poor live – poor farmers, poor coconut farmers, poor fishermen. So even though you can see the beauty of the industrial estates in CALABARZON, in the other Laguna there are so many poor people, especially in the rural areas of Laguna.

So I want Secretary Lina, who was once the father of Laguna, who is very familiar with Laguna, to find his former children of the barangays in the countryside who need to be given this help as we distributed today. That means you don't have to be a rebel first before you get help like this. The poor should be rewarded for not entering into rebellion. So that's what our former father of Laguna will do. Find them, those grandchildren, Joey? Barangay grandchildren.

But in these times, you brothers and sisters who are returning to the faith, I want to say that you are truly very important, as is this day of your return. You know, today is the feast of Saint Isidore the Laborer. He is the Patron of Farmers. Saint Isidore the Laborer was an ordinary farmer. The difference is that every day before he went to the farm, he would first attend mass, I mean, go to church first, attend mass, and then, he would be one hour late compared to his companions. However, when harvest time came, his harvest was still more abundant than that of the others. So those who were jealous of him said, let's spy on him. How does he get a bigger harvest when he starts his farming one hour later? And according to the story, that's why he became a saint, they saw that while he was at church, an angel would descend to plow for him. So when he arrived at his work, he just had to plant.

We don't have an angel like Saint Isidore the Laborer. Not all of us will be designated as patron saints. The Lord gives some examples to inspire us. What is the inspiration of Saint Isidore the Laborer's day? That means if we have faith, not everything needs to come solely from us. Faith, that means, if we have faith, our work will be fruitful.

So on this day, friends who are returning to the faith, thank you for returning to your faith in the justice of our government. And may Saint Isidore the Laborer bless you so that your work will bear fruit and provide a truly good life for your families.

Thank you very much, welcome home to all of you.

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].