Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Secretary Pamintuan, our champion of the Urban Luzon Beltway, for your introduction of me.

Thank you very much as well and congratulations, University President Nani Perez, for your welcome and for your leadership here; and thank you Vice President Noli de Castro because usually the President and Vice President don't attend the same occasion but because what we are doing here is very important, Vice President Noli de Castro is here.

Thank you also, Congressman Dodo Mandanas who has been with me since Manila, congressman in your district, for attending our discussion on the Urban Luzon Beltway where even before you were governor, you already did a lot regarding this.

I also greet the father and son, Congressman Dong Mendoza and Secretary Larry Mendoza. And of course, Mayor Dimacuja, thank you very much for your very kind welcome remarks. I remember when all of this was still being planned, even before I was president, even before I was vice president, I was still a senator or undersecretary, I went to Mayor Dimacuja’s house to eat breakfast there uninvited, do you remember that, Eddie? Okay.

And I would like to introduce the new Press Secretary, Jun Icban. And the one sweating because Nani said your “bridge of promise” needs to be finished by May, Vic Domingo, Secretary of Public Works. Noli de Castro and I were asking Congressman Mandanas, why is it called the “bridge of promise”? Because Dodo said it has been promised for a very long time, it took so long to fulfill. So now if Vic Domingo fulfills Nani’s request to finish it early, it should be called the “bridge of fulfillment.”

To all of you, officials of Batangas University, teachers and students, good afternoon to all of you.

I am happy to be here at your university to discuss what we call the Urban Luzon Beltway. First of all, because the Batangas Port plays a very big role in the Urban Luzon Beltway and the former Secretary of Transportation, Nani Perez, played a very big role in conceptualizing the Urban Luzon Beltway. And I remember during that time, we were also arranging the relocation, so Dodo even invited me there because of course we want development to be humanitarian.

One reason I am happy to be here is because I wasn't able to attend when University President Nani was installed as president of Batangas University, so even though I'm late, I'm here to greet and congratulate him. And double congratulations because, even before I came here, Nani went to Malacañang where he received the Certificate of Deregulated Status for Batangas University.

It is a great honor for me, as Nani said, that the project he started, especially the Batangas Port, was completed during our administration, so congratulations to all of us.

I also thank your University President because he and Larry Mendoza were a great help during EDSA Dos, and after EDSA Dos, Larry became chief of my PNP and Nani became my cabinet member in January 2001. And the Philippines has come a long way since January 2001. You students were still very young children then, in 2001. So I think you don't remember how chaotic that time was, less than ten years ago, the country was on the brink of extreme political turmoil and financial bankruptcy.

During that time, the economy was struggling and regressing. There were few investors, few jobs created. The government's debt was 3.6 trillion pesos, more than the GDP of only 3.3 trillion pesos. And our dollar reserves were almost depleted.

During that time, salaries were low. Prices rose rapidly. And with very low tax revenues, there was insufficient funding for expanding healthcare, improving education, and providing clean water and electricity in remote barangays.

We entered this miserable scene. I didn't pursue the Presidency in 2001, it fell into my lap. But instead of backing away from these difficult tasks, we rolled up our sleeves, determined to reverse the course of the Philippines.

We were focused like a laser beam, to deliver real results to improve the lives of ordinary Filipinos. As an economist, I know that to recover the economy, we needed to discipline the treasury, grow the economy, and invest in people and infrastructure, such as the infrastructure in what we call the Urban Luzon Beltway. The Batangas Port that Nani started when he was Secretary of Transportation, we completed in 2007. It is a gateway to the world, we expect it as an international port and as a RORO port connected to Vice President Noli de Castro's province, Mindoro which also has two RORO ports: the RORO port there in Calapan, with a good road and Roxas Port to the south of the Philippines.

This includes our Urban Luzon Beltway from Batangas Port, as Nani said, we built the road to the Southern Luzon Arterial Road or STAR which we completed in 2008. And now we are connecting the STAR and the Southern Luzon Expressway, currently under construction and later after this we will have a motorcade from Batangas Port to the end of STAR where the connection to SLEX is almost finished.

We are expanding SLEX, it's almost finished, right, Vic? It's finished, it's finished, it was just completed. The connection of SLEX to the North Luzon Expressway or NLEX is being made or is being done through the highway being built from C-5 to the Valenzuela Exit of NLEX, that's where we're going tomorrow.

The NLEX was expanded in 2005 to reach the Subic-Clark-Tarlac Expressway or SCTEX which we opened in 2008; and the Subic Port which we are also making world-class, was completed in 2008. At the ends of the beltway here in the southern part, STAR was also connected to San Juan, Batangas, in the district of Larry and Dong, because it was connected to the RORO Port of San Juan, Batangas which was then connected to our further RORO ports in Marinduque continuing to Lucena. And in the North, SCTEX was connected to the Tarlac-Nueva Ecija-Aurora Road up to Dingalan Port in Aurora. That is what we call the Urban Luzon Beltway.

Noli, was supposed to go with me in the helicopter but he decided to just drive, but our trips are almost the same. Noli said it was so fast, as you know because you travel. He was surprised at how fast the trip was from Manila to Batangas City. The STAR reduced the Batangas City-Lipa travel from one hour to just a few minutes, you know this better than I do.

And the soon to be completed SLEX-STAR Road, which is the Sto. Tomas- Calamba Road will reduce travel time from Batangas Port to Alabang by an hour. I think you can believe it because you saw the trip to Batangas reduced by an hour because of STAR, you will believe that the same will happen because of the STAR-SLEX connection. And because we expanded SLEX, traffic is being fixed in Manila up to Calamba. And because of that, more people have decided to just live in suburban Laguna even though they work in Manila. The C5-NLEX highway in the North is the same, undergoing construction. This will also reduce travel time between North and Southern Luzon by half an hour. The NLEX expansion, the travel time from Balintawak to Clark was halved so those who work in NCR, many of them now live in the suburbs in the North every night, so Manila is decongested.

All of this made housing projects outside of Metro Manila where land is cheaper and the lifestyle more conducive to the family viable. And because of this, we have also ensured that more and more families are able to own a home. In our administration in the department of Vice President Noli de Castro, almost half a million affordable housing units were built and gave that many families across the country the opportunity to achieve their dream of owning a home. And more than 300,000 of these are along the Urban Luzon Beltway. There in the waresite, I told Noli, we will visit a housing project near NLEX, to show how many housing developments have moved out of Manila.

On the other side, in the North, for a long time Subic and Clark had been left idle. They were mere ghosts of their past glory, they were undeveloped assets, they were a painful reminder of the loss of the strategic importance of the Philippines, they were as empty as our foreign relations.

But now, Subic and Clark — magnet of economic activity. International airlines bring half a million tourists to Clark. And in Subic, the biggest world-class ship ever built in the Philippines and among the biggest ever built in the world was launched, followed by others. The SCTEX connects the two economic zones; more than 150,000 jobs have been created.

Within Metro Manila, the work of Larry Mendoza, a Batangueño, the rails were connected and the LRT and MRT will soon be connected from Monumento to North EDSA. What needs to be done Larry, right, is to just test the operation of the trains to make sure the trip is safe. And this train, the LRT was also extended to Pasig and Marikina, and we are connecting the Northrail and Southrail to Lucena.

So we have delivered a nationwide transportation system not only in the Urban Luzon Beltway but nationwide, that binds the nation together as never before, so that people and goods can be delivered faster, cheaper and safer from one end of the nation to another.

We have turned around the Government’s dire fiscal situation that was inherited from past administrations. While challenges remain, our government’s finances are in a much healthier position today than nine years ago. Earlier, I said when we started, the country’s debt was larger than our GDP. Now, it is only now 63% of GDP, we have significantly reduced it. This has resulted in an improvement in our credit ratings, and today, we no longer have a debt with the IMF.

Why? We never shied away from taking on tough issues. Most notably, my popularity plummeted when I… when I went against the grain and championed the passage of the expanded Value Added Tax. Thank goodness for congressmen like Dodong Mandanas who supported us there. We knew it would be unpopular, but someone had to get the nation’s fiscal house in order and bring in revenues, fresh revenues to invest in the people. It was the right thing to do. We served the country well, we do not regret doing it.

These accomplishments have shaped the building blocks of change that brought about an unprecedented 36 quarters of sustained economic growth, created nine million jobs, added 52 million people to health coverage, and our country, the national treasury, remains strong.

And for those who refuse to see progress, just look at the skyline of Manila or Clark or Santa Rosa today. It is a skyline with new, modern buildings; construction cranes, better roads, hotels, shopping malls and small businesses. This is the part of the Philippines we have helped nurture and create.

We have made progress in many areas, but more needs to be done. For example, it will take more than two years to complete Northrail. But what I can say is, everything our government has achieved is to build a brighter future for the next generation of Filipinos. That is why I am here at your school, to connect with the youth. The youth of our country are our hope and inspiration. Everything we need to do should be to build a better life for each of the youth of our country.

And while we are proud of what our government has accomplished, the achievements of the past are only as good as the nation’s ability to continue to grow and prosper. We truly expect, we desire that the progress we have made will not stop, that what remains to be done will be picked up by the next generation of leadership.

And the youth, you, the youth of our country are the bridge between the past and the future. And for you, our youth, we correct what is wrong, we fight for change, and we seek a brighter tomorrow. Our country has come a long way, but there is still a long way to go and you, our youth, represent the aspirations of our country.

For you, our youth, we dedicate the efforts of our country to lift up the Philippines. That is why I am pleased to be here.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Urban Luzon Beltway Tour: Visit to the University of Batangas. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100505232725/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27526&Itemid=38