Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the official luncheon for H.E. Prime Minister Jan Fischer of the Czech Republic

[Delivered at the Aguinaldo State Dining Room, Malacañang, September 7, 2009]

His Excellency Prime Minister Jan Fischer, members of the delegation, leaders of the Philippine government and Philippine business, ladies and gentlemen:

Your Excellency, welcome to the Philippines! This is your second visit to the Philippines in a very short time, but your first visit as prime minister. Congratulations!

Although we are located far away from each other, it is natural for our two countries to cooperate with each other. We share similarities in our respected histories and culture. Our peoples are religiously devoted to the Sto. Niño. We have Sto. Niño de Praga and we have Sto. Niño de Cebu. We even have Sto. Niño de Praga and shrine in our Benedictine Abbey which you visited yesterday.

Our national hero, Dr. Jose Rizal, was a very good friend of Ferdinand Blumentritt, so much so that one of the important thoroughfares in our metropolis is called Blumentritt Street. And while the Czech people on the other hand have statues, plaques and a museum dedicated in the memory of Dr. Jose Rizal. And there’s even a chapter of the Knights of Rizal in the Czech Republic.

In World War II, 14 Czech soldiers fought soldier-to-soldier with Filipinos and Americans, seven of them have their final resting place in Capas, Tarlac. Just about two hours drive north of Manila. We have a congressman from that area there today. Our People Power Revolution of 1986 was one of the world’s 100 greatest events of the 20th century. Similarly, the Velvet Revolution was an event that became an inspiration for a wake of political changes in Eastern Europe. These links are a solid foundation for further strengthening our relations.

Thank you, Your Excellency, for bringing with you a business delegation and for addressing the business seminar this morning. Hopefully, this will lead to greater commercial ties between our two countries. And, as you mentioned, not only trade but joint ventures as well.

So far, among the results of our trade relations with each other are the train coaches for the MRT tracks on EDSA and the continued supply of their spare parts. Also, most of the grand chandeliers in this palace are from the Czech Republic. I understand that the Czech Republic has also supplied equipment for sugar cane mills in Negros, Luzon and Mindanao. For aircraft, for Zest Air, and rifles for Philippine sports’ shooters. And we welcome the benefits brought to the rural communities in Bohol by the Czech hydro power company Geotest. We’re happy to know that the Geotest is also conducting a feasibility study for a similar hydro power project in Baguio where you have provided Official Development Assistance for water along with Aurora province, another beneficiary of your Official Development Assistance.

Thank you also for your ongoing ODA projects on drinking water for Metro Manila and solid waste management in Naga City as well as your humanitarian aid on the oil spill removal in 2006 in connection with typhoon Durian.

Excellency, while our countries are far from each other, you have continued, your people have continued the friendship of the two great men of our countries — Rizal and Blumentritt. And we hope that your visit will lead that friendship to become even greater, wider and deeper by increasing economic and people-to-people contact with each other.

On that note, I invite our guests to join me in a toast to the continued good health, success and prosperity of Prime Minister Fischer and the enduring friendship between the Filipino and Czech people.

Mabuhay!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the official luncheon for H.E. Prime Minister Jan Fischer of the Czech Republic. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134432/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26206&Itemid=38