Thank you, Secretary Ermita.

Secretary Romulo, Durano, Favila; Ambassadors Gaa and Brillantes; our Consuls General and Consuls, Honorary Consuls; Tourism officials; our Balikbayans; ladies and gentlemen.

I join Secretary Romulo in welcoming you to Malacañan Palace.

This is an annual event now, as our Speakers have said, and it has consistently drawn hundreds of participants since it started in 2005. In fact, this has become such an important occasion for us. Secretary Favila remembers that in the 2005 visit, that was the time when I announced Secretary Favila as the new Secretary of Trade and Industry, and now here he is serving you the people of the Philippines from America and Canada. Secretary Durano was afraid that because of the global crisis and the slowdown in America we would have a much smaller number this year. But here you are, all of you, thank you for being here.

We are pleased to see that many of our kababayans from the United States and Canada are eager to participate in this Tour. Some have joined the Tour even more than once. So, welcome to the second and third timers who are here today. And your applause to Secretary Romulo said that we should do this twice a year, upon the recommendation of Secretary Durano, is a testament to your desire to reconnect with your proud, colorful and unique cultural heritage. It’s also perhaps an indication that this has become a new tradition of sorts, one that we look forward to with anticipation each year, like a grand homecoming or family reunion.

So, we hope that you will encourage your friends and colleagues to join this Tour in the future, so that they also may be able to share in this tradition.

Let me say once again, that Filipinos in the United States and Canada are truly a significant and positive force for development.

Four million-strong in the U.S. now and half a million-strong in Canada, you are an important partner of Government in ensuring that the Philippines remains firmly on the path of progress.

Your remittances, make up the bulk of the record-setting 16 billion dollars that we received in remittances in 2007, and therefore you have helped fueled the growth of the Philippine economy.

In fact, our GDP growth is 5.2 percent but because of your remittances our GNP growth remains at 7.0 percent. Thank you very much for that. Your investments in small and medium enterprises have fanned the flames of entrepreneurship among your siblings, children, nieces and nephews. Your investments in real estate have been instrumental in renewing the real estate market during my administration and sustaining its considerable growth.

And now you might have noticed our Philippine Stock Exchange is courting your investments as well. You are a crucial part of Team Philippines. We encourage you to continue championing Philippine initiatives aimed at lasting peace and development.

On our part, in the Philippines, we continue to build bridges and neigbors, and strengthen ties with allies around the world, especially America. That is why your Tour is important. But at the same time, at this moment in world history, with the rapid rise in food and fuel prices, which you’re also experiencing as the whole world is experiencing, the Philippines must take greater control of its own destiny. We must become more self-reliant and self-sufficient.

We are in uncharted waters that we must navigate in the new and uncertain era.

The world crises did not catch us unprepared or without reserves.

We took hard decisions several years ago, hard on our people, unpopular with big business, but good for the country, as events have shown beyond any doubt.

These hard decisions were intended to raise new revenues, large amounts of new revenues from bold fiscal reforms — more money for more bridges, roads, ports and other infrastructure to create more opportunities for new wealth and new jobs, all towards a self-sufficient, self-reliant, strong republic.

With more money, we spent a lot on health and education, we spent a lot to train and retrain a growing workforce. And not just for specific tasks but for whatever challenges a wayward world economy may throw up.

And because we have been prepared for it, we have been able to shield our nation from the worst effects of food and fuel crises worldwide.

Had we acted differently, or not acted at all, all would be lost today.

So we remain committed to the path we have taken. The best solution is the one that has worked.

We remain on track and firmly focused on getting the country well on the road by 2010 to first world, like what you are enjoying, in 20 years.

We are sticking to and we are widening the fiscal reforms that have earned us the respect of international finance bringing our interest rates down and making our peso stronger. We shall plant them deeper in the structures of government of the economy. All this is for the benefit, not only of our people tomorrow, but the next President as well.

With the fiscal wherewithal bestowed by our reforms, we are now focusing on the day-to-day problem… we can focus on the day-to-day problems that have taken all countries by surprise including the U.S. in the world food and fuel crises, while continuing to invest for a better tomorrow.

All over the world food prices have spiked. In Thailand — from whom we buy rice — rice is 56 pesos per kilo, in Vietnam 67. So when we have commercial rice at 35, that’s a blessing. Our subsidized rice is 18.25 and 25 pesos; Indonesia’s subsidized rice is 25.30 and Malaysia’s is 27. Either we are all handling the crisis well or equally bad.

The prospect of a real world food shortage has generated a real world crisis. Some say it is due to speculation, as money moved from subprime mortgages to commodities, and to food and now to fuel. You know very well the subprime events in the U.S. Others point to the very real increase in demand as millions more Chinese and Indians move up to the middle-class.

But when it comes to food and fuel, definitely, we cannot run the risk of no one selling us both unless we pay impossible prices. National food self-sufficiency and national fuel conservation are now entrenched as the first principle of statecraft. And that is why having prepared for this, we have adequate supplies of rice today, and we have a solid plan to reach self-sufficiency in the very near future.

We spent the last two years preparing for such world crises in two ways: first, by increasing productivity, with the help of the International Rice Research Institute which you have visited. Second, by increasing demand with bigger incomes and smaller income tax bites. Today, minimum wage earners no longer have to pay income tax.

We should have the world food crisis well in hand in the Philippines, with the programs we launched, combined with more vigilance over prices and greater severity against price manipulation.

In disaster-stricken areas such as Panay — and I understand you will be visiting Iloilo soon, you will see the devastation there — Panay, Romblon and Masbate, the Department of Social Welfare and Development has a cash-for-work program. This is part of the 1.7 billion pesos released for relief, recovery and rehabilitation from typhoon Frank. But I take this opportunity to thank our Filipinos in the U.S. and Canada because you have been so generously sending over support for our calamity victims. Maraming salamat.

We are clustering the programs of DSWD, Department of Health, GSIS, SSS, and other anti-poverty agencies into a National Social Welfare Program to shield the poorest from these ongoing global-wide developments.

But our best response in the longer term to the global commodity crisis is this: What is lost in rising costs of commodity imports like oil and rice must be offset by increasing volumes and hopefully increasing prices of commodity exports, whether hard commodities like primary products or soft ones like tourism. Whereas, Secretary Romulo said our tourism is going to be three and a half million this year; five million hopefully by 2010. But remember before our administration started it was not even one million, so it has increased indeed by millions. And we thank… it’s still our number one source of tourism, U.S. and Canada? Okey. Another source of soft commodity exports to earn us the dollars to buy petroleum and food is the Business Process Outsourcing, where we rank second only to Bangalore.

And in all of these means, whether it is disaster response or building up tourism or building up primary exports or building up BPO, we acknowledge the role that the private investment, both domestic and foreign, especially American makes to our development. Filipino and foreign businessmen and especially Fil-Ams and Fil-Canadians are an important part of the Philippine economic success story. Maraming salamat din sa inyong lahat.

International finance agrees we are making important progress. International credit rating agencies like Moody’s, Standard & Poor and Fitch have kept their positive or stable outlook on the country. A couple of years ago, we tasked Secretary Peter Favila to head our Competitiveness Council and we are happy that the World Competitiveness Yearbook, the latest edition, shows a remarkable improvement of five notches in the rating of the Philippines.

So as you wind up your brief official tour, and go on to your post-tour, we hope that you experienced first-hand that the Philippines is truly what the credit rating agencies and the Competitiveness Yearbook say.

And we count on you to spread the good news about the Philippines to your loved ones and our other kababayans and friends in the United States and Canada.

Long live! Welcome again to all of you!

Maraming salamat.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). PGMA’s Speech during the Courtesy Call of the delegates to the 4th Annual Ambassadors/Consuls General and Tourism Directors Tour (ACGTDT) of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412115939/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1613&Itemid=38