Thank you very much Secretary Teodoro for your introduction.

General Esperon and all the officers and men and women of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; President Ramos, my predecessor and former chief of staff of the Armed Forces, and all the other former chiefs of staff of the Armed Forces present today; members of the diplomatic corps; ladies and gentlemen.

Happy anniversary! And thank you to the brave individuals defending democracy and peace – the soldiers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. (applause)

Troop Commander General Dolorfino, give ‘tikas pahinga.’

On behalf of the entire nation, thank you for always saving the Filipino people from calamities such as typhoons, floods, volcanoes and landslides, or threats of terrorism and rebellion.

We laud your valor, your sense of duty, your loyalty to our flag and constitution.

In your defense of our republic and constitution, our democracy is strong, our institutions are solid, and the people do not succumb to selfish schemes against our constitution and democracy.

General Esperon discussed the events in the Peninsula.

It is clear that the actions of those few desperate men reveal just how out of touch they are with the hopes and dreams of the average Filipino. Filipinos want political stability, a bright economic future and social justice. The actions of those misguided men undermine each and everyone of the genuine aspirations of real Filipinos. Instead of working to bring together the nation by working within our democratic process, their actions merely are fuel for selfish motives for personal gain.

But in the end, because of you, together with the police and the citizenry, the rule of law prevailed. The transgressors will not hold this nation hostage with impunity. They will be punished to the fullest extent of the law. Justice shall be served and the interests of the people upheld.

The guarantee of stability and the rule of law which you safeguard all across the archipelago is the foundation on which we are building the current surge of our economy.

Our economy has reached a new level of maturity with some of the strongest macroeconomic fundamentals in many, many years including a seven percent growth rate. Six years ago, no one thought we could get more revenues, cut down on tax cheats, strengthen the peso, move the stock market, bring our budget into balance, lower our national debt and raise employment — but, we have.

If we have seven percent growth today, if we have a 12.7-billion surplus today, it’s in large part because you, the men and women in uniform, are 100 percent behind the constitution and our democracy. Maraming salamat sa inyo. (applause)

Ninety-nine percent of the personnel of the armed forces are good, outstanding, sincerely loving of the country, struggling to protect our nation every day.

We must all be true to our God, faithful to our values, and loyal to our nation. An essential part of building a modern nation in these trying times is to have a military as strong and modern as the nation it serves. We have put our money where our rhetoric is. As General Esperon has said, and you have applauded, we have invested heavily in new and better equipment, more training and more cooperation with our allies — some of whom are represented here today by their ambassadors — to professionalize our military.

We have achieved much to the Philippine Defense Reform Program which is now on its fourth year of full-pledged implementation. When I was acting secretary of defense I ordered the simultaneous roll out of all ten PDR programs. Therefore, with the AFP capability upgrade program which we started last January, we have bought Huey helicopters or upgraded them for the Air Force, plus V-150 light armor repower system upgrade units for the marines. We are also acquiring light utility and night attack helicopters with the special allotment. And we now have hundreds of squad automatic weapons, the first batch of night fighting systems, the military trucks, some of those that you see on this field so crucial in the battlefield, as well as Harris radius for what General Esperon termed as the move, shoot and communicate capability. Congratulations! To Secretary Teodoro and General Esperon for giving the capability upgrade program top priority. (applause)

Aside from more intense combat, we also want to take better care of our soldiers. Many lives have been saved by the immediate assistance and treatment of the forward-field medical support system. We remember the heart-breaking experiences of soldiers who died because they did not receive treatment on time. They bled to death. That’s why we have concentrated on forward-field medical services. We are also funding the upgrade of several hospitals such as the Camp Aquino Station Hospital; Cavite Naval Station Hospital; Camp Capinpin Station Hospital; the trauma hospital in Jolo, Sulu; the Camp Siongco Station Hospital in Cotabato; and the planned upgrade of the Camp Navarro General Hospital in Zamboanga; and Camp Bautista Station Hospital in Sulu. This is for the soldiers, but also for your families, and for the surrounding communities.

And if you remember, when I became president, we raised the salaries of soldiers, as well as the police, to be equal to the salary of teachers. And in the housing program for soldiers, there are off-base units including housing in various camps throughout the country.

We are also increasing aid to soldiers wounded or killed in action. And the combat pay incentive that you have long requested is now being given, up to 150 pesos a day to soldiers who were directly involved in firefights or actual combat. (applause) Your subsistence allowance has been increased by 30 pesos per day, and your hazard pay has been increased by 120 pesos per month.

It is important to constantly enhance your welfare just as it is important to constantly enhance your ties with local communities and governments through peace and development activities, like medical missions, building of community centers and other small infrastructure.

I am pleased that we have rewarded the municipality of Tagkawayan today. I always said that Tagkawayan was like Camp Abubakar of the NPA, but not anymore. And that is a great symbol of the success of our fight against the NPA. (applause) And we are giving awards not only to the soldiers who achieve it, but also to the civilians.

It dramatizes that the way to peace isn’t just through the barrel of a gun. Rather it begins with providing a person a job, food on the table and human dignity. Central to that success is to invest in the people, in education, health care, roads, bridges and schools. We are making those investments and it is working. In southwestern Philippines, we have worked with the U.S. Military on a number of beautiful community projects.

But to have this done all over the Philippines, we ask the Congressional Bicameral Conference Committee as it meets to reconsider restoring the original amount of the Kalayaan Barangay fund which finances the infrastructure programs in conflict-ridden areas that ordinary contractors do not want to touch. (applause)

This special infrastructure program is significant to the success of our soft power strategy. These efforts have opened for you new bridges of public cooperation and trust so crucial in the fight against terrorism, crime and insurgency.

We are also pleased with your focus on human rights reform. We have followed the roadmap laid out by our Melo Commission. We have been meeting with success in the fight to put an end to the legacy of political violence in the Philippines. During human rights day, the report about political killings showed a very, very drastic reduction in 2007 compared to previous years.

Regardless of religion, livelihood, or social status, everyone is equal before the law, which must defend the life and freedom of every citizen.

We condemn every and all assassinations of activists, media personnel, and other victims, including soldiers and police who have also been victims of human rights violations. Whether a former president, member of the military or an average citizen, all men and women in this nation are equal before the law. The death of any Filipino citizen because of expressing their beliefs is a violation of human freedom.

I congratulate the AFP for creating the AFP Human Rights Office. This office has not just created the awareness of our soldiers on human rights and instructional humanitarian law. It has provided a responsive venue where the public-at-large can lodge their human rights concerns to the AFP.

At the same time and in view of our adherence to the rule of law and respect for human rights, we allow no quarter to terrorists who are the most reprehensible violators of human rights in their violent quest to impose their selfish demands on us.

Let it be noted that terrorists like the Abu Sayyaf and the armed communists are a threat to the sovereignty of the nation and they must be checked once and for all.

The Abu Sayyaf stand in the way of bringing peace, stability and order to the southern Philippines. We must wipe them out once and for all. They are a menace to peace and a beacon for international thugs who wish to join their ranks. That's why thank you to the soldiers for your relentless operations that resulted in the fragmentation of the Abu Sayyaf. Congratulations! For recently neutralizing Abu Sayyaf leaders like Abu Sulayman and others with prices on their heads. (applause)

But we mourn the death and some of them very cruel deaths of our soldiers who have had to give their life in pursuit of the fight against terrorism. We also mourn for civilians here and abroad. For instance, we mourn with the family of Jean Luna, a Filipina employed at the U.N. World Food Program who died in the recent terrorist attack on the U.N. Building in Algeria. That’s why we need to intensify our cooperation with other countries to suppress terrorism in Asia and around the world because wherever there are Filipinos who may become victims of terrorism.

The communist rebels, as General Esperon said, have spent years as a low-level threat. It’s time for their disruption and violation of human rights to be put to rest so that the nation can move ahead. They impede the progress and development of a number of rural areas. They’re responsible for a wide range of human rights abuses. If we are to become a first-world country, we have to put a stop to their ideological nonsense and their criminal acts once and for all.

And I’m very happy to hear the report that the insurgents’ strength has been brought down to about 6,000 from 12,000 in 2001 and 7,000 a year ago. In other words, you have brought down their strength to one-half of what they used to be. And I am very happy to hear that from a high of 107 NPA guerrilla fronts in 2005, continuing dismantling of their structures in barangays has eliminated 20 fronts. At the rate we are going, I feel we are on track to put an end to the insurgency by 2010. Congratulations! (applause)

As for peace in Muslim Mindanao, we remain optimistic that we can overcome the final barriers on ancestral domain, that we can finally bring peace with finality. However, even now we have achieved a great deal. The region is vastly improved in terms of safety, security and economic growth. And we thank you, the AFP, for upholding the ceasefire agreement agreed upon by the government panel and the MILF way back in 2003. Our ceasefire has been holding for four years. It is making things better, and the peace will really take off, the region will really take off if we achieve lasting peace and the millions of foreign aid promised comes in.

Indeed, not only the foreign aid but many other things considered. A peace agreement will bring a new era of economic development to Mindanao. Coupled with this is our paradigm for peace in the island. At a time when hard power has not proven its value in the world, our model for dealing with the flashpoint of Mindanao has focused on a combination of what I mentioned earlier, soft power and hard power to promote peace: we have been able to meld together confidence-building measures grounded on strong interfaith dialogue and cultural awareness. And I congratulate you for your AFP-PNP-BUC dialogue which has moved forward very much the interfaith dialogue and cultural awareness aspect of soft power; also investments in economic and basic infrastructure development. That’s why I’m glad that part of what we gave as awards today were those who contributed to building community infrastructure in the areas in which we are working for peace; and part of soft power are mutual security arrangements to keep the peace in Mindanao.

I would like to congratulate Secretary Teodoro and General Esperon for a fruitful year for the AFP.

And I would like to congratulate all our soldiers, all the soldiers, from the Filipino people, thank you for your faithful service to the entire Philippines. (applause)

To all of us, a joyful and peaceful Christmas!

Thank you very much to all of you. And happy anniversary! Once again. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the 72nd Founding Anniversary of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135509/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2305&Itemid=38