Many thanks.

Many thanks to our poster boy, Secretary of Tourism Ace Durano.

Many thanks, Father Estepa for your welcome remarks and thank you for accepting my visit here at your school.

Many thanks also to Governor Aumentado for your welcome and for your vision since I was a senator and you were a congressman because we planned this together a long time ago to develop tourism here in Bohol. And many thanks also to Congressman Chatto because he is the author of our Tourism Act of the Philippines. Thanks also to Mayor Lim, the mayor of Tagbilaran for your welcome and congratulations on the handsome sites and people here in Tagbilaran City.

Aside from Ace Durano, I would like to introduce also to you our Press Secretary, Secretary Jun Icban. To all of you, my brothers and sisters, I am happy that I am now able to visit you, to visit Bohol again and now to visit our youth who have a very important future and tourism is also important to you and your tourism education here in Bohol and throughout the Philippines.

You are lucky because education is important and you are receiving a good education from our SVD fathers and that is…

I am visiting now because since we took office in the Presidency, the government has made it a goal to develop all areas of the Philippines, not just Manila. The provinces are the heart and soul of our country. Our job is to nourish the heart and soul by investing in our people and our infrastructure, so that every Filipino can progress.

Our visits to the country are an important part of our time in office. More importantly, we don't just travel to the provinces, we invest in the provinces. It shouldn't be that our political and economic processes bring so much power to Manila. We intentionally try to spread the opportunity across the nation and reclaim the advantage from the power brokers and elite in Manila.

To spread development away from an inequitable concentration in Manila, we created the Super Regions. If you look at the screen, you will see the Super Regions: Agribusiness Mindanao, Cyber Corridor, Urban Luzon Beltway, North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle, and Tourism Central Philippines, where we are all now.

The Central Philippines includes the Visayas, Bicol, MIMAROPA, and the islands of Northern Mindanao. It attracts the majority of our foreign tourists. They come here to Central Philippines. Its center is Boracay, Cebu, Palawan and now Bohol. The biggest advantage of these places in Central Philippines is the very beautiful natural wonders and the natural warmth of the people. The job of the national government is to provide facilities so that tourists can easily reach these wonders.

For example, for Boracay which is the leading tourist destination, we upgraded the Kalibo Airport so that international airlines can also land there. And we have had more international airlines coming to the Philippines because we have liberalized our air policy. We are no longer very strict about airlines coming to us.

Their passengers upon reaching Kalibo Airport, will ride a vehicle to go to Caticlan and pass through the road they used to call the “abortion road.” But now it is no longer an abortion road, we have repaired this road so that traveling to Caticlan and Boracay is no longer difficult. And now a private investor has started the construction of the Caticlan Airport to make it an international airport right there across the narrow channel from Boracay.

We also built a good road from Boracay to its neighboring areas in Panay which can be spillover destinations, such as the Caticlan-Libertad-Pandan Road, extending to Antique and the road from the Sta. Barbara Airport which we built, we are constructing the road to the city of Iloilo.

We also built the Bacolod-Silay Airport in Negros Occidental.

Now in Palawan. Palawan is the most popular destination for tourism investors. Perhaps 40% of the investments now in tourism go to Palawan. And, why? Well, first of all, of our 7,100 islands in the Philippines, 1,700 are in Palawan. So, there are many islands, there are many white sand beaches. The problem before was that the roads were difficult if there was a road because Palawan is the longest province in the country. Its length from El Nido to Rio Tuba is 500 kilometers. That is as far as Manila to Laoag City. That’s how long Palawan is — 500 kilometers. Presidents since the Commonwealth until my predecessor, what they completed of concreting the 500 kilometers, 100 kilometers; in our administration alone we completed 300 kilometers, so the entire road from North to South of Palawan is now complete.

And perhaps you already know that in the New 7 Wonders of the World, now the Amazon River and the Underground River in Puerto Princesa are contesting for number one, so we also built the road from Puerto Princesa to the underground river. As I said earlier, Palawan is leading in tourism investment.

Not only the roads are important in Palawan, because Palawan is an island or many islands, we also need airports because there are so many islands so we need to bring the tourists there through the airports in Puerto Princesa and Busuanga which we upgraded or the new airport we built in San Vicente, and then they will travel along the whole length of Palawan islands, 500 kilometers, just as I said earlier, just like Manila to Laoag. So now, you can travel 500 kilometers throughout Palawan under our administration.

Now on the other side here, Cebu, is the number one favorite to visit by foreign tourists. Because its airport is world class and the beaches are close to the airport. Their resorts are world class as well. And especially those in Mactan Island and there is a large convention center.

Before, there were also bad roads in Cebu. We fixed these as well, especially we prioritized the road going to South Cebu until Santander because there are so many tourist attractions there and in the North until Daanbantayan where there are also many tourist attractions including the thresher sharks in Malapascua. Those thresher sharks are very rare maybe as rare as your tarsiers because the thresher sharks their tail is as long as the body and the only place where you can find them is in the Philippines. Because in other countries they’re two far deep below but here in the Philippines every morning they go up to have themselves cleaned and that’s where you can catch them.

Before, it took four hours from Cebu City to get to Malapascua. Now, the trip has been halved due to the roads we built.

And perhaps you know… I know if you felt the problem here in Bohol because in the Visayas they say there is a problem with electricity, that if a ship goes to Bohol there is a visit I am now but whether you have a problem with the rotating brownouts now or not our message throughout the Visayas on March 5 we will inaugurate a large power projects in Cebu which is part of an investment in Cebu and Iloilo of one billion dollars. And this first investment of 250 megawatts will now solve the power problem in the Visayas starting on March 5.

So, you’ve already heard about me for Boracay, Palawan, Cebu. Before, they called it Cebu-Bohol tourism. But now Bohol has become a favorite to visit by tourists different from Cebu since, first, we defeated the communist terrorists there in 2005. Congratulations! to our officials. And the second reason, we made, we have finished the Bohol Circumferential Road. So now we are building an international airport in Panglao Island.

Earlier, while we were sitting on the stage, while Father Estepa was giving his welcome, I asked Governor Aumentado, how is our airport now? He said that the bidding is finished, there is a winner, he doesn’t know who but we are happy with the post qualification procedures. So whoever won the bidding, if they have no disqualifications, the contract may be awarded before March 26. So it will be finished, construction may start — not maybe — we have great hope that the construction of the Panglao Airport will start so you also have your own international airport and many more tourists will come to Bohol.

We also built ports, as Congressman Chatto said, the cruise ship port will be finished in May, so the large cruise ships will come to Bohol and visit you.

Now we have a port for international cruise ships, we also have ports for smaller ships, RORO (roll-on/roll-off) modes in various locations to connect tourists while in Cebu connected to Bohol via Tubigon Port, and Bohol connected to Camiguin via Jagna Port, and Bohol connected to Leyte, to Southern Leyte via Ubay Port. So tourists in Cebu can come to Bohol, tourists in Bohol can go to Cebu, tourists in Bohol can go to Camiguin, to their beaches, tourists in Bohol can also go to Southern Leyte to their diving spots. So this part of Central Philippines is connected through our RORO.

That's why Bohol, especially once the international airport is completed, can be an anchor or hub where tourists can go to various places, various islands neighboring Bohol. So these progresses are important, especially since your school has a tourism course so we can ensure that our students studying tourism have jobs upon graduation.

I am happy that the private sector has responded to our investment in roads, airports and RORO. Their response is the expansion of hotel capacity, lodging houses and other infrastructure, and all of these investments, according to Secretary Durano as Secretary of Tourism, amount to almost 600 billion pesos during our administration. And now there seems to be a prospective investor in our audience whom we will talk to later and his purpose, if I think he will be happy with our conversation, he has a one billion investment here in Bohol.

But he is no longer the leader because there are so many resorts already. I have reached all the cities in Bohol and each of your cities, as Congressman Chatto said, has potential for tourism. And the private sector has seen this because during my visits for a long time, every time I visit I stay in a new resort that is always more beautiful than the previous resort. So now there are still new ones under construction or nearing groundbreaking, the Bellevue Investment, so there are many. Eskaya is one of the most expensive resorts in our country and yet it is full of customers. So the investments here are very beautiful.

Our country, Bohol is blessed with some of the most beautiful scenic beauty in the world. That diving, there's a lot of diving in Bohol. More importantly, our country is blessed with the most welcoming, energetic and friendly people in the world.

The story of my friends who vacation here, even if they stay in a high-class, five-star expensive resort, they are happy to go out of the resort and stroll the streets because all the Boholanos they meet are very welcoming, so nice, so friendly, so strong is the culture, the tourism culture here in Bohol. So you are part of the attraction of Bohol.

If we want to succeed in developing our tourism, and it can greatly help the economy of the country and Bohol because tourism in 2008 contributed 6%… 9% of our GDP and 11 billion dollars in earnings for the whole country. Here in Bohol, at first, before our administration, you were with the 20 poorest provinces. Thank you for the big role of tourism, you are now a middle-class province or no longer among the poorest provinces. So, congratulations to Bohol!

So if we want to continue this progress in tourism, we need to invest in our people, our infrastructure and our environment. I have already told you about our investment in infrastructure. For the people, our children really need better if they have tourism courses, so during my visit on my Tourism Super Region tour, I included a visit to every school offering a tourism course. And I’m happy that I am here in Holy Name University.

Now, regarding the environment. Earlier in our class, we in the tourism class observed their lesson for the day was about the environment. This is really important, this is really important because if the environment isn't beautiful, tourism isn't beautiful. Therefore, here in Bohol where you have so much natural beauty, it's important that we love our environment. Let's love our forests, the tarsiers, let's love the Chocolate Hills, let's love the marine life that attracts a large dive tourism like Balicasag; Pamilacan, there are many; Panglao, there are many, and let's fight against dynamite fishing. That's what's needed to continue our eco-tourism which is the specialty here in Bohol.

We have established almost 100 marine sanctuaries within the Central Philippines since the year 2001. But as the law states, every coastal town should be given 15% of its municipal waters for a marine sanctuary. So, I hope each of you, if you live in a coastal municipality, ensure with your officials that there is a marine sanctuary in your town.

What we are doing is the concept of sustainable economic development where a clean and healthy environment does not contradict a strong economy. We can create jobs while continuing to keep our environment safe and sacred.

In our investment, we have done many difficult and unpopular decisions to control our budget deficits and increase our taxes to pay for the future of this country. Our roads, airports, ports, they all need taxes to finance them.

Since the first day of my presidency, we have been committed to investing in our people and our provinces—far from Manila.

The country needs to increase its political and economic footprint to allow all regions to progress, not just Greater Metro Manila. Therefore, we have pushed to invest billions of pesos throughout the country to connect the country through a more effective and modern transportation system through airports, roads and RORO, and a better future for our youth through better education, like the education being given, is being given here at your Holy Name University and we need to invest to keep this country clean, clean and beautiful so that we can utilize the most beautiful of our natural beauty.

So, I am happy to be able to talk to our youth now, because you are the future, you are also the way on how we can reach our future in a good way because if we want tourism to bring progress to Bohol, we also need to involve our youth.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the Tourism Central Philippines Tour: Visit to the Holy Name University. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080549/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27626&Itemid=38