That is why I’m saying our national agenda is focused on creating good paying jobs, stable prices and bringing the benefits of a strong economy to every single worker.

And as Mr. Tupaz said when he read the manifesto, we expect the day when there are enough good jobs created in the Philippines so that diligent Filipinos no longer need to go abroad to work. As Vladi Tupaz said, the day we are looking forward to is the day when going abroad for a job is a career choice, not the only option for work.

That is why in the past six years we made difficult but necessary decisions to strengthen our economy. And now these steps are beginning to pay off. Now we have funds to invest in the dividends of our social partnership.

For example, Vice President Noli De Castro is here, we can say that PAG-IBIG will distribute six billion pesos worth of dividends to the members. How many of you here are PAG-IBIG members? You will receive dividends, a total of six billion. And will allocate funds… Additional funds of 30 billion pesos for loans to members, you can be loaned for tuition and your medical emergencies.

If you remember in the past, we forgave the penalties for PAG-IBIG loans. We will continue this condonation. And PAG-IBIG will allocate a new 25 billion pesos for housing, only six percent interest and can be paid in thirty years.

For GSIS, a 10-month salary loan program will be created, the scholarship grant will be increased, the interest will be lowered, and housing loans will be restructured. Hospitalization support will be expanded and services will be improved through computerization — PGEA, your requests.

For SSS, the flexi fund for overseas Filipino workers will be expanded and informal workers will be included in our SSS coverage.

For sugar workers, we will establish 25 million pesos worth of sugar livelihood centers in Regions III, VI and X. And we will allocate 12.6 million for the sugar workers’ socio-economic program.

The POEA will use ten percent of its income to more effectively combat illegal recruiters.

Earlier, in the manifesto read by Vladimir Tupaz, he said there are workers being deceived by the Internet. For example, there is a job available, you pay, but it turns out the job is not available. Therefore, the DOLE will look into this internet, examine if those jobs are real, in order to expose those who scam our workers.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library