Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines On Rotary as partner in sustaining economy

[Delivered at Holiday Inn Resort Clarkfield, Angeles City, Pampanga, February 10, 2006]

Thank you for continuing to be concerned with the Rotary clubs that you headed in the past and the Rotary districts. And thank you for inviting me to be here with you today because I would consider that as an expression that one of the Rotary concerns is how you can continue or even expand your partnership with the government in helping our people.

Indeed, Rotary is a partner in sustaining the economy, because many of you are important businessmen and professionals, and in alleviating the plight of the poor because that’s what got you into the club to begin with — how to do community service. And because you are all governors here, you are of proven leadership in the private and NGO sector, and you are the vanguards for community service. And I’ve come here before you today, not only because Guiller is my cousin, but knowing Rotary very intimately I would like to say that we in the government need you more than ever in uniting our people in growing the economy and delivering its fruits to the doorstep of the poor. And I hope that you will continue to guide the incumbent officers of Rotary to do that.

Your back to basics concept of delivering essential services to the community, such as livelihood, jobs, shelter, health and education stand on the same springboard as our pump priming programs. Let me therefore share with you a couple of things we are doing as part of our 35 billion-peso pump priming programs which we are able to do now because through your support we were able to raise our taxes through our fiscal reform programs.

In the area of shelter, which is a very important activity of Rotary, the United Nations commended our government for our socialized housing program. And for January as part of our pump priming program, I released one billion pesos for the relocation of squatters from the railroad tracks. Perhaps many of you who go through Osmeña highway in Makati have seen that the railroad tracks are being cleared at the pace of 100 families a day. And we’re able to do that because we’ve spent one billion pesos for their relocation. Five hundred million pesos for community mortgage programs wherein those who squat on private land can buy the land from the private sector owner and also for socialized housing projects.

For instance, I instructed the secretary of the budget to release 25 million pesos to be able to work on the socialized housing programs for Welfareville in Mandaluyong City.

Also during our administration, not just what we released this January but throughout our six years of… Well, not yet six years, five years that we are in government, more than 100,000 families have benefited from our urban land reform proclamations where we proclaim a piece of land as available for security of tenure for those who are living there. Many of these are government lands that would be useless anyway because you would go through such expense of relocating the squatters or giving them the social preparation. And indeed, we’re spending one billion pesos for the north and north-south rail linkage relocation alone.

So, billions and billions would be required if you were to relocate all of them. So there are government lands like lands that belong to the national railroad that will not have a railroad built on them that we have already allotted to those who are living in them. And this is following the principle of Hernando de Soto, whereby, if you give a document that an impoverished person can have that he can use to get credit, then you begin to build small enterprises and you begin to build a better life for the people there.

In fact, one of the things we noticed is that after we’ve proclaimed an area for socialized or shelter a security, in the beginning, they’re living on barong-barongs or cardboard boxes. After awhile, you see that they’re already building with materiales fuertes and putting small enterprise in their little houses.

We have awarded certificates of lot allotment Hernando de Soto style to almost 14,000 families and will be awarding over 21,000 more. During my administration, we have allocated almost three billion pesos for this very strong community mortgage programs whereby 65,000 beneficiaries are able to buy the land from the owner of the land that they are squatting on. So, they are no longer squatters and the owner at least gets paid for the land that otherwise he probably wouldn’t be able to do anything about it anyway because it’s very hard to eject thousands of people living on your land.

Going to education now which is also a very important concern of Rotary, as part of our pump priming program, I’ve also released 500 million pesos for grade school classrooms this month of January; 500 million pesos for high school scholarship vouchers, and many Rotarians I know own schools, high schools, and a lot of you have been complaining that your schools are closing down the high schools. Because ever since we provided for public high school education, the children… The parents would rather send their children to public high schools.

Now, of course, there is a lot of… Because of the population growing, there’s a lot of classrooms for grade school and high school. We build for the grade school but for the high school — why build additional classrooms for public school when you have excess classrooms in private schools? So therefore, the economic solution is high school vouchers where the children from public grade schools can if they wish enroll in a private high school if the public high school in their neighborhood is already over enrolled.

And we have also allocated 500 million pesos for the high school voucher program. Four thousand pesos is what we grant to every child who goes to a private high school and enrolls there, and that is much cheaper than building new high schools and paying for the teachers. Also, it prevents dislocation and closure of a very important industry in our country and that is private school education.

The 2006 budget for this kind of government assistance to students in private education is almost two billion pesos. And if the whole two billion would be spent at four thousand pesos per voucher this would allow almost half a million students from poor families to enroll in private high schools. To what extent we will be successful in getting half a million students to avail of this service will of course depend on the absorptive capacity of the bureaucracy to process it because this is the first time we’re doing this on such a large scale. And I hope that the Rotary clubs where education as one of their primary programs will help us in this absorption.

For college scholarships — just earlier, I came from the Ramon Magsaysay Technical University in Zambales and I announced to them that — we are releasing on Monday 500 million pesos for scholarships in tertiary education. It’s a good thing Ben Ricaforte is here, a message for Nona, this 500 million pesos will be for the students who will enroll in technical and vocational schools in state universities and colleges. And I would wish this could be one billion pesos, I’ll see what I can do in the 2006 budget. But I think it’s so important to provide for this tertiary education scholarship because of the many pre-need victims who are holding pre-need scholarship plans but are not able to use their scholarship plans because of the financial problems of the pre-need industry. Therefore, the key to not having all that massive stranding of the pre-need victims is to have a massive scholarship program in tertiary education.

Ideally, one billion pesos. Now. There’s 500 million pesos on Monday. Well spend the rest of the year including the budget process looking for the second hundred billion pesos… 500 million pesos. In any case, school begins in June, so we have all this time but for the tri-semester education institutions, I hope they can start working on this system in the third semester. So even if the 2006 budget contains only 441 billion pesos, I will try to raise it to one billion pesos especially to help the pre-need victims.

With the things that we are doing — pump priming, collecting more taxes, having tax reform, reducing the budget deficit — indeed, things are looking better than they have in a long time. Actually, if you speak of poverty between 2000 and 2003, when the last national survey was made, there has been a decline in the poverty incidence. Nonetheless, when you’re talking of four million people I inherited who had no jobs, and even if we say that maybe there are less than four million people now with no jobs, that’s still a lot — over three million people with no jobs. There’s still a lot to do, but things are looking better.

Well, many of you are bankers, businessmen, and maybe you’ve heard that just recently metro bank tried to raise 100 million dollars in the market. Well, they did not get subscriptions of 100 million dollars, they got subscriptions of 650 million dollars, six times oversubscribed. And you’ve read in the papers about Standard and Poor’s raising our credit rating outlook and I hope that you’ve heard that the biggest pension fund in the United States, Calpers, the California Pension and Retirement System, has upgraded the Philippine investment rating to even higher than China, Malaysia and Russia.

So, my message to you, as you advise the incumbent Rotary officers, let’s commit ourselves to exert your moral influence, our moral influence to end despair and raise hope. Let’s join hands and work together to raise the nation to the apex of our dreams.

Once again, I’m so happy to see many of my fellow Rotarians and their husbands. Thank you once again for inviting me and may Rotary continue to be of service to our communities.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].