Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Governor Nini Ynares. And she is also the Chairman of the Lake Laguna Development Authority.

First of all, regarding the beautiful fountain we inaugurated with your renovation. I also greet former Vice Governor Ben Felix. And then Vice Mayor Julio Narag. And the other mayors who are here, Mayor De Los Santos of Jala-Jala, Mayor Bernardo of Morong, and Mayor Zapanta of Taytay. I greet the various members of the Sanggunian, the various barangay captains who are here. And here is Mike Defensor, the chairman of HUDCC, and the officials of the agencies under HUDCC. I greet those who will benefit from the distribution of the Certificate of Lot Allotment. And I greet the source of the land that will be distributed today, Mr. and Mrs. Boboy Virata.

To those who will receive the papers for your land, congratulations to the new landowners. You are no longer squatters in your own country. I hope this helps you understand that with the many problems facing our country, you are not forgotten by your president and will never be forgotten by your servant. Because of your cooperation, your lives are gradually improving. The officials of your associations are hardworking, so congratulations to the officials. Where are you? Where are you? Likewise, the leaders of your government – provincial and local – led by Governor Nini Ynares and Mayor Nicanor Felix.

If every Filipino were as hardworking and cooperative as you and did not engage in causing trouble, our country would progress even faster. That's why Cainta is a very developed place. This place is really very urban. This place is already a city in terms of economy. And this should be seen by the whole Philippines as a model that when development is thought of and not chaos, the economy of a town progresses. So from the developed and peaceful town of Cainta, I will now deliver a message to our fellow Filipinos.

There is a pattern of renewed destabilization to erode the looming electoral process and I call upon the people to stand for democracy. We shall respect the right of protesters to express their political views and grievances, but we would like to draw the line on the side of civility, lawful conduct and public order.

I’m calling for reconciliation but I must stand in the way of anarchy. I extend my hand to my detractors but I cannot allow them to flaunt the law. I ask the leaders of protest actions to police their own ranks and instill discipline among their followers. The police and the military are holding maximum tolerance but they are ready to enforce the full might of the law when required by any situation.

So friends, from Rizal, from Metro Manila, my appeal to you, especially those who are poor, do not easily believe false news or the urging of groups who want to discredit and overthrow the government. Because the government deeply cares for the dignity of every Filipino. That is why, I exert so much effort to provide you with your needs such as orderly and decent land to build on.

The awarding of titles, such as what we are doing today, was initiated by me since I first sat as president. And we have surpassed the target to ensure land ownership. Because we made fifty-one proclamations declaring government-owned lands that could be purchased by those residing there. As well as the community mortgage program for lands that already have owners. That is why I am grateful to Mr. Boboy Virata, a large businessman, because he supports our program.

As I said, we have already made more than fifty proclamations. And almost three hundred thousand families of our urban poor have benefited, including our brothers and sisters here in San Juan, in Cainta, in Rizal.

My appeal is, as long as we are united. And I want to remind you and assure you that your welfare is always in my mind, whether there is trouble or not.

So friends in Cainta, thank you very much for this opportunity. I just want to thank you all for always supporting me. Let us work together to develop the Philippines, Rizal, and Cainta.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Distribution of Certificates of Lot Awards to Qualified Beneficiaries. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140736/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7454&Itemid=38