Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the Pontificio Collegio Filippino.

“I am Filipino, Truly Noble.”

It is an honor and privilege for me to meet with you again. First of all, of course, to once again convey the recognition and gratitude of our countrymen for your kindness. And thank you for giving a good name to all Filipinos here in Italy through your goodness. Almost every time we talk to an Italian, they always praise the Filipinos.

Last year, your servant was here and some of us met and one thing we discussed last year was the request we made to the President and Prime Minister, because your servant coordinated with them, of Italy regarding an important agreement regarding the recognition by Italy of the Filipino driver’s license. Do you remember what we discussed? Well, thank God, congratulations! Ambassador, this has now been fulfilled. Isn't it, Ambassador, the Filipino driver’s license is now automatically converted to an Italian driver’s license. This will make it easier for Filipinos to live and work here in Italy and will also open up new opportunities in transportation services.

Aside from these, we have another good news for our Filipino compatriots here. Also, upon the recommendation of the Ambassador, we are now directing the Department of Foreign Affairs — and this is already known, it has been approved by Secretary Romulo — to lower the passport fee. The passport fee will be lowered from 65 Euros to 50 Euros. And the fees for affidavits, certifications, notarials will be lowered from 32.50 Euros to 25 Euros.

And why not? You, our overseas Filipinos, are great heroes in your sacrifices and concern for your work, your family, and your country. Ten percent of our country are overseas Filipinos. This is not unique. The richer country Portugal also has ten percent of their Portuguese working abroad. And New Zealand even surpasses us, a first world, first world country. New Zealand has 25 percent of them working abroad but with different origins. In New Zealand, where your servant came from with Secretary Romulo, they told me that even if their child is working abroad, the mother and father are in New Zealand, they are still the ones sending money to their child working abroad. But our Filipinos abroad, in Italy, you are the ones sending money to your parents and family.

Thank you and you send 600 million dollars a year to our beloved country. You know, in 2001 when I first assumed the presidency, I met eight million Filipinos abroad. Now, it's still eight million because while some leave, some return. But the overseas Filipino remittances have doubled even though the total number has not increased. The seven billion I met before 2001 has now become 13 billion dollars. So thank you very much. As they say, this is because our overseas Filipinos are now investing in our country rather than just sending money for the basic needs of their families. So you should really be called not just OFW or Overseas Filipino Worker but OFI or Overseas Filipino Investor.

But, my dream is the day when Filipinos no longer need to go abroad. Our dream is that overseas work will be just another career option and not the only choice you often have to earn a living. Like the New Zealanders, they are rich. If they go abroad, it’s a career choice. They found a good job, they were recruited, not because if they don’t go abroad they can’t survive. I hope our economy is like that. That’s why we are focused on the economy, we are improving the regions of our country, we are striving to distribute wealth so that our people can find work in their own country.

Our call centers, business process outsourcing, they span from Baguio to Clark-Subic, Manila, Cebu, Davao. When I started my presidency, two thousand people were employed there. Now, it's 250,000, a two billion-dollar industry. That's why I believe we are gradually breaking the cycle where people still need to leave to find work. I like to think that as the years come increasingly we will be keeping our best and brightest right in the Philippines, closer to friends and family, helping our communities, and providing the next generation of leadership.

These are undeniable signs of how deeply you care for our motherland and its future. You show through your actions your desire to remain a part of our great nation-building work even while being so far from your homes. And although you are far from your homes, as I said, we already feel very much at home here. Congratulations! To our countrymen who have been given the extraordinary privilege of sitting on town councils as Consiglieri Aggionte, congratulations! Yes, because according to Italian law, you can speak in those town councils on matters and issues that affect fellow Filipinos. So, even more so, defend the rights of Filipinos here.

Your unwavering love for our country is truly inspiring to all of us. Your deep pride — as our singer said earlier, “Ako ay Pilipino, Taas Noo” — your deep pride in being Filipino lifts up Filipinos everywhere. And I hope that we will continue to accompany all our countrymen in the Philippines and around the world in our efforts and prayers, because our faith is what benefits our beloved country.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library