Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 90th Anniversary of Philtrust Bank

[Delivered at the Fiesta Pavilion, Manila Hotel, October 21, 2006]

THANK you very much Governor Tetangco for your introduction, and thank you for your very strong Central Bank policies that have made our banking system strong.

Don Emilio Yap, Doctor Laya and the other officials of Philtrust, and to the men and women of Philtrust, happy 90th Anniversary to all of you.

Today, Governor Tetangco, if I’m not mistaken, we have almost 900 banks -– 872 – and there are almost 8,000 branches all over the country helping finance the funding requirements of our growing economy.

But one of the most trusted of these banks, many banks, is none other than Philtrust.

Philtrust is one of the most outstanding banks in the country, especially its liquidity position. And I can understand why as Chairman Laya said, Philtrust is a conservative bank. And conservative banks are very liquid. Philtrust is one of the few commercial banks without any local and foreign loan or guarantee obligations.

I learned that Philtrust does not borrow or avail of any rediscounting facility from the Bangko Sentral. Instead, it is a lender to the BSP because in addition to loans extended to business and industry, Philtrust invests in the dollar and peso Treasury Bills issued by the Philippine government and the BSP.

And that is why this second oldest private commercial bank in the country is a most reliable and important partner of the government in nation-building.

I thank Doctor Laya for saying that our policies, economic, fiscal, monetary, have helped to make our economy strong.

Yesterday, here in this very hall, we announced a 10 percent increase for SSS pensioners. The increase in SSS pensions is a direct payback of tough economic reforms. Now, we can see how biting the bullet can speedily win dividends for the average Filipino, because the average Filipino is an SSS member. Meanwhile, the bullish outlook of various investors and financial institutions has sparked business confidence and boosts the cycle of more growth and social returns. We take pride in the resiliency and productivity of the Filipino that drive the economy forward. Both business and labor continue to reap the fruits of good economic stewardship and social justice. And now, with resources at hand, I’d like to thank Congress headed by Speaker De Venecia and Gina is here to send my message of thanks to him. I’d like to thank the Senate, too. And I see Senator Lim is here so he can convey my thanks to the House and the Senate for the resources we now have at hand because of the tax reforms that they enacted. And with the resource that we have at hand, we can continue to invest in education, infrastructure, basic services, and other important components of national strength and stability.

And I thank Philtrust for being such a conservative, therefore, liquid, therefore, reliable partner of government. I thank you for your desire to spur economic activity. I thank you for opening four more branches here in Metro Manila. Congratulations for that.

And so, on your 90th Anniversary, I ask you, let us keep this partnership strong and healthy and let us make this country of ours an economy to reckon with in the highly competitive global community.

Once more, Happy 90th Anniversary Philtrust and thank you Don Emilio.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 90th Anniversary of Philtrust Bank. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409204352/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3008&Itemid=38