Congratulations!

Congratulations! to Father Paking, Edith Bueno, NEA, Samar Electric Cooperatives on the 8 millionth household electrification. And also here in Pampanga, congratulations PELCO II on your rehabilitation!

At keti naman kaluguran kung kabalen keti Pampanga, pung Lubao y Vice Governor Yeng Guiao, dening Congressman tamu y Mikey Arroyo ing chairman ing Committee on Energy. Y Dong Gonzales, Anna Bondoc, ampu ing congressman ning BUTIL y Pitung Guanlao. Y Secretary Ed Pamintuan ing kekatang CORD, ing kekatang host keti king Lubao y Mayor Dennis ampo ding aliwang opisyales keti, ding aliwang mayors a bisita tamu ngening aldo, and our General Manager of PELCO, General Manager Amador Guevarra at dati kanu y Ka Basil, congratulations! Kaluguran kung kabalen karing opisyales, reng pamuntuk… karing opisyal deng ali-aliwang balen, yung iba-ibang mga electric cooperative dito sa Central Luzon, congratulations sa lahat ng mga ginawa natin deng kooperatiba king kuryenti. Congratulations to all of you!

At king PELCO II king pamamye elektrisidad kareng metung a what? 177 barangay keti king Pampanga, congratulations!

And Fr. Paking Silva, whatever we did with Edith and the NEA, you are the real inspiration because you were already outstanding in the electric cooperative back then, congratulations for the 8 millionth households to be electrified!

And a very big reason why we are holding this celebration here in Lubao, it could have been done in other towns of Pampanga, the PELCO, it could have been done in Samar for the 8 millionth cooperative — and we congratulate Samar — because the son of Lubao, our former President Diosdado Macapagal started the Electrification Administration.

And on this day we remember a person whose dream was to give electricity to the farthest villages of the Philippines. That's why Bishop Parang of Mindoro is also here. Hello! Bishop nice to see you here.

And all of us here are continuing his dream, and as you have seen, thank you Father Silva and Edith for these charts that explain themselves, our administration extended the biggest ever financial assistance to the electric cooperatives, five billion pesos to enable you, our cooperatives, to do your missionary work even in the so-called non-viable areas. And I am pleased to see that most of you have delivered, congratulations on your success!

Now I told Edith Bueno and the Department of Energy, we should complete by the end of this year that all barangays of the Philippines have electricity. And like PELCO, I’m also pleased that the electric cooperatives have improved your performance, including like PELCO, their rate of collection, and you are now ready for the competition in the power sector industry.

Samantala, we are accelerating our power and energy development program while developing more sources of indigenous power. The country has already attained 58 percent self-sufficiency in power. And we anticipate an even higher percentage with the full implementation of the Biofuels Act and the Renewable Energy Law, na ing principal author king House ya y Congressman Mikey Arroyo.

The full implementation of EPIRA, which we passed in our administration, will also start next year, after the power purchase agreement that we inherited will expire. This is projected to bring down power rates especially for small consumers.

It is comforting for me to hear Father Paking's report that the electric cooperatives are working together to provide good service. Last June, I ordered the NEA to energize Bgy. Mawacat near the mountains of Pampanga, Bataan and Zambales where about 200 Aeta families are located. In just a few days, seven thousand kilometers of lines were installed through the efforts of Task Force Kapatid. Congratulations, Task Force Kapatid! PENELCO, PELCO I and II, PRESCO, TARELCO I and II, ZAMECO I and II are helping each other in this program, thank you very much. Thank you very much.

At keti naman king Pampanga kapamilatan na ning PELCO II, dakal lang negosyu ing karelang asopan kalupa na ning Mekeni Food Products, Jomafer Supermarket, Makro at ding gagawang muebles king Betis at Guagua. Ngeni sisiguradwan na ning PELCO II na ding atlu pang mitatagan a barangay midinan na la mu namang serbisyu king malaguang panaun.

Samantala y sundu ning gubyerno ing pamamye serbisyo kareng tau lalu na king kasalukuyang problemang pang-ekonomiya king mabilug a yatu. Ding kalulu dinan tang prioridad. This means that electric coops must work hard to bring light and power to the farthest barangays where the most marginalized of our people reside.

Growth is achieved only through hard work and perseverance. And so today, on the first anniversary of PELCO’s rehabilitation, on the 8 millionth household electrification, I once again enjoin the electric cooperatives continue to be a vital contributor to the steady economic growth that we enjoyed in the past eight years where I’m sure this barangay electrification helped us enjoy an unprecedented 33 quarters of uninterrupted growth. And with your help, let us carry the steady growth forward into the future.

Thank you Father Paking, thank you Edith, thank you to the NEA, thank you to the Electric Cooperatives for helping me put flesh to my father’s dream of development for our people — a dream that the rest of our countrymen share as well.

Once again, congratulations! Mayap a oras pasibayu king PELCO. Dakal a salamat kang Ging y Dennis, ampo ding aliwang nga opisyales keti king Pampanga ding Congressman tamu.

Congratulations and Mabuhay to us all! Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the first anniversary Celebration of the Pampanga Electric Cooperative II and symbolic lighting of the eight millionth energized household under the National Electrification Administration’s electrification program. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412100244/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26022&Itemid=38