Thank you very much, Mike for your very kind introduction.

Ed Lacson, President of the PCCI; Bobby Amores, Chairman of this conference; Donald Dee; Don Emilio Yap, our host in this hotel and Dr. Laya who gave us the welcome remarks; Jun Ortiz-Luis; Francis Chua; of course, my fellow member of the government in charge of taking care of our business sector, Secretary Peter Favila; our very, very deserving awardees; ladies and gentlemen; members of the business community.

Before anything else, my heartfelt thanks to the members of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the provincial and regional chapters, and the other affiliate business chambers for your assistance to the victims of typhoons Ondoy and Pepeng. Maraming salamat sa inyo.

And as we have a respite between those two typhoons and the coming one, I’m very happy to see all of you again. The Philippine Business Conference is an important platform from which to launch milestone policies. I remember when I first addressed you as your new President in 2001, the U.S. had just come out of the tragedy of 9/11 that shocked everyone and redefined national security throughout the world.

Because of the dangers posed by terrorism to our own politically vulnerable economy, I said then to your assembly that our deliverance from event risks such as 9/11 was best assured by finding our place among the emerging economies of our Region.

Now, I am gratified that because of our partnership over this last eight years, we are now considered indeed a frontline among emerging economies not only of Asia but of the world, no longer the sickly economy of the Region. To emphasize my point, the day that I addressed the Emerging Market Conference of The Economist in London last month, we were recognized as one of the top emerging markets in the world. Thank you to the business community.

In 2004, it was again at the Philippine Business Conference where I warned of the steps we needed to take to strengthen our strained fiscal position. Our fiscal capability was being weighed down by the burden of short-term loans contracted by previous administrations but coming due in 2004. It was before you that I broached the idea of undertaking difficult but necessary fiscal and tax reforms — a proposal which was met with resistance by many who were uncomfortable with change. But though many resisted, I was fortunate to have the PCCI on my side. You and the Executive branch and brave souls in Congress pushed for these reforms. We implemented some of the toughest fiscal and financial reforms in our history. But they became the building blocks for 34 quarters of uninterrupted and unprecedented economic growth. In other words, with those reforms supported so wholeheartedly by the PCCI, we were able to tame the boom and bust cycle that had plagued our economy for generations.

Last year, when most of the world was shaking in its boots because of an economic recession, a world economic recession, I unveiled before you our Economic Resiliency Plan. I remembered then that the private sector offered to finance half of a proposed P100 billion-peso public-private sector infrastructure program to unlock the liquidity of our banking sector held. And I am proud that one year later, I am proud to acknowledge that the private sector has honored your P50 billion-peso end of the bargain, especially for financing power projects. Thank you and congratulations! Now that lock liquidity is there building up power projects for our increasing competitiveness.

Indeed, our reforms and our partnership have provided our economy with the resilience to bear the heaviest blows of the crisis and still remain standing rather than have our economy contracting like many others in the world and in the region. In fact, we would have balanced our budget this year, had the global economic crisis not intervened. But I think with everybody else, going into deficit, ours is quite understandable as well.

So, let us continue with our partnership not only on the Economy but on what I call the three E’s: Economy, Education, Environment.

On the Economy, Ed Lacson made a presentation of the many aspects of our partnership. This partnership has helped maintain our domestic demand-driven economy. In fact, one of the things in common, among the economies that have survived this crisis, are that they are domestic-demand driven, and we are one of them. While the export-driven economies continue to reel from the economic crunch, economies like ours are kept afloat by the size and buoyancy of our domestic market. In other words, our large population with our middle-income level $2,000 per capita and our investments enabled by our reforms — that provided us domestic demand.

Aside from domestic consumption, indeed, one big source of domestic demand has been our investment in infrastructure. As pointed out in the President report of Ed Lacson, PCCI is a member of the Pro-Performance Steering Committee that monitors our infrastructure projects. And in that capacity, PCCI has witnessed how the projects were planned, bidded out and implemented. And I hope that the PCCI members on the Committee have also seen for themselves how the projects have impacted positively on the lives of the people in addition to providing the domestic demand that has kept our economy surviving during the world crisis.

Another fruit of the partnership between the government and the PCCI resulted in Nonoy Libanan being awarded today especially. The PCCI and the Bureau of Immigration partnered for the visa-upon-arrival of the Bureau of Immigration, and this helps in increasing tourism as one of the factors boosting our GDP this year.

Still another fruitful private-public sector partnership is in the skills training for Business Process Outsourcing. And I remember in 2001, not in the PCCI meeting but in my State of the Nation Address, ayes predicted that the growth sectors of our future would be the skills intensive service sectors like information and communication technology and tourism. And looking back, it has come true. But this is not to negate the importance of our export manufactures and agri-export, and I was looking at the latest macro-economic figures — Peter, am I not right? — That now even our hard-hit export sector is starting to recover month-on month? But Bobby Amores is still very worried in behalf of the exporters, so he asked me to assure the business community, many of whom are in the export sector, that the export support fund is still there and Peter Favila has just received the request for the next tranche for release and we have to examine that each one, each peso of those hundreds of millions of pesos in the balance will go to something that will directly increase our exports, but the fund is there for you.

Regained confidence in our economy is also indicated not only by the inflow of tourism receipts, or the inflow of BPO receipts, or even the reviving inflow of export receipts, but also by the net inflow of $200 billion dollars of investment into our capital markets during the first semester of this year. In sharp contrast to the negative outflow during the height of the global crisis last year. And of course, there is our upgraded credit rating which has been maintained despite the onslaught of the recent typhoons.

On Education; again, in the report of Ed Lacson, he talked about the active involvement of the PCCI in our Education System Task Force which gave us and pointed out what you call the Philippine Education Highway. This highway is a framework for seamless education from early childhood education to basic education to tertiary education, whether it is college or vocational school. And for PCCI’s quiet but steady work in this Commission or Task Force on Education, where you’re in improving industry-academe linkages, curriculum upgrading and skills development, in order to resolve the long-term mismatch of jobs and skills, I thank the PCCI and I congratulate you.

On the Environment, there is much to do. But, if we speak about urgency, the most urgent concerns we must now address have to do with adaptation measures to cope with the adverse impacts of climate change. For instance, the increasing frequency and intensity of typhoons due to global warming. I have created — I think you’ve all read in the papers and heard it in the news and saw it on TV — a special national public-private sector reconstruction partnership, which is tasked with the following:

First, undertake a study of the causes, costs and actions to be taken in the wake of typhoons Ondoy, Pepeng, Frank and now Ramil;

Second, undertake the rehabilitation of damaged infrastructure and other measures for the reconstruction of the areas, industries, and the population affected by the calamities, and this includes agriculture as the first item that was presented to me by Bobby Amores in your resolution — the rehabilitation of agriculture;

Third, tap the resources of the private sector and enhance and facilitate the cooperation and coordination between government and the private sector in formulating and implementing the reconstruction strategy;

Fourth, raise funds, especially grants to fund reconstruction;

Fifth, prioritize the projects and programs for the reconstruction efforts;

Sixth, oversee the implementation of the reconstruction program;

Seventh, serve as the clearing house for the international assistance implemented by the donors themselves — and I would like to acknowledge the presence of the diplomatic community here — using the cluster approach; and

Eighth, request the UN and the World Bank to coordinate an international pledging session.

On the government side, the Reconstruction Commission will be chaired by Finance Secretary Gary Teves. The membership will be the agencies that will use the funds: namely, the National Disaster Coordinating Council, the Department of Social Welfare and Development, and the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council. The private commission, as you all must have read, heard or seen will be chaired by PLDT Chairman Manny Pangilinan with Cardinal Vidal as co-chair, and I am happy that PCCI President Ed Lacson has agreed to be one of the members of the private sector commission. The NEDA and the Office of Civil Defense will provide the Secretariat which will be headed by Ric Saludo.

The public-private sector partnership has been very busy already, it has scheduled meetings with JICA tomorrow, the World Bank the day after, and others in the donor community and the private sector in the weeks to come. They will present the partnership and update them on the work program. And then this will be followed by an expanded dialogue to seek support in the reconstruction efforts. The public-private sector partners will interact regularly with our development partners and with media.

But, even as we are organizing for reconstruction, typhoon Ramil is approaching. And therefore I would not want to end my remarks to you today without asking you to join me in a prayer.

I ask you to rise, bow our heads and put ourselves in the presence of the Lord as we pray:

Almighty Father, we raise our hearts to You in gratitude for the wonders of creation of which we are part, for Your Divine Providence in sustaining our needs, and for Your Wisdom that guides the course of the universe.

As we face typhoons, floods, volcanic and other calamities we trustingly seek Your help, aware that You are the Master of Creation.

We acknowledge that as an entire humanity we have not been good stewards of Nature. We have confused your command to subdue the earth.

The environment is made to suffer our wrongdoing, and now we reap the harvest of abuse and indifference.

Global warming is upon us. Natural calamities occur in increasing numbers and intensity. We turn to you, our loving Father, and beg forgiveness for our sins.

We humbly beg that we be spared from the dire consequences of calamities.

We beseech you to inspire us all to grow into responsible stewards of Your creation, and generous neighbors to those in need.

Amen.

Thank you all for joining me in this prayer.

Thank you for continuing our partnership.

Long live the PCCI! Long live the business community!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 35th Philippine Business Conference and Expo (PBC&E) One.Global.Filipino “Regional Economic Development: Frontline to Sustainability”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134029/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26599&Itemid=38