I am truly happy to visit your Public Market Center. First of all, because as I said, Procy has been telling me about this for three years now. And secondly, because there are so many of you here, it’s wonderful to be together. And thirdly, the manager that Procy hired, this is the one who used to campaign for me since 1992, Ariel Mañalac. He is with Mely Jabola, my PA now here in Region IV.

So, Congratulations Procy on your wonderful project. This is another proof that we achieve success when the government and our citizens work together.

And although Quezon is now part of CALABARZON, and it’s like the gateway or the center of the industry of our country, this project is still very important because I learned that 70 percent of the people in Procy’s district, and especially those in other districts further from Manila, make a living through agriculture.

So, this Public Market, aside from establishing this Public Market, the collaboration between the government and the citizens has greatly helped in laying the foundation for meaningful and pro-people projects and initiatives, such as loans with no interest, Procy? Technical assistance that the Department of Agriculture also helped with; the free use of this Public Market, you don’t pay; transportation, so we helped with reefer vans, right, Artie? for… there, it’s loading now so that even when the vegetables are being transported, it’s like they’re in a refrigerator, they won’t spoil, they’ll stay fresh; and of course, assistance for selling for our farmers. Here in the Public Market, farmers can go directly, buyers can go directly so that they don’t have to go through traders or middlemen. So congratulations to all of you! Congratulations to Procy Alcala for this great idea.

I am pleased that part of our contribution is on top of those reefer vans, the cold storage, that is a contribution of the Department of Agriculture and our National Government. And earlier, I was also pleased that our farmers who received documents for land security are no longer tenants on their own land. You are the ones who truly have the rights to it.

This is one of the projects being promoted to face the challenge of poverty and promote the development of every citizen. Because we want to have a strong and growing economy, we are working hard to create it to help ensure the peace, order and stability of our country. Procy told me that Ka Remo’s son died with Hector but here now because the lives of farmers are growing and improving, it is no longer as much and the rebellion is weakening, the NPA is weakening and the province of Quezon is becoming more peaceful.

So our efforts are bearing fruit. Our coconut farmers told me how the price of copra has increased under seven years, and this is also part of the whole that now our economy is the strongest in more than thirty years. We can see that the peso is strengthening, investors are pouring in and we are close to balancing our budget.

We made difficult and unpopular decisions to increase the country’s collection so that we can spend for farmers and other citizens. We are fighting smugglers so that what we collect will be the capital for infrastructure and for our people. So earlier, what Engineer Boner Seguit showed us, our roads, aside from what Governor Raffy Nantes told us, there are two important roads to further bring Sariaya closer to Manila.

From what I've seen here, Procy clearly understands the problems faced by her constituents and what our people expect from our leaders. The people want us to bring investments into three important areas, what we call the three ‘E’s — first, the economy, so our farmers are helped through this People's Market and related projects; second, the environment, which Congressman Alcala showed me with his organic fertilizer project, which is better for the environment than urea fertilizer, so this should also be supported by Secretary Artie Yap; and third, education. Earlier, before we came here, we first went to a school in Lucena because we inspected the new Science Laboratory for our children. And I watched the microscope that was delivered to them, they were looking at the different parts of plants. Well, if they have a good education in botany, they will become good farmers or technicians or engineers in the future. So these are at the heart of lifting up our country and preparing the next generation of leaders.

The recovery of our economy is timely, because there are global clouds raising the price of oil and food. That's why this project is so important.

We know that no matter how much progress is made at the top, many of our people are still working very hard. We are very aware that many are working hard every day just to put food on your tables.

But my heart swelled when we heard the success stories of our three speakers who started with this project. So congratulations to you!

Therefore, the lesson I would say in our celebration today is, let us work together for the success of our programs that will offer more goods and investments and for the success of our other national goals. And in unity, we can achieve the progress of our country, your district, your province, your community.

I remain optimistic about our country, optimistic about our future and fully committed to being a force for good.

We all love our country. You all love your province, your district, your town. It is truly heartwarming to see partners in work like the people of Sariaya and here in the province of Quezon.

To all of you, thank you very much. Long live our country! Long live this People's Market!

Adamson University Library