Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the meeting of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PCCI) and the Libyan Union of Chambers of Commerce, Industry and Agriculture (LUCCIA)

[Delivered at the El-Bawho Al-Ahder, Al-Kaber Hotel Tripoli, Libya, July 17, 2006]

I have come to Libya at this time together with our business delegation to commemorate the 30th anniversary of the Tripoli Agreement of 1976 where the leader facilitated and started the peace process of the Philippine government with the Moro National Liberation Front or MNLF in Mindanao in Southern Philippines. Thirty years, that is how long Libya has been a friend of the Philippines under the visionary leadership of the great leader President Colonel Muammar Gaddafi.

The Tripoli Agreement of 1976 eventually led to the final peace agreement of 1996 which ended the MNLF rebellion and brought the MNLF into the mainstream of Philippine governance. In fact, one of the MNLF commanders has been elected deputy speaker of the Philippine Congress — and I think he will be joining us later — he is part of my official delegation on this state visit.

Another leader of the MNLF, the brother of a former commander — he was just outside — is now the governor of the province of Sulu in Southern Philippines. And another MNLF commander is now the Mayor of the Islamic City of Marawi in Southern Philippines. So they have really… The process that was started in the Tripoli Agreement of 1976 thirty years ago has indeed been working very well bringing the MNLF into the mainstream of governance.

The help of Libya and the leader did not stop there. When I became President in 2001, I asked Libya to help us again with another peace process. This time with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front or the MILF which did not accept the earlier agreement. And the government of Libya obliged and hosted a second Tripoli Agreement. This time the Tripoli Agreement of 2001 and we are confident that just as the Tripoli Agreement of 1976 led to the final peace agreement with the MNLF in 1996, we hope that the second Tripoli Agreement with the MILF in 2001 will also lead very soon to a final peace agreement very very soon in a very short time.

With the support of Libya also in 2003, we agreed on a ceasefire with the MILF, and that’s why I am confident that the original agreement in 2001 will also ripen into a final peace agreement. The ceasefire agreement that we have with the MILF which started in 2003, three years ago, is being monitored by our friends: Malaysia, Brunei and, of course, Libya.

Another way in which the leader has helped me very much also happened in 2001. In fact, when my peace panel was here in Tripoli negotiating the 2001 Tripoli Agreement with the MILF, in the Philippines, terrorists belonging to the Abu Sayaff group hostaged a group of tourists in a resort called Dos Palmas in Southern Philippines. And I had the chance to speak with Colonel Gaddafi on the phone who asked me how he could help. I asked for his help. I said I would rather fight the Abu Sayaff than pay ransom, and I asked him for his help. He helped me and he denounced the Abu Sayaff and with his support and the support of other friends in the international community, the Philippine military eventually defeated the Abu Sayaff.

And because of the leader’s quick response that time when I asked him to help me against the Abu Sayaff, with his quick response in denouncing the Abu Sayaff, I was not surprised that when 9/11 happened, the leader was one of the first — in fact, he gave the firmest denunciation of the Al-Qaeda bombers after 9/11– by any Muslim leader. Also I rejoiced with the recent news of the successful reconciliation of Libya with the U.S. and the other members of the international community which occasions the opening up of the Libyan economy.

I congratulate Libya for this diplomatic triumph, even as I am proud that Libya has been our friend long before this reconciliation with the U.S. and the international community. In fact, I’m here to reiterate my deep gratitude to the leader not only his support for our peace process since thirty years ago but also his support to my administration in our fight against terrorism since 2001.

And it is in this context for the thirty years of friendship that I hope to discuss the prospects of opening the doors to broader and deeper bilateral trade between our two countries. Apart from obtaining support for peace and development in Mindanao, I am trying to secure a steady supply of oil for the Philippines in the face of projected continuing high prices of oil.

And last night at the state dinner, I asked the leader if the investment management fund of Libya could recycle some of the profits of Libya from the high oil prices in the form of investments in the Philippines, like refineries, gasoline stations, agriculture in Mindanao, and hospitals all over the Philippines. Our ambassador, Mr. Mangibin, is tasked to follow through on this request by submitting specific proposals to the investment management fund of Libya and also to the private Libyan health care industry.

Libya helps many African countries, and I hope that a similar kind of assistance can go to a Southeast Asian country that has recognized Libya as a friend for a very long time, namely the Philippines.

Besides, the Philippines is a good stable economy to invest in. In June last month, we posted the third monthly budget surplus, keeping my economic managers’ balanced budget projection by 2008 attainable. The IMF has commended our tax reforms and debt reduction program. The Bureau of Internal Revenue beat its tax revenue goal for the month of June. We have tamed the inflation rate so far notwithstanding the high oil prices in the world market.

And Germany has just earmarked half a billion pesos for two Philippine forest programs. Our overseas Filipinos, their remittances including those from Libya are increasing steadily to now more than one billion dollars for the month of May alone that boost our dollar reserves.

Speaking of overseas Filipinos, the Philippines is grateful for the good treatment of our nurses and other workers here in Libya.

In fact, during this trip of mine, the labor ministers of our two countries are discussing a memorandum of understanding to develop a program of further partnership and cooperation between Libya and the Philippines in infrastructure construction, in infrastructure operation and maintenance, in hospitals and health care. I understand that the twin interest of Libya in this program of partnership are first, the hosting of workers from the Philippines and second, the training of Libyans by Filipinos.

On the first, Libya will hire nurses in the public sector and private clinics and hospitals, also other paramedical professions. Libya will also hire construction workers in roads, buildings and allied trades. The minister of labor of Libya will determine the number of workers needed by mid-August. So I hope that the Libyan business community will submit to him the information that he needs about your human resource requirements as soon as possible.

And I would also like to invite, as I said earlier, Libya and the Libyan health industry to invest in hospitals in the Philippines because the way for us to produce more nurses to fulfill your requirements is to educate more nurses in the Philippines and so they need more hospitals to qualify for training for their profession. This is a profession of which enjoys a very very large demand not only in Libya but all over the world.

Libya I understand needs trainors for nursing and paramedical professions. So it will be our honor to accommodate this need as I reiterate therefore we need more hospitals to conduct the training of nurses. And I hope that the Libyan health care sector community will consider investing in hospitals in the Philippines to provide a venue for training nursing students.

Indeed, as you have said, Excellency, Libya is opening up right now very rapidly. This accelerating economic and development activity in Libya requires accelerating also the human resource recruitment from Manila. So the Philippine Department of Labor will set up a special desk to attend to Libyan recruitment on a government-to-government basis.

And I understand Libya will also assign a labor attache to Manila within this month.

Aside from labor and human resources, because of your rapid opening up that is going on, we view Libya as a challenging and potentially rewarding market not only for Philippine labor but increasingly for Philippine exports as your own national development efforts continue to accelerate with your renewed engagement with the international community coming on the heels of the establishment of diplomatic relations with the United States.

So, we look forward to an improved market access such as fresh and processed foods like canned tuna, fresh bananas. Speaking of fresh bananas, last night, we had a wonderful dinner hosted by the leader and I was told that all the fruits that were served last night are grown in Libya except the bananas which are imported from Ecuador. I’d like to inform you that the Philippines is one of the top exporters of bananas in the world. Almost all the bananas in Japan come from the Philippines, and we are the number one supplier of bananas to the huge market of China. So, I think that if you can buy from Ecuador, you will also like the bananas coming from the Philippines.

We also would like to have the chance to sell to you Halal poultry products coming from the Philippines and also consumer manufactures such as furniture and furnishings. Our furniture are world-class, very fashionable, very sophisticated. Automobiles and auto parts. Construction services, which I am sure you are already beginning to purchase very much not only from the labor side but also from construction companies in the Philippines, we hope we’ll able to have construction contracts here and also information and communication technology or I.C.T.

With regard to I.C.T we together with India are the top providers of I.C.T. services to the world. And we suggest that a particular area of interest to Philippine businessmen is I.C.T. service for banks, offices, hospitals and hotel resorts in Libya.

Back in the Philippines, I’ve been talking about investing in Mindanao. But in Luzon, where the capital of the Philippines is located, we are positioning the Clark-Subic economic zone just north of Manila — an hour’s drive from Manila — to be the most competitive logistics and transport hub in the region, with capabilities to respond to the maintenance of the world’s airlines.

In this regard, we’re inviting Libya to patronize the Philippines C-130 depot maintenance in Clark. Ran here by a member of our delegation, Mr. Peter Rodriguez. I understand that the Philippines is one of only two ASEAN countries that have been authorized by the U.S. government to maintain and upgrade C-130 planes which are plentiful here in Libya.

Last night, when I told the leader about offering to do the maintenance and upgrading of C-130 aircraft in Libya. He said, “but does the Philippines have that capability?’ and yes, it has the capability because Lockheed Martin is the technical partner of this maintenance center.

So, ladies and gentlemen of the Libyan business community, the great leader of Libya has supported the Philippines since thirty years ago in our peace process. And he has supported my administration in the war against terrorism since 2001.

Now, let us move to a new stage of our relationship. Now I ask the Libyan business community as you open up to be our companions in a journey towards greater peace and prosperity for both our countries.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the meeting of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PCCI) and the Libyan Union of Chambers of Commerce, Industry and Agriculture (LUCCIA). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212628/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2826&Itemid=38