Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the declaration of merger of the Lakas-CMD and the KAMPI Parties in Davao region (Region XI)

[Delivered in Apo View Hotel, Davao City, June 18, 2008]

Thank you very much, Secretary Puno, chairman of Kampi. I would like to greet also and congratulate our host, Speaker Nograles, president of Lakas, and all the many VIPs of Lakas and Kampi who are present here today. Congratulations to all of you, to all of us for this merger.

(dialect)…from Luzon and the Visayas, who are also the big leaders of Lakas and Kampi. (dialect)…At the core of those organizations is a strong economy, not just the core but the product that the Philippines has built up under our two parties’ leadership now to become one which is helping us meet the challenges of the global surge in the price of food and fuel.

A strong and growing economy has been the central pillar that together our two parties, now to become one, have labored to create to help guarantee peace, order and stability in our country. It is paying off. Our economy’s … reached its highest growth in 30 years last year; the peso is strong; and in the first quarter of the year, approved investments doubled; and we are close to balancing our budget. (dialect)… plus the head of the local government league. Mayor Guico, Governor Ocampo and City Mayor Abalos. (dialect) This collaboration has given the final push to our economic comeback, as a result of which we are able to invest in key sectors. And Nonoy Andaya is here with us to help us make that investment to cushion the harsh impact of rice and fuel on our poor.

And due to our collaboration, we are also able to invest, continue to invest in necessary infrastructure project like roads, like the Manay-Boston road (?) which we should be groundbreaking soon; the Tandag-Butuan Road which will travel on to Molo; bridges like the Bankerohan bridge which opened in time for classes here in Davao City; and we’re able to invest in education, to name a few. All the while we are balancing this vital investment with the commitment to meeting our fiscal obligation and balancing the budget in 2010. (dialect)

Peace is a central ingredient in the nation’s and island’s future. It is a path that we are firmly committed to achieving. This includes defeating the NPA, wiping out the Abu Sayyaf once and for all and returning the Mindanao countryside to the people. I have ordered the AFP to launch a massive manhunt for the kidnappers of Ces Drilon. (dialect). At East MinCom we will also meet with rebel returnees. And I ask the stalwarts of Lakas-Kampi who are here to work for amnesty concurrrence which will enable the insurgents to rejoin society. The path of peace also includes working with the MILF to achieve permanent peace in Mindanao.

I would like to announce that yesterday, our National Security Council …(unclear) government’s draft of the ancestral domain agreement in our negotiation with the MILF. So, I now direct our negotiators to present our government position to the MILF so that we can quickly resume the stalled negotiations and hopefully hasten the signing of our final peace agreement with the MILF and bring sustainable peace and development not only to Mindanao but to the country as a whole.

Our choice of candidates in the forthcoming elections of the ARMM is anchored on the commitment of every Lakas-Kampi candidate to work for permanent peace. Later we will open this separator here and officially present our ARMM candidates led by ARMM Governor Zaldy Ampatuan. And I know that you will all join me when I tell them that we, their party mates look upon them, the vanguards of peace and the front liners in the fight against poverty in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao. I have no doubt that our candidates in the ARMM will win the elections as I have no doubt that our candidates in the next national elections will also win.

So, this early we will ask Zaldy Ampatuan to prepare his plan for a peace offensive centered on expanding the people’s economic opportunity. And this early I ask our president Boy Nograles, Lakas president, to convene the party institute so that they can work on refining our party vision and party draft for the years to come. Many things are left to be done. We will continue working to strengthen our merged party to increase the mass of like-minded individuals. We will continue to work hard to fulfill our Philippine reform agenda until the day I turn the national leadership over to my successor who, I’m sure, will be whoever Lakas –Kampi will support.

We will work for victory to propagate our reform agenda. And I depend on you, party mates, to carry on our program and continue to fight for the economy, education and the environment. (dialect) I remain bullish on our country, optimistic about our future and deeply committed that LAKAS-Kampi shall be a force for good of Mindanao, of Region 11, of the entire Philippines .

Congratulations! and…. (dialect)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Declaration of Merger of the Lakas-CMD and the KAMPI Parties in Davao Region (Region XI). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412121254/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1556&Itemid=38