Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the Vin D’Honneur 2005

[ Held at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang, January 7, 2005 ]

MOVING FORWARD WITH DECISIVE ACTION

I begin this year with a sense of urgency, but also a deep sense of hope and renewed purpose. The nation is at a crossroads, and must move forward with decisive action in Congress, the unity of the people, and a clear direction from your elected leadership.

As President of this great nation, I will provide that leadership and direction in 2005.

While it won’t be easy — nothing worth fighting for ever is — it must be done. Simply put, we must enact vital legislation to increase revenues, pass a budget that invests in our 10-point, pro-poor program; and take executive action towards wiping out corruption.

The economy is the foundation of our hope and the creation of jobs the central organizing principle of my government. My pledge to the people of the Philippines in my election campaign of just six months ago was to create jobs, bring fresh water and electricity to those who have none, and build new classrooms and equip schools with modern technology.

I further pledged to build vital infrastructure, bring unity to our social divisions and restore peace between Muslim and Christian in our war torn south.

And I will do it. But it will take the support of every single person in this room and resolve amongst our political and business leadership, pulling together, in the same boat, to move this nation in the right direction.

We must work together as a people and as a nation, to solve our problems. Church, state, military, civilian; rich and poor; we all have a stake in the future of our nation. Collectively and as individuals, we must employ every fabric of our being to bring about the kind of community and bring the hope that the people yearn for and deserve.

I can’t do it alone, nor even with the full weight of the government by my side. We need to harness the power of the nation and spark the individual power of each soul that makes up this nation, if we are to forge a new Philippines.

What lies ahead is exciting; I welcome the challenge and remain ever so hopeful that we will prevail. 2005 will be a year of transformation and change that will move the nation forward.

And after the year we had in 2004, we need a brighter day ahead.

What a year it was. We faced a contested election and, just recently, the loss of the nation’s loved FPJ. We came face-to-face with the far flung responsibilities of securing the lives of our OFWs, personified in Angelo De La Cruz, the Filipino everyman.

And most importantly, we must focus on how the year came to a close: with great typhoons here in the Philippines that in the end seemed dwarfed by the tsunami which struck our South and SouthEast Asian neighbors. Each caused grief of unimaginable proportions.

And for life itself we should be thankful.

Tonight we must all take a moment to once again reflect on the power of nature and the good fortune of life itself, as we send our prayers to our loved ones, friends and neighbors here at home and abroad, who don’t come with us into the New Year.

The death and destruction of nature is a humble reminder of our own vulnerability. And shame on us, as leaders, if we inflict our own political tsunami upon this great nation of ours if we don’t come together and take the hold steps necessary to get our nation hack on track.

We can and must start fresh with the New Year. And it must start with the powers that he that make up the leadership of this nation. Leaders in business, government, the media, civil society.

I ask you to join me to eliminate waste, fraud and abuse in government.

I ask you to help me in fighting corruption, to stop illegal logging and identify tax cheats.

I ask you to help me pass legislation in Congress to strengthen our finances and the institutions that govern us.

I ask you to help pass a national budget that will invest in the poor and allow them to live a life of dignity, meaningful work and reward.

I ask you to help me reform the military, invest in a strong Judiciary and press for social justice.

I ask you to help develop sensible, environment friendly laws as we develop a safe and vital new mining sector.

And I ask you to bring hope, optimism and vigor, working together to get this nation moving once again.

We are on the right track: our exports are up, our growth is up, and our spending is in line. We’re our own worst enemies; we have many obstacles to overcome, hut many are harriers we place in front of ourselves.

It’s time to tear down barriers and build up hope, growth and a new optimism at the start of this new year.

Leaders in business, government, the media, civil society. This is your nation, too. You’re among the best and brightest. I may be President, but we need a thousand of leaders to inspire our people and do the right thing.

May it begin tonight, here in this room, together with our friends, friends of our country from all over the world.

I ask therefore everyone in this room to join me in a toast to a year of urgent change and a year of fervent hope.

Mabuhay!

Source: Adamson University Library