Thank you very much, Congressman Rey Uy, for your very kind introduction of me, and thank you for your support for me since you were mayor of Calbayog City and I was still a Senator, until now that I am president and you are a congressman. Thank you very much for your support.

Thank you also, Mayor Mel Sarmiento, for inviting me to come here to your Calbayog City Day, and thank you also for your support for me along with the various local government officials in our country. And congratulations also for your many awards as an outstanding city in various aspects of development.

I would also like to greet all the Congressmen of Samar Island who are here. Here is not only Congressman Rey Uy, our host, but also Congressman Kata Figueroa, thank you for being here and for your support; Congressman Nonoy Libanan; and Congressman Boy Abayon, from Samar Del Norte, thank you all for being here.

And here also is the governor of Eastern Samar who is always helping together with Mayor Mel Sarmiento, Governor Ben Evardone. They are all here so it's confusing with the different positions. Yesterday Rey Uy was mayor, now he is congressman so it's different. If before Boy Abayon was governor, now he is also congressman so the positions are different but I have known them all for a long time. So you are all very handsome… This is now a reunion at the fiesta of Calbayog.

I will no longer greet the various national government officials who are with me now. Our previous speakers have already greeted them, so thank you to them for joining our celebration, and to all of you, happy anniversary Calbayog!

I would also like to reiterate to our hosts: to Congressman Uy, to Mayor Sarmiento, to Vice Mayor Aquino, to all the SB members, not only for your invitation but also for your support. And to all the congressmen here from Samar Island, what does that mean? They agree with what Mayor Mel Sarmiento said earlier that when we think of development here in Samar, it shouldn't be Western Samar, Eastern Samar, Northern Samar, but — “Samar: One island; One culture.”

I would also like to greet Monsignor Marceling Rosales, so nice to see you Monsignor. Monsignor is almost 100 years old, but his mind is still very sharp. I’m so happy to see you. I have known him for a long time, when I was still a small child. So it’s nice to be with him here. We have known each other for a long time. As Congressman Uy said, I have been to this school before and I go here when I was still a senator, when he was still mayor. And now it’s so fun, we can chat during our celebration of Calbayog’s anniversary. What do I want to tell you? About our plans for Calbayog City.

Calbayog City is part of what we call the Central Philippines. Because if Mel said no more North Samar, East Samar, West Samar, politically okay. But, economically, one Samar only. The Philippines is the same. Politically, we have Region 8, we have Region 4-B, we have Region 6, we have Region 7. But in economics, it’s all one — Central Philippines. That’s part of the super regions we built, one economy. We built it as one, not in politics but in economics. The RDCs of Region 8, Region 7, Region 4-B, Region 6 are still continuing. But the economy is one — to strengthen the ability or competitiveness of every part of the Philippines. We need to think about what we need to do to strengthen the economy.

I remember when I first came here. Not only this socio-cultural center that we promised, we also agreed to improve the packaging of your smoked fish here in Calbayog City. And with our agreement, with our constant coordination, this was fulfilled, so isn't the trade of your smoked fish very lively now? Now, even bangus is being made into smoked fish because of the number of orders, because the packaging of Calbayog City has improved. What can be done in one city can also be done throughout the country. We have natural products, but we create policies that strengthen them, and that's how the country's economy also strengthens. In the country, what we needed to do was reform the national treasury – the tax reforms. So thank you again Rey Uy, thank you again Kata Figueroa, thank you again Nonoy Libanan, thank you again Boy Abayon because you helped me, you did the reforms in the national treasury, so now the economy is thriving.

We welcome the reports that the Philippines could be due for a credit rating upgrade by Moody’s. Fiscal discipline is winning the day for the Philippines. And we urge the Senate — because our congressmen here are really great — we urge the Senate to speed up the deliberations on the budget. Thank you, congressmen, for passing the budget at four in the morning.

Now, we urge the senate to speed up the work on the budget so that we can show the world our determination to keep the banner of reforms up and the drag of politics down. I applauded heartily when Congressman Uy said that we should not allow political mudslinging to hinder our progress.

The budget not only defines our development agenda but signifies the payback to the people of our tough economic reforms. Do you know that for the first time in many, many years, this 2007 budget will have more allocated to social services than to debt repayment. This budget, this is a matter of national interest that can no longer be delayed as the train of popular expectation is waiting to travel onward. I mentioned waiting to travel onward. Travel – that’s it now, if we talked about smoked fish earlier, let's talk about travel now. That’s what we agreed on now regarding Calbayog City.

Do you know that out of almost three million tourists who visit the Philippines now — isn't it almost three million? — more than a million and a half or more than half of the tourists traveling to the Philippines go to the Central Philippines, especially Boracay, Cebu, Bohol and Palawan. There's a province missing from what I mentioned.

I remember when I was still a senator, because as Mayor Rey Uy said, if I was still a senator when I went here, I came here with my classmates. Gabby Claudio knows this, I always tell him about it because he is from here, from Catbalogan and Calbiga. My classmate said when we were passing by the sea, Samar is so beautiful, more beautiful than other islands, more beautiful than some popular tourist destinations. Why don't they go here, why haven't they discovered Samar yet? That's what I've been studying for a long time, what are the reasons why tourists haven't discovered Samar yet? The main reason is the image of peace and order. In the history of Bohol, when there were many tourists in the Philippines, it was Boracay, Palawan and Cebu, Bohol wasn't included then. Before tourists flocked to Bohol, they first quelled the rebellion in their rural areas and some of their towns. I think if we want Samar, where many tourists go to the Central Philippines, to be visited as well, we need to do the same here on Samar Island.

And one more thing is needed, transportation. I think you want, I believe you want the city of Calbayog to be interconnected with other places efficiently, cost-effectively, conveniently and with sufficient frequency. So in your Charter Day celebration, there are two things we agreed on — one, let's bring Calbayog closer to other places in the Central Philippines and secondly, let's restore peace and order in the city and province together.

The first one, transportation, bringing Samar closer to other places that are already being visited, is among the projects we will do now to strengthen business and tourism here in Samar. Because as Congressman Rey Uy said, my father built the Calbayog port. So the PPA will expand the Calbayog port. Aside from that, I built a second Calbayog port. What was its name? Manginoo. That's it. What's special about that port? It is a Roll-On/Roll-Off ferry port, RO-RO port like Allen. And we will connect this port to the ports of Biliran and the ports of Masbate. So Calbayog port will become a center of Roll-On/Roll-Off ferry. So now I will tell my father, I will pray for him on November 1, “Father,” I said, “the port you built in Calbayog port now has a child.”

The good thing about this is… Aren’t the highways, the expressways, equipped with interchanges to switch from one highway to another? This Calbayog port, in Manginoo, we will make it an interchange as well. Because Calbayog is on the Maharlika Nautical Highway. Isn’t this the first nautical highway, with RO-RO in Allen, and RO-RO also in Liloan.

Now, I created the Central Nautical Highway and Western Nautical Highway — but we also created the Eastern Nautical Highway — the Western Nautical Highway, everyone already knows about it because they travel on it from Batangas to Mindoro, to Boracay, to Panay, to Negros up to Dapitan or Dipolog. But we are also currently creating the Eastern and Central Nautical Highways. The Central one — Cagayan de Oro, Camiguin, Bohol, Cebu, Masbate — so that’s the Central one. The Eastern one is Surigao, then the usual Liloan, Southern Leyte, Leyte, but Biliran continues — that’s the Eastern one. So if Calbayog is connected to Biliran, connected to Masbate, then Calbayog is on the Maharlika Nautical Highway, on the Eastern Nautical Highway, on the Central Nautical Highway, Calbayog City will truly become an interchange. That way, Calbayog City will become important in our Roll-On/Roll-Off ferry system like Toledo City of Cebu which is also an interchange, San Carlos City of Negros Occidental and Dumaguete City. These are interchanges, you can pass through these towns to switch from one Nautical Highway to another. The same will happen in Calbayog City, it will be used as a hub to transfer from one Nautical Highway to another. That’s why something great will happen in Calbayog City.

But of course, this Nautical Highway will be used by people, Congressman Rey Uy is right, we will also rehabilitate the Allen-Calbiga section of the Maharlika highway that passes through Calbayog City. Tomorrow there will be a notice to proceed because it’s finished, right? Wasn’t Allen to Calbayog finished? So now Calbayog to Calbiga — Gabby’s town — the notice to proceed is tomorrow, 2.8 billion pesos.

So Congressman Rey Uy said, this two million I gave here won’t need additional funds, because the two billion pesos requested was for the Calbiga-Calbayog road. And because Calbayog City will be a hub — a route for the Maharlika road especially when Calbiga to Allen is improved again, it can go to Biliran, it can go to Masbate and thus go to other Nautical Highways — we will put a traveler’s rest area there in the Port. So it’s like you have a hotel, an airport hotel, only it will be a Ro-Ro hotel there.

But earlier we discussed the Medium-Term Plan of Eastern Visayas. All of this will help your province and city if we work together to ensure peace and order in Calbayog and in Samar.

Earlier, I introduced to the officials of Samar Island our new military leaders in the area. Three-star General Cardoso Luna is an excellent Central Philippines Commander; two-star General Macky Maclang is an excellent Eight Division Commander; with them in helping with peace is General Dela Paz, whom you have known for a long time, he has been here for a long time. I placed him here because you requested him. But I can tell you why I chose these two three-star and two-star generals here. When I told the officials earlier, Mayor Mel Sarmiento whispered to me, General Luna has a very, very strong war record. You know, I got General Luna from Mindanao. When he was a brigade commander, in his entire area of command, he defeated the enemies town by town. So I gave him an award and his soldiers in the middle of the battlefield, in the middle of the battles. But after I left them, they won more battles. So they forced the enemy away from his area of responsibility.

So I think if there is someone who can make top-level operational and strategic decisions for our fight for peace and order here in the Central Philippines, that would be our war hero, General Cardoso Luna. And General Macky Maclang, you know he has long been in charge of all our tanks, the light armor brigade. Three years, right? He was my brigade commander in the light armor brigade for three years until I promoted him, he led our intelligence, J-2. But when General Bonifacio Ramos — you know him. He’s good too, right? –was promoted, a replacement of his caliber was needed. So, although Maclang was supposed to be sent by the leaders, by the top brass of the military to Davao, I asked if Macky could go to the eighth division so he could help with the peace and order of Samar and Leyte.

What I’m saying is that, I personally assigned to Central Philippines and Eastern Visayas the best commander I could find. So I hope you will help them so that there will be peace in all the barangays of Samar. This is the way we can return to the former vibrancy of Calbayog — the vibrancy during my father’s time, when he built the first Calbayog port — let’s work together to achieve this.

Therefore, on the 58th anniversary of Calbayog City, what should we aspire to? Peace and development; peace and progress. Peace through a close partnership between the government of the local governments, the people and our armed forces, and development. Let us allow, let us enjoy, let us invite tourists to come to one of the most beautiful islands in the entire Philippines, none other than the Island of Samar — One island; One people; One culture.

Thank you very much. Happy anniversary to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 58th Calbayog City Charter Day Anniversary Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412210839/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3014&Itemid=38