Thank you very much Congressman Chuck Mathay, Congressman of the Commonwealth.

And I will mention the former councilor because I have many to greet here who are former councilors of Quezon City: I greet Senator Francis Pangilinan, former councilor of Quezon City. And also a former Chairman of the Council at U.P. like Mr. Gonzalo Bongolan, the president of HGC who spent how much, 300,000 million pesos so that this market could be built for the people of Commonwealth; members of the Cabinet, our chairman of HUDCC, also a councilor of Quezon City, from U.P. also, a former colleague of Francis and Gonzalo, Mike Defensor; our manager of everything to fight poverty directly, Secretary Ging Deles; our members of the Quezon City Council led by our acting Mayor Herbert Bautista — Herbert is acting mayor because Mayor Sonny Belmonte is on an official trip now in China, in Shanghai; our other government officials here including Percy Chavez who is your older brother, he is the chairman of the Commission on the Urban Poor and your police director here, General Thor this uniform I am using is a uniform of General Thor because if you remember on January 20 I said he was making a program for out-of-work, out-of-school-youth emergency employment so he is here not only for peace and order but he will turn our gangs into work gangs. Our barangay chairmen led by Chairman Felicito Balmocina and Chairwoman Pecson; you, the many Peoples’ Organizations, and our religious groups here; those who received certificates; friends:

Good morning to all of you. Here we are again, together. Thank you to the five thousand who attended our celebration this morning.

Someone asked me earlier why I favor Commonwealth when it comes to launching various projects, like this very modern Commonwealth Market-Mall that we are inaugurating today.

My answer is not that I favor it, but that you are quick to act when it comes to arranging your needs. Your organizations and local leaders are hardworking so you easily achieve your requests.

Therefore, I give you due attention because I want others with needs like yours to see how you implement your projects. I want our fellow citizens to know how important unity and cooperation are in getting what you want.

Earlier, some representatives of the Peoples’ organizations were here to give a declaration of support to me and our government. As Ging Deles joked, those who used to fight each other are now together after a year. I was telling Senator Francis Pangilinan, the Chairman of Housing in the Senate, when I would come here, when I spoke with one group that attended Edsa 3, they were rallying there, those from Edsa 2 said they were traitors. When I went to talk to those P.O.s who were at Edsa 2 and Edsa 3 rallying ‘Erap pa rin’ they said. But after a year, when Ging, Percy really sat down with your representatives, captains, local officials in Quezon City, after a year, you are almost all united. Thank you very much.

We in the government are doing everything to address your needs immediately. For example, in housing which we are diligently implementing not only here in Commonwealth but throughout the country, the application processes have been shortened and the number of signatories reduced. In other words, the process has been expedited and simplified for your convenience.

You know, before, the process for low-cost housing, from completing all the paperwork before starting, until the project proponent could build homes, took two and a half years. Now it has been divided, and not just divided, it has been reduced to six months to make it faster.

Our only desire is your enthusiastic promotion and compliance with the requirements so that we can achieve your requests quickly, whether collectively or individually.

As I said, you are not the problem. The squatters are not the problem. The urban poor are not the problem. You are part of finding solutions to the problem.

For example, why I say you are part of the solution, isn't Mr. Perez from Payatas here? I heard his name earlier. When I was in Payatas on January 16th, wasn't it a big problem how to issue the titles because there were many fake titles suddenly appearing. Three people are claiming one piece of land. Mr. Perez said to just declare it all as government land that is being sold. Then, whoever wins in court can return the government's money there, at least the people of Payatas have bought their land. That solution came from him.

This Commonwealth market-mall is part of the National Government Center Urban Renewal Program that was started by former Presidents Corazon Aquino and Fidel Ramos. During the time of Tita Cory, she declared this as the National Government Center. During President Ramos' time, he started this market. In 1999, construction was stopped because the release of funds was stopped. It was only during President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo's time that the funds were released again, so this market was completed. It was completed now in our administration. This is to provide additional livelihood for those who live around it, including the housing beneficiaries who need additional income to pay your housing amortizations.

Usually, the main requests for housing are water and electricity. But here with you, we didn't just provide water and electricity, we also included a market!

This market-mall is expected to be the center of trade in this part of Metro Manila. It will also ease traffic because vendors no longer need to sell on the side of the road.

To those who are currently positioned here, I want to inform you, first of all, according to Mr. Bongolan, how much is the rent for these markets? 70 pesos here, only 10 to 20 pesos here. And not only that, you have one month free until April to sell without paying. This is so you can adjust well to your new market.

And your first payment will be applied to the miscellaneous fee of the table stalls as your goodwill, as additional help for you. Isn't it that when you offer goodwill, there needs to be a goodwill downpayment? Your first payment will be deducted from that goodwill.

And as stipulated by the policy of the Home Guaranty Corporation, the one who built this, the balance of the goodwill for regular stalls, just like the table stalls, including the installments, will not be paid immediately within two years, in installments and without interest.

The front of your market will also be made into a large transport terminal for the convenient disembarkation and boarding of all shoppers, even those coming from Montalban or Novaliches. Because the terminal is there, people will shop here.

That is why I invite all wholesalers to bring their goods here so that the Commonwealth market will be known as a regional market and not just an ordinary local market.

I also congratulate the leadership of Quezon City — Herbert, the acting mayor, our two councilors here, Congressman — for the construction of the steel bridge that will connect the Commonwealth market from Manggahan. Do you know about that, the steel bridge? It’s cheap and can even be moved. So when others ask me for a catwalk, I tell them to emulate what Sonny Belmonte did, the steel bridge, it’s cheaper and can be relocated.

I also congratulate them on the asphalting of the transport terminal, and on the opening of the island in front of your market. I also congratulate all the vendor associations, federations, people’s organizations and NGO’s for your cooperation with the leadership of HUDCC, that’s Mike, of HGC and in the operation of this market, to fulfill the dream of housing and livelihood for the majority of families of vendors and other beneficiaries.

We are still carefully studying what other assistance can be given to you, including the capital you will need.

Some of those who will benefit from this modern market are extension and outreach livelihood projects, such as sewing, broom making, dustpan making, handicrafts, folding beds, and other cottage industries. Terminals, baggage boys, and porters will also benefit from this.

Today, we also witnessed the distribution of certificates of title reservation, and certificates of lot assignments and lot entitlements to around three thousand beneficiaries under the housing project of our government.

So, while Congress is expediting the process, while Senator Pangilinan and Congressman Mathay are working to have Congress declare that this land can now be sold to you outright, you already have security regarding the land where your homes are built. What that means is that even now, you are no longer squatters in your own country.

These beneficiaries are part of the 85 Homeowners Associations here. These associations have done a lot in arranging the needs of the project. That is why, I ask the associations in other areas to emulate the good example of the Homeowners Associations here in Commonwealth.

I would just like to emphasize that the provision of these housing projects depends on certain guidelines and policies that must be followed by the government and the beneficiaries.

The distribution we are doing is just one of the important processes for the complete ownership of these housing projects. Because just recently, we also distributed housing to another 2,000 beneficiaries here, it turns out that 5,000 Commonwealth residents have already benefited from our housing project since I assumed the presidency.

At this point, I am calling on the DPWH to expedite the land acquisition of some more properties included here in the National Government Center. I am also calling on the National Housing Authority under Mike Defensor, isn't Jopet your deputy? No, are you HUDCC? Also a Councilor of Quezon City, to facilitate the NGC East Project Trusteeship.

When Chuck was a councilor, didn't he fund the administrative expenses to finalize the surveys, the making of titles? Well, now I am also providing five million pesos to defray the expenses for the titling activities to facilitate the awarding of land titles to the beneficiaries of the NGC-east working group. Mike, I will give this to you.

And I remind the concerned agencies that I should sign the proclamation of Payatas within six weeks.

To the People’s Organizations in NGC-East, I request that you further strengthen your unity here because this project is in full swing, with the community master plan and the Code of Policy being worked on.

I would also like to inform you that during the last Cabinet meeting last Tuesday, I designated the National Anti-Poverty Commission or NAPC as the lead inter-agency in the committee being formed for Demolition and Relocation. Among the tasks of this committee is the construction of emergency shelter for those affected by demolition and relocation. But here, no one will be affected; I am just using this opportunity to tell it on television because there are other places, for example, if we build a train, we will speed up the train going to Bulacan, going to Clark, going to Calabarzon, going to Batangas Port so that wherever you live, wherever you work, it is possible because the train is fast, there will be people who will be relocated there. The area along the railway, that’s what I’m talking about relocating, not you. You already have a certificate, so it’s not you.

I also instructed the DILG to make an inventory of government lands that can be used for housing and other government projects. Because as long as it is government land and not used for things—like railways, we will sell it to those who live there.

The distribution of housing, to the urban poor, is just one proof of my effort to give a social bias to the development programs of our government.

In my tours of urban poor areas even before I became president, the urban poor always said that the main need is security of land tenure. That is called shelter security in English.

This is why I want 150,000 families to graduate from being squatters every year. We achieved this last year, and we will achieve it again this year.

The 2,000 who received it last year, that was part of the 150,000 for the year 2001; the 3,000 who received it now are part of the 150,000 target for year 2002 so you are among the first to benefit.

We are also building 100,000 units for low cost housing and 50,000 units for socialized housing every year for those who are the poorest of the poor.

I know that if you can help it, and as long as it can be avoided, you don't want to be a squatter. But I also know that it is very difficult to acquire land, especially a house in the city, because of the high price of land here. That's why I understand the dream of every person here to have a decent and secure home.

You know my father, the late President Diosdado Macapagal, he grew up poor in the countryside because he was the son of a farmer who farmed land they did not own. Then when he studied in Manila, because he became valedictorian in the province, he was able to study in Manila, he stayed with his relatives there in Dagupan, in the estero. In Manila, from a poor rural person, he became a poor city dweller because he was also a squatter there in Tondo. That's why my father passed on to me the feeling he explained, the hardship of living in slum areas. So, in remembrance of him, I became a senator, vice president. With the good name he left me, this is what I can offer to my father: he felt being a poor rural person and a poor city dweller, and that the hardships he experienced may bring comfort to the poor city dwellers in the new generation.

And as I said, as you are no longer squatters in your areas, may the time come when there are no more Filipino squatters in their own land.

Housing and the provision of its necessary rights, such as livelihood projects, are related to several principles that serve as guides in the anti-poverty program of my administration.

First of all, development is not enough if it does not improve the condition of our countrymen, especially the majority who are poor. Hopefully, our economy will truly improve; but it should only be that as our economy improves, the lives of our poor will also improve.

And the poor should benefit more from the law. I said “there must be a social bias in our economic development plan,” that’s what I said in the medium-term plan; that’s what I said in the SONA in Congress last year when Chuck Mathay was there at the opening of the session. What that means is, our main goal is how the poor can escape poverty, and this should be considered in any development program of our government.

People Power and people’s participation are also important in finding solutions to the problem. That is called institutionalized consultation with the people. As I said, you are not the problem, you are part of finding solutions to the problem. Like the proposal of Mr. Ely Perez in Payatas, you found the solution. So within six weeks, the document for the proclamation will be released now.

Housing is one of the needs of every person. That's what Senator Francis Pangilinan also said in his greetings earlier, and we will work together to address it.

So my friends, my brothers and sisters, fellow Filipinos, thank you and may the Almighty guide us. Support your administration. I need you.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during her visit at Commonwealth, Quezon City. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230245/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7629&Itemid=38