Congressman Firmalo…Mayor Rios and all officials and residents here in the kind… In San Fernando, various other mayors who are visiting today, to all of you, good morning.

And congratulations! To our new colleagues who have taken over the job of Secretary Jun Ebdane, who is with me today. And congratulations! To our students who are entering the current schoolyear in private schools from the work of Acting Secretary Fe Hidalgo of DepEd, who is also with me today.

It is a great joy for me to visit you again because if you haven't forgotten, I visited you when I was still a senator. Okay. And I would also like to express my deep gratitude today because, just like the mayor said during the 2004 elections, I had a big win here in San Fernando. So, it is fitting that on my first visit to Romblon after the election, the first town I visited was San Fernando here in Sibuyan.

Thank you to all of Sibuyan, because I won in all of Sibuyan in 2004. I will never forget my first visit here in Sibuyan when I was still a senator. I remember that there was an airport here, so I hired a plane to land at the Sibuyan airport. But upon arrival, or as I was about to take off, I learned that the airport was not approved by the A.T.O. because it had deteriorated significantly. So, there was no time to notify my advance party, the nephew of Mayor Rios, Bong Ruado, is already here, is already in Sibuyan. I went straight to Tablas airport, my intention was to communicate with Bong here in Sibuyan that I had landed in Tablas, but I learned that there was no communication at all from Tablas to Sibuyan. That's why when I became president, one of the things I did was talk to our telephone companies, and now I am happy to know that you have cell sites here in Sibuyan.

So, that was my first promise, pledge to Sibuyan, your communication, so it's done. Now I know from the mayor that your problem is electricity, but new officials have arrived regarding electricity. Each of the bridges we are inaugurating today, each one of the bridges has an average cost of 20 million pesos. So, our eight President’s Bridges here have a total of about 160 million pesos for just one town, the town of San Fernando.

The update from the congressman to me in all of Sibuyan is 22, congressman, President’s Bridge Program. So in our program here in Sibuyan alone, our bridge program is 440 million pesos.

Now, the mayor said the problem is electricity, and earlier he mentioned it to me and the governor, saying that the new power system will be completed within six months. But the problem is what we will do in the meantime, in the six months. Because of course, if the electricity is not good and there are many brownouts, our peace and order will not be good. So, the problem of our comrades here will increase, our Southern Luzon commander, General Cabuay, who is with us today and our second division commander, General Yano, who is also here with us today. They have a large territory, General Cabuay covers the whole Southern Luzon and General Yano covers the whole Region IV-A and B. So we want all the places to be bright and peaceful.

So, earlier I was talking on the cellular — I think some of you were already ready to greet me but then the phone rang — it was a return call from our Secretary of Energy. I told him I’m here in Sibuyan in Romblon, the electricity is lacking but NAPOCOR is working on something I told them but that is to bear fruit six months from now. So in the meantime what is our plan? So I said the proposal of the mayor is to look for a power barge that you can rent. Rent is not a problem, the problem is the Secretary of Energy needs to know if there is an available, physically available power barge. And so he’s going to find out now, and I hope he can call me back again before I leave the place.

But I’m just so happy that we can do governance now all over the cellphone. Unlike in the past, I could not even notify you but I was going another way, by boat, because there was no communication. So little by little we are completing our necessary priorities, basic services: communication, electricity. The water here in San Fernando is not a problem. In fact, you have the best water system in the whole region, congratulations!

But for me — and we were debating this on the stage — should I mention it now? Lest my speech become controversial, but it’s a thought that I would like to convey to you. I finished MIMAROPA, because the five provinces felt that you were not included in the plans of CALABARZON. Because CALABARZON is industrialization, the problem of MIMAROPA is poverty. It’s unrealistic to expect industrialization to happen here. So, in my first term, I finished the executive order to make MIMAROPA a separate region. But many years later then I find that what is happening, MIMAROPA… We’ve been sticking to poverty alleviation projects because the provinces of MIMAROPA are very poor. The problem is, you are reinforcing one another’s poverty because you’re trading with other provinces that are just as poor.

And so the government keeps having to put up bridges, keeps having to put up schools, keeps having to give scholarships. It’s okay if you had no potential, but here in Romblon and Sibuyan you have a lot of potential in our new growth sector — tourism. Now I chose this occasion to visit you and to speak in Ilonggo because I want to stress that you in culture and in the economy fit the Ilonggo or Hiligaynon economy.

And I came from Aklan by a 30-minute short helicopter ride to prove that Sibuyan is very close to our center of tourism. They say the best beach in the world but maybe because they have not seen the Romblon beaches. They say the best beach in the world is Boracay island. But you belong to the same sea, the same culture. The problem is you don’t belong to the same planning group. Imagine Boracay, almost a million tourists already last year. The number one tourism destination in the whole Philippines. Their facilities are no longer enough, where do they send their extra tourists? Because they belong to Region VI and there is a master plan for tourism and there is a regional director for tourism that is in-charge of Region VI, where do they send their extra tourists? Pandan, Antique; Libacao, Aklan; Roxas, Capiz. Even to Guimaras which is much farther from Boracay than San Jose, Sta. Fe and even Sibuyan.

So, it’s not something that I will do today, but just to give you food for thought. Of course, the government always has ways to alleviate poverty like our young graduating students from grade school. Why is our project for them because the congressman said you lack roads, you lack electricity, you lack classrooms. So our program — and I will ask Secretary Hidalgo to listen to this — in all of the… Let’s start with Sibuyan. Fe, if you can check in all of the towns of Sibuyan or all the schools, how many schools have a student-classroom ratio of more than 100:1, let us build additional classrooms in all of them. Why 100:1? Because if less than 100:1, we can have two shifts of 50 students each. That is for the grade school.

Now in high school they say the classroom is lacking in high school but there are also fewer students in private high school. We don’t want the private high schools to die. So there is excess demand in one, there is excess supply in one, the idea is to combine them. So these students, 25 of them have a high school voucher worth 4,000 pesos each. In other words, when they enter high school, it is no longer necessary to wait for a new high school classroom building if it is lacking. They can go to a private school, give their 4,000-peso voucher as the tuition fee for the private high school. And then the Department of Education will pay the tuition fee. If they want a more expensive school then it’s up to them to add to the 4,000, but the DepEd guarantees to pay the 4,000-peso tuition fee.

These are our programs — your high school-grade school classrooms, high school vouchers, water if lacking, electricity if lacking, but you can do more than that if only the tourists will discover the beauty of Romblon and if only the investors will discover how profitable it will be to send the tourists here to Romblon. But I say, the mentality of MIMAROPA: classrooms, PhilHealth, farm-to-market road, electricity, which are all very good. But you can have more of those if development is faster. And you have the potential to develop faster because of tourism potential.

Here in Region VI, especially in Aklan, some projects are no longer water for every town, no longer electricity where even Napocor needs to put up a power plant here. Even the private sector invested in a power plant in Boracay, including Aklan. And we would like that kind of development here in Romblon.

So if you would consider it to start thinking of the idea that you are totally Hiligaynon in your culture, you are very close to Aklan and Boracay, I hope you consider, one of these days let’s consider that Romblon will also be part of Region VI. I’m not forcing it to you today. I’m only introducing the idea for the first time publicly although I’ve discussed this already many times with congressman. I’ve told also governor about it but it’s for you to decide how fast do you want tourism to come to Romblon. And the faster you want tourism to come to Romblon, the sooner you should be part of Region VI whose development plan really revolves around the development of Boracay and the other neighboring attractions.

So, I’m so happy to be able to come here. And surely if you were part of Region VI, because their budget really goes to access to tourism enterprises, your airport can be included in the airport budget of Region VI which is very large. Your roads instead of farm-to-market road, which should be all weather, if it’s roads to tourism destination, they have to be nicer. And power instead of waiting for Napocor and the D.O.E. the private sector itself, big companies, are the ones that themselves put up the facilities here. Our health, in Boracay there are three private clinics. So here instead of waiting for the government to put up additional rural health units, the private sector itself will come. That is the beauty of tourism development. You know Bali started with Kuta, now spread to the whole Bali, which is as big as Panay and Romblon together.

So I hope that as we are able to chat with one another today, totally the San Fernando… In fact, Mayor Rios said he has started to talk about this already to the people to consult. It’s a good time for us to start discussing this so that we can do our own planning in the near future for if it is the wish of the people of Romblon to develop your beautiful natural wonders and for the people of the world to experience the loving hospitality of the people of Romblon especially here in Sibuyan island.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). GMA’s Speech during the Ceremonial Inauguration of the five newly-constructed President’s bridge projects. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412214049/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2434&Itemid=38