Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, During the awarding of Certificates of Land Ownership to CMP beneficiaries and Certificates of Recognition to former barangay captains of Bacoor, Cavite.

[Delivered at the Mayor Arsenio Castillo Coliseum, Camella Homes Springville Brgy. Molino 3, Bacoor, Cavite, June 15, 2005]

Mayor Castillo, happy birthday and congratulations!

I greet Brother Mike Velarde, a guest of honor of Jessie, and the fellow children of Yahweh El Shaddai who will have a prayer rally later; I greet our three congressmen who are here today: Congressman Abaya, Congressman Velarde and Congressman Señeres; and representing the province today is Vice Governor John Vic Remulla. Joining me as your guests today is the chairman of GSIS, Secretary Abes who is also the coordinator for power and water.

Do you remember what I said when I took my oath as President, in the ten points of our program, we would bring electricity to all barangays in the country and water to every town without water and every barangay in Metro Manila without water. Well, this Bacoor is not part of Metro Manila by law. But in reality, economically, it is part of Metro Manila.

So earlier, when we went here, we greeted those who are now the new owners of the land they are building on. In Molino, one said, “give us irrigation there in San Lorenzo.” so that’s what I introduced to Secretary Abes.

Also here is the head of the Light Rail Transit Authority, Administrator Mel Robles. And he is here to announce that we have not forgotten what I said that we want – part of my ten-point program also – to decongest Metro Manila. And an important way to decongest Metro Manila is to connect Bacoor not only by road but also by train, right, Mel?

Anyway, Jessie, congratulations! For your very beautiful coliseum. Your offering to the people of Bacoor in celebration of your birthday.

And I also want to announce that today there is good news. Perhaps a gift also to Jessie and the very large population of Bacoor and the entire Philippines. Earlier I received the news from the National Statistics Office, last year the unemployed throughout the Philippines were 3.1 million. Now, according to the latest data, it has gone down to 2.9 million, so more jobs are being created and will increase even more now that Phase One of our reform has been completed, which, thanks to our congressmen, has given us new taxes. Now we can spend the taxes to further improve the infrastructure of Bacoor and other areas of Calabarzon such as the train, such as water so that many investors will come and more jobs will be created in Bacoor, Calabarzon and the entire Philippines.

I also want to use this opportunity, Mayor Jessie, to thank you and your beloved barangay captains and former barangay captains and your voters for the support you gave me in the last election.

Today is not only Mayor Jessie’s birthday. It is also the anniversary of the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program. But because we are here now, yesterday we celebrated the anniversary in Malacañang and there in Malacañang as a celebration of the anniversary of land reform we gave awards to outstanding beneficiaries of land reform and outstanding former landlords.

But today I also want to announce that within our administration this means that land reform is not only land reform for agricultural lands but also land reform for urban lands and reform for ancestral lands. In fact, Mayor Jessie, even during my first term as President, that’s what he always asked for every time we met, that for decades the poor urban dwellers of Bacoor have been hoping for certainty to remain on the land they occupy.

And this is one of the goals of the mayor. And I said I agree with you, Mayor, and I will fight for your hundreds of thousands of citizens who need certainty in the land they occupy, we will help. I think that’s why Mayor Castillo decided to support me in the last election. So in celebrating Mayor Castillo’s birthday, which is also the anniversary of land reform, the mayor ensured that part of his celebration was the distribution of titles to two hundred and seventy families here in Molino 7 in San Lorenzo.

The Register of Deeds was just late. You are holding your titles but when he arrives, the mayor will give them to you. But what we can say is this is a new beginning for all our beneficiaries of land titles. The piece of paper you will hold later guarantees your right to protection as a legitimate landowner. You are no longer squatters in your own country.

I mentioned earlier the first phase and the second phase of our reform. The first phase, now done by the congressmen, gave me new taxes to be spent for the good of our people. This giving of titles to the land is part of the second phase of our reform agenda. Because of the additional taxes from the first phase of financial reform, our administration can now help the poor more, fund your needed water more, fund the needed guarantee for loans to the LRTA and also include faster reform for urban areas.

And it is truly timely. It is timely because it has been too long that there are two Philippines – one Philippines where if you are hardworking and have business skills, you will rise; and another Philippines where even if you are hardworking, the comfort of life is just a dream. One Philippines that is positive; one Philippines that is not. It is time that there should only be one Philippines because we are only one people.

So my friends, to those who are trying to further grow or worsen the two Philippines, I will not engage in the politics of destabilization. We have many of our good law enforcers and lawyers, they will take care of those who are destabilizing because the country is already too divided into two Philippines.

Now that funds are coming from Congress and from the new taxes and we can spend more for the poor, that is what I will pursue. I will pursue now the desire to have one Philippines – the Philippines where everyone has hope for their dreams. In this effort of mine for one Philippines, I know that the mayor will continue his support for me and your support. And I also expect that Brother Mike and Yahweh El Shaddai, the children of Yahweh El Shaddai who helped me in the last election, will also help me achieve one Philippines.

So to all of you here at Mayor Jessie’s birthday, here in the new coliseum that we are celebrating, to those of us who received titles, to our senior citizens and our tricycle drivers, because thanks to Congress, I am given more spacious funds for the capital requested by Mayor Castillo for the town pharmacy, capital for the spare parts cooperative, is part of our offering for his happy birthday.

To all of you, people of Bacoor, thank you very much. Help me become a good President.

Thank you very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Awarding of Certificate of Land Ownership to CMP Beneficiaries and Certificates of Recognition to Former Barangay Chairmen of Bacoor, Cavite. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412081036/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5079&Itemid=38