Thank you, Secretary Arthur Yap for your introduction and for introducing yourself also to the people of Camiguin.

Our honored host here in the province, Governor JJ Romualdo and the Vice Governor and all the provincial officials. My friend in Congress, Congressman Loloy Romualdo (applause) together with our colleagues from Congress, Congressman Joeboy Aquino and Congressman Anton Lagdameo, (applause) Mayor Romualdo, Vice Governor Lasacar, our various brothers and sisters here in Camiguin, good afternoon, happy new year and happy anniversary to all of you. (applause)

The story of Camiguin is like the story of what we have done to prevent the world crisis from reaching us. Your province is a good example of what can happen when the benefits of reform are supported by the people and accompanied by good plans and good implementation. And I’m very happy with the stories of JJ and Congressman about the many firsts here in the province. And one of your firsts in the province is the first water system in this region. Even before you were a province, you already had your water system, and it is a great honor for me that the President provided your water system, none other than my father, President Diosdado Macapagal. (applause)

Now, let's move forward to the year 2000, Camiguin was sixth on the list of Ten Poorest Provinces in the country in the year 2000. But within just six years, you were removed from the list of ten poorest. You are now 34th in the middle of the list of all provinces. (applause) Because you are now in the middle of the list, we can say that Camiguin is now middle-class. Congratulations! (applause) Thank you, DSW Poblacion.

And it’s like what JJ said, even though there is only a small amount of land for cultivation here, you still increased your productivity to 11 percent, so that is the reason why Camiguin was removed from the ten poorest because of the diligence of the people here in Camiguin. (applause) And with your 11 percent on a small amount of land, you know that you should not rely solely on agriculture for your progress. You also saw that with your small land, there are many attractions for tourists like the sweetest lanzones in the world, (applause) the Hibok-Hibok volcano, the origin of Camiguin because you are the province ‘Born of Fire,’ the fire of Hibok-Hibok, so you have hot and cold springs, natural soda water, you also have a sunken cemetery and other beautiful dive attractions.

Earlier, we came from Gingoog City, and from below the helicopter we saw a very beautiful island. So upon my arrival, I asked Congressman, “what is that beautiful and wonderful island?” He said, Mantigui Island. (applause) So that’s why Mantigui is one of the most famous dive sites in the Philippines right now. (applause) And there’s more, not just a dive site below, but also beautiful beaches above. And all these tourist attractions are filled with the goods and abundance… with the loving people of the province of Camiguin. (applause) Therefore, from all your tourist attractions and your natural hospitality, beautiful smiles to match the beautiful beaches, you have made tourism develop. So you are one of our favorite tourist destinations here in the Philippines. (applause)

Therefore, the national government and the local government, we have connected Camiguin to the Central Nautical Highway, like JJ said earlier, through the ports of RORO here in Mambajao going to Jagna, and that one existing route from Balingoan, we also repaired the roads around your province. And because we repaired the infrastructure, travel for tourists is easier. And like JJ said, not just tourists but also products. The products and supplies and food here come from mainland Mindanao, from General Santos, according to JJ, and from the islands of Visayas, so there is always enough food even during times when there are many tourists. These RORO ports are also the reason why your sweet lanzones arrive fresh in various cities in Luzon and Visayas. And so, Artie Yap will assist you to make sure that this year the harvest of lanzones will be as productive as the harvest of your palay. (applause)

But we need to work harder in Camiguin and throughout the country so that the world economic crisis does not reach Camiguin and here in the Philippines. The slowdown in global growth has worsened and there is a recession in two-thirds of the world but not in the Philippines, not in Camiguin. Thank God. (applause)

Many economists were surprised and praised us for the growth of our economy while others declined. Just for the new year January 2, what came out on international television was the stable outlook for China, Philippines and Indonesia, the most resilient economies – strong currency, strong fiscal position. Our strong fiscal position is thanks to the help from our congressmen like JJ before and Loloy now.

Thank you to them. (applause) Because of their support for our economic reforms in Congress, we are among the few Asian economies that fared best in 2008 and that are projected to do well in 2009. And it’s like JJ said, that the price of rice will remain at P18.25 here in Camiguin is one reason why Philippine inflation has gone down to 8 percent last December compared to double digit in our other neighboring economies.

No one knows how long this slow global economy will last. But I am hopeful that through our comprehensive economic resiliency programs, a Philippine crisis or a Camiguin crisis will not result from the world crisis.

For our economic resiliency, we will continue to invest in our people, such as our assistance from the VAT shares and effective infrastructure programs like your new oval and sports complex (applause) which, according to JJ, when I come to this year’s lanzones festival will be completed with public services. The government will spend more on education, health services like your hospital upgrading and providing training for job seekers. More will also be spent on building more infrastructure to increase our competitiveness around the world, especially our competitiveness in tourism.

So, on your province’s birthday, my request to you is for the people of Camiguin to continue to trust in our own strength. We continue to unite and look in only one direction – the direction of stability and progress. The people of Camiguin have already shown your ability to withstand difficulties. Continue this diligence which is the reason you were able to get off the list of ten poorest provinces and became a middle-class province. (applause) Let us continue to work hard, to unite so that the day will come when Camiguin will not only be middle-class but also become a first-world within the next 20 anniversaries.

Thank you very much and thank you always for your support. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 41st Founding Anniversary of Camiguin Province. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412105738/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=17566&Itemid=38