Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Opening Ceremony of the 15th International Convention and Exhibition of the Federation of Asia-Oceania Pest Managers Association (FAOPMA)

[Delivered at the Rizal Ballroom, Shangri-la Hotel Manila Makati City, November 18, 2003]

Thank you very much, Undersecretary Drilon.

Mr. Chan and Mr. Chin, and our other guests from the different parts of the world, welcome to the Philippines. Ms. Genuino and the other Filipino leaders of the associations participating in this conference, thank you very much for your expression of support. Chairman Genuino of PAGCOR, association presidents, honored guests, ladies and gentlemen.

Once again, to our foreign delegates, I welcome you at a time of continuing dynamism in our country, and I thank you for the confidence you have shown by holding your convention in Manila.

We are at the front of the political season, and I suppose you all see the usual run of controversy in the news media. But we have been noted for this for having the most freewheeling democracy in Asia. But it works.

I would like to assure you that we are firmly in the map of investment and are holding out relatively well in terms of macroeconomic stability and law and order. In fact, there was just a recent survey of Japanese investors, and they find that the Philippines is their third favorite place of investment here in our region.

Coming out of the summits of ASEAN and APEC last month, I bear enduring faith that our region will wake up one day to the future of shared aspirations and energies, just as these are evident in your meeting here today.

Earlier, I was asking Sheryl, “are you also including agricultural pesticides?” and she said, “it’s really mostly urban.” but I see the presence of Agriculture Department Undersecretary Drilon here. And indeed, while more of the delegates are here in behalf of urban pest control, I would like to say that the presence of agriculture in this conference is important to us.

The Philippine economy has a very big agricultural sector. Food production in our country has plenty of room for growth. But higher yields can only be had with the proper application of cost-effective and environment-friendly agricultural inputs. In fact, not only in the Philippines but anywhere in the world, in your countries, there will be no food security anywhere without pesticides.

But there is much more to this that occupies people’s minds about pesticides, and it is that they must be understood not only in light of their impact to food production, but to the environment and our health.

As Sheryl said in her welcome remarks, “it is in this spirit that I welcome this opportunity to join you in this ceremony. This is the ideal opportunity for industry’s professionals to learn and to be exposed to the latest‚ pest management strategies, products and technology.”

I also envision this conference to forge deeper cooperation among all stakeholders — the government, represented by Undersecretary Drilon and myself, pest control operators, associations, manufacturers, distributors, and the private sector who buy your products. We are all stakeholders in this vital field of socioeconomic development and progress.

Integrated pest management, that is something we use very often in agriculture. But integrated pest management is not confined to lending bounties to the farmers and fisher folk alone.

Surely when we talk about integrated pest management, we can also talk about it in other areas, other sectors of the economy, but taking into account not only the killing of the pests but other concerns as well. The deterioration of health is not the only consequence of poor pest management. We are also challenged by the deterioration of our treasured heritage sites that are vulnerable to insidious attack.

For instance, if we don’t respond accordingly, I understand that the Philippines stands to lose to termites more than a hundred 18th and 19th century Spanish-style houses in Vigan and Northern Luzon at all.

But not even to talk about those great heritage villages, I have gone to so many hospitals and school buildings that had to be rebuilt because there was no pest management in the first place. We could have saved a lot of money if we had sent a little. In this particular case, it’s really true that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. Without proper pest management, we would even find it difficult to foster sustainable development strategies that would benefit the great masses of our people. We have to think of the larger picture as Sheryl said, the global picture, where our future is concerned, and this is a matter of collective concern.

Of course, we know that in pest control there is an underground trade. And the underground trade is both unwelcome and dangerous.

Many people are still in need of education regarding pests and the possible effect on their homes, their lives and the environment. Professionalism is the key to the resolution of many of these issues.

I am a believer in free enterprise. In fact, I’ve spent a lot of my administration, and even prior to this as senator and undersecretary of trade and industry, trying to break down unnecessary rules and red tape.

I believe that as much as possible there should be no rules in business except for we have to attend to the needs of safety, security and public morality. But in this particular industry, safety is a very important consideration. Health is a very important consideration. Therefore, we cannot subject your industry to laissez faire and total free enterprise.

I would suggest therefore, as part of the results of this conference, for the leaders of your industry, especially the Philippine industry, to draft an amendment, to push for an amendment to the national building code of the Philippines that would require… I see that we are on the same wavelength. and I hope you mean that the amendment you welcome is one that would require all pest control treatments, whether structural or household, to be done by a licensed operator. Because we must protect the consumer.

With such a prestigious convention, plus the yearly symposia and seminars being organized by your various local and international associations, I trust that the industry will continue to live up to its role as a guardian of sustainable agriculture, the environment and public health.

To all of you, have a fruitful convention.

To the Filipinos, thank you for your support.

To our foreign guests, welcome once again to the Philippines.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Ceremony of the 15th International Convention and Exhibition of the Federation of Asia-Oceania Pest Managers Association (FAOPMA). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140656/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7448&Itemid=38