Thank you.

Thank you Secretary Favila for your introduction.

Ambassador Liu of the People’s Republic of China, thank you for being here with us; Secretary Roque; the elder statesmen of the Federation, the previous presidents, honorary presidents and senior advisers; Mr. Henry Sy, our host for today and his family and corporations; and Tessie, thank you for your contributions to the Philippine economy, and thank you Tessie for your kind words about our economy and our economic management; the outgoing officers headed by President John Tan, congratulations for a job well done!

Under John, the Foundation has continued to be government’s strong partner in development programs. Our incoming Board and Officers headed by Alfonso Uy of Iloilo, whom I’ve known for a long time in Iloilo, congratulations for being the first Federation president coming from the province!

This makes the Federation truly national and I am optimistic that our partnership will grow even stronger under the next set of officers who will officially be chosen during this convention. But because Dr. Uy is running unopposed, he was already introduced to me by Francis Chua as the next president or their incoming president.

It is so impressive that such a large ethnic-based group can be so cohesive and keen in preserving your unity, your cultural identity, and yet be so thoroughly assimilated to Filipino culture and traditions. Just looking at this room, if I had maybe an hour to speak, there would be so many that I could mention that I can recognize on this floor of Chinese ancestry. Of course, we have your congresswoman from Chinatown, Naida Angping, and her husband Chairman Harry Angping, but we also have mayors, city and municipality, we have prominent businessmen that I have interacted with not only in Manila but in the provinces and so many of you. And this is just a tribute to your ancestors who chose to make the Philippines their home.

And let me say that because of your ancestors and you, our country has been culturally and economically enriched several times over. In fact, most Filipinos have a Chinese ancestor in their family tree. So you’re really considered of Chinese ancestry if you can trace it very specifically in your family tree. Because if you cannot trace it ,then everybody has Chinese ancestry. In my case, I’m very happy that my grandchildren can have traceable Chinese ancestry because my husband’s middle name, Tuason, came from his Chinese ancestor, Son Tua, whose gallantry in helping defend the Philippines against the British forces in the mid-18th century earned for him a Spanish nobility title and lands stretching from today’s Sta. Mesa to Diliman to Marikina. So, we are part of you.

The government’s partnership with your Federation started ever since you were founded. The numerous projects that your Federation launched in support of government’s programs have touched the life of every Filipino in one way or another. Just speaking of John Tan’s administration, and he gave us his report, the Federation provided assistance in lobbying for far-reaching economic laws, sponsoring various trade fairs and investment and promotion campaigns, providing police patrol cars — and how many times I was there to witness the turnover together with other equipment necessary to maintain peace and order –training our youth, building schools in far-away communities, delivering relief goods in places visited by calamities. So, thank you, John again and your Board and thank you to the elder statesmen and senior advisers of the Federation.

The Federation is among the most active of groups complementing government’s social services delivery. You have the best volunteer fire brigades in the country. You have mobile clinics that have helped cure thousands of the sick. Your speedy relief to victims of calamities such as typhoons Cosme and Frank in the region of your new president has been exemplary.

And the people especially thanked the Federation for your landmark championing the cause of quality education. You have shown that classrooms can be built at half the cost estimated for these projects. That’s why I decided that in support of what the good you’re doing for our people on the occasion of the inauguration of the new Board, I will give you a 35 million-peso check. So that you can be even more generous, as you have already been generous, with your two-classroom school building donations to the “Operation Barrio Schools.” I only ask — you have linked up with the DepEd to build so many units of two-classroom buildings. And I thank you for that — I only ask, for this one, you will specifically put it in the grade schools where the ratio of students to classroom is 100 for one shift or two-fifth students for two shifts. Because if the ratio is more than that, that is where the lack is really there. So that is where I would like you to put this money where the ratio is bigger than 100 to one for one shift or fifty to one for two shifts.

And I’m glad that John already told you about the Executive Order that I signed authorizing your Federation to fund raise for your “Operation Barrio Schools” and that all the funds generated from contributions shall be tax-exempt. Meaning, the donor or contributor shall be allowed to deduct the donations or contributions for income tax purposes.

At no time in written history do strong partnerships matter more than now, when our nation faces concerns brought about by the global economic crisis. As you all know, this global recession is not of our making, yet we have to deal with its challenges.

In challenging economic times, we must tackle many challenges at once to keep our economy and way of life going strong. On the part of government, we must live within our means and run a lean, efficient government. This includes continued fiscal prudence, which Tessie said is one of the keys to our resiliency today, and efforts to work towards a balanced budget. All the while, we must also simultaneously invest in key programs for our people.

So this coming Independence Day, we will forgo the costly annual parade. In the past, I looked forward so much to your dragon dance which I insisted to my organizers that must be included together with the ‘tinikling’ or what Muslim dance are there because the Chinese-Filipinos are Filipinos and your culture is part of Philippine culture. But we won’t have that now because we won’t have a parade.

Instead, we will hold a countrywide mega-jobs fair so that our — is the number correct, Nitoy? — 46,000 displaced workers can find employment and livelihood. And I enjoin your Federation, with your network of 170 member organizations all over the country, to be actively involved in the jobs fairs.

I am happy to recognize the Federation’s action also in signing the Memo of Agreement with the DOLE, that’s why Nitoy Roque is here, for the reemployment of workers who would be displaced by the global crisis.

By the way, I’d like to thank Mr. Sy and family for having the Gaming Exhibit downstairs because we’ve lost 5,000 jobs abroad, right? But Nitoy Roque was able to get openings in Sentosa in Kuala Lumpur for 5,000 jobs. So, now what we have to take care of are those losing their jobs in our export-oriented industries in the Philippines.

On the part of the people, now is the time for pulling together and focusing on family and the community. We must initiate a new era of volunteerism and community spirit. This should include the government, religious and civic groups such as the Federation, and non-governmental organizations harnessing our people to engage in coordinated volunteer activities. We should focus on initiatives such as cleaning up our environment, building parks and planting trees and bringing comfort to the poor through food banks and bringing the dignity of literacy to adults who cannot read.

During these trying times, the Filipino spirit and commitment to caring should prompt each one of us to count our blessings and give back to those who are less fortunate. Our nation needs us all pulling in the same direction. Volunteering time, skill and resources is a noble undertaking that the Federation has taken seriously all these years. And I thank you for that and I hope you will be an example for many other Filipinos.

Because in lean economic times for the world, we need to tap into national support for “volunteerism.” We need to promote citizen involvement to help friends, families, communities and the less fortunate, notably revolving around the poor and the environment. You know, today is Friday. I devote Fridays to concerns and initiatives for environmental security. On this Friday that I am with you, I especially appeal for your help in promoting proper waste management, solid waste management, and also in putting sewerage treatment plants in your respective office buildings so that the water that will flow into the system, into the Pasig River will be already treated and clean water.

I also ask your help for the Youth National Service targeting 18 to 24-year-olds that I launched last Wednesday in Bohol at the Sangguniang Kabataan National Convention. The National Service Corps shall be like a domestic “Peace Corps.” It shall be geared to the unemployed or underemployed skilled youth or college graduates. It shall focus on their contributions to education and community service programs. We are recruiting such youth to undertake a 2-year national service commitment with a modest stipend. And I ask that the Federation help me with the stipends.

We look to our reliable partners for support to create new jobs, deliver targeted relief to the sectors that have been hardest hit by the global economic slump, and spend more judiciously on programs that give the greatest positive impact.

Also, I’m sure that you are very much concerned that in times when money is difficult and crimes are expected to rise, the police must become even more vigilant, so with the military.

This morning, I was able to talk on the phone with Ms. Lacaba. And I told her we are happy that she is back with us. And we give credit — as I told her, those who worked hard for her release — to the local crisis committee, the troops, the DND, the DILG and the PNRC leaders. We call for more of such concerted efforts to end lawless violence.

Here in Metro Manila, I have put a new director for the whole region for NCR. Somebody that many of you are familiar with because he was the head of the Manila Police District and maybe some of you in the provinces are familiar with him because he was able to have for a long time the biggest drug bust in Quezon province and put in jail the highest ranking fish in the drug trade. That is your new director for NCR, General Boysie Rosales, and my special instruction to him is look into the kidnapping incidents in Metro Manila. He has done a good job in Manila because of the support of your community and your Federation. And now I’m sure you’re supporting him in his bigger area.

I thank the Federation for your contributions that help the police keep the peace and make our people feel safe in their homes, their workplace and in the streets. As Tessie said and our other speakers, the theme of your biennial convention is: “Working Together, Overcoming Crisis.” Indeed, we have been working together for a long time and produced inspiring results.

The people of the Philippines recognize your efforts to make life better not only for the Filipino-Chinese in our country but for everyone else. Tessie praised our economic management for our resiliency. But let me in return say that your efforts, the Filipino-Chinese business community, helped our country achieve a record 36 successive quarters of growth during my Presidency, capped by the 8.0-percent GNP growth in 2007.

Last year, when two-thirds of the world went into recession, we managed a 6.1- percent GNP growth last year. And this year, while 46,000 of our workers have lost their jobs in our export-oriented industries and 5,000 workers have lost their jobs abroad. There are 5,000 jobs available abroad and our economy has increased employment by 500,000 also so far this year.

So we have created more than 500,000 jobs here and there are 500,000 jobs abroad, and hunger has gone down significantly. This was achieved with members of the Federation playing vital roles in propelling the economy upward as well as delivering more social services to the poor. For your contributions to this achievement, we thank you.

FFCCCII has promoted the growth of business and integrated the Chinese community into our society. And most importantly, the Federation has worked hard to achieve our vision of a modern Philippines.

In these challenging times, we need to work together even more closely, complementing each other’s actions to keep the global crisis from becoming a Philippine crisis and to keep our country on the path of long-term growth.

With your support, I have high hopes of sustaining our economic resiliency and attaining a vision of a Philippines at the threshold of first world in 20 years.

To the officers to be elected, congratulations!

And to all of you, thank you very much once again to all of you.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the 27th Biennial Convention of the Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce and Industry, Inc. (FFCCCII). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412104123/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=23265&Itemid=38