Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the launching of Ford 2002 ‘ESCAPE’ and third year anniversary of Ford Motor Co. Philippines

[Delivered in Sta. Rosa, Laguna, September 9, 2002]

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much Undersecretary Greg Domingo who is the managing head of the Board of Investments.

Governor of Laguna Ning-Ning Lazaro and Congresswoman of this district of Laguna Uliran Joaquin; and Mayor Arcilles of Sta. Rosa and the other citizens of Laguna and Sta. Rosa lalung-lalo na ang ating magigiting na nagtatrabaho dito sa Ford. Ford Motors Philippines President Henry Co and Ford ASEAN Joseph John Parker; and other officials of Ford; Ambassador Ricciardone of the United States; other officials of the U.S. government; and I would also like to acknowledge the presence of the Commissioner of Customs, Tony Bernardo; our other officers taking care of our peace and order, Roy Kyamko the Commander of the Southern Luzon Command; and the Regional Director of Region 4, General Apacible; I’d like to also greet the various suppliers and the various dealers and all of you; ladies and gentlemen:

I think we should all be very happy this is a great day for Philippine manufacturing.

I just came from Nestle also here in Laguna and there we had a ceremonial switch-on of their expansion, two-billion peso expansion. Nestle and Ford within plant are very similar, the products are not similar but they both employ about 500 people in house but give jobs to 10 times as many outside of the factory. And when they launch new products there in nestle and today we launch a new product here. The Ford 2002 “Escape”

Ford 2002 Escape is another milestone for Ford Phils. As Mr. Co said, within a six-month period. Because six months ago it launched Ford Lynx which is now being exported to other countries in the Asian region. And soon Ford Escape will be sold to Thailand and Indonesia. And of course the Philippines. This is the fulfillment I’m very happy to say, of one of the outputs of my trip to the United States last year. Because this expansion, this launching is a fruit of a memorandum of agreement that was signed during my trip to the United States.

I remember Ford has been in the country for many years now. Or at least Id rather say it was in the country a long time ago. I remember as a young married woman owning a Ford Fiera, aside from other Ford models. But Ford left for a while during martial law, and thankfully resumed operations in the Philippines in 1997. Since then, Ford has grabbed a considerable portion of the automobile market in the country. We should congratulate Ford for boosting the country’s image in the automotive exports industry. And I also commend Ford for its support to our economy, particularly its contributions to foreign exchange earnings and job creation. Ford’s projected foreign exchange earnings for this year I believe are estimated at 26 million dollars. And the expansion to escape is worth just about that much in investment as well. And in a time of great unemployment, the automotive industry is especially valuable because of its many job-creating linkages.

Since Ford came back to the Philippines, its investments have totaled as we have seen in the show 200 million dollars, 80 million of which went to the construction of this manufacturing facility.

I was looking at its investment in the other countries, I saw 300 million dollars in China and 300 million dollars in India. So we have 200 million dollars. So I was telling Mr. Parker I’m looking forward to your next 100 million dollars in the Philippines.

I thank Ford and our other exporters for our good export performance this year, which exceeded expectations. The July figures show a 23 percent increase in dollar value in total Philippine exports, while in the first semester of 2002, exports contributed 39 percent to our Gross National Product. I hope that Ford and the other exporters will translate their success into hiring more workers to increase our employment rate. Even as we hail the achievements of our export sector, it is important that we fuel domestic demand. In this factory 80 percent of the cars are for export 20 percent for the domestic market Ford Motors, for instance, is not just export-oriented. It also operates in the Philippines because of a good domestic market. But that is not necessarily by choice. It is because the 20 percent is what the domestic market can absorb. But therefore what we should try to do as an economy is to try to increase the capacity of the domestic market so that more of the cars can be produced and sold for the domestic market. Ford Motors is not just export-oriented. It operates in the Philippines because we have a large population with a decent rate of growth and that should make a good domestic market for cars and other consumer products. This domestic market we must strive to increase come what may in the export market.

To expand our own domestic market the model we are following is what economists call — domestic consumption-based “managed asset reflation.” This economic model is focused on domestic consumption and complements multinational exports as a source of growth.

I am focusing on a roadmap based on this model. It is a key response to the continuing uncertainties in the U.S. economy, which is the Philippines’ biggest market.

We want to ensure that Ford and other manufacturers have a good domestic market to sell their products to, thus we want to develop new sources of domestic demand, notably capital-efficient small and medium enterprises.

Managed asset reflation, amounts to prudent monetary policy, a gradual reduction in public-sector debt, and a balanced budget in four years.

By developing small and medium entrepreneurs who will be able to afford to buy either their first car or an additional car, we hope to develop a good domestic market for automobiles. At the same time, by developing the motor vehicle industry, we hope to have a better export performance in motor vehicle parts and components, and I hope that Ford will continue to be our largest buyer of local auto parts components. This will not only help augment the country’s dollar earnings, it will also help in turn, help small and medium enterprises producing these parts.

It is with the support of industry players like Ford that we will meet our export targets and also develop our small and medium enterprises.

I intend to use fiscal policy to encourage Ford Motors and the rest of the manufacturing sector. To bring in that extra, new hundred million dollars additional investment from Ford in the next two or three years the board of Investment is working together with the department of finance to have tailored-made incentives for the automobile industry.

I remember when I was still also in the board of investments about ten years ago, we also had a vehicle manufacturing industry. But at that time the value added, the local value added for vehicles was only about 10 to 15 percent. Here in Ford Motors the value added is 40 percent the local value Added, so I congratulate Ford for that. Their valued added comes not just from the labor contributed by our very skilled human resources here in- house in Ford but also by the various suppliers of parts and components which range in capitalization from hundreds of millions themselves. Like I see Toti Torres here, who does the wiring harness and Eddie Jose who does logistics. But on the way from a hundred million pesos in investments or even more or even a hundred million dollars for some of them to maybe even just two million pesos in capitalization.

So their suppliers range from large scale to small scale. And because in our thrust now to build the domestic market we want to push small and medium scale industries. We have a concentration on a program that we call one town, one product, one million pesos in loans for small enterprise. So, because Ford has some suppliers that are small and medium scale Gregory Domingo and the DTI representative by provincial director Marilou Orejola will work with Ford to look for a deserving supplier who should be able to expand its business and we will give a loan of one million pesos to that chosen supplier.

I am very happy to have the chance to be here therefore. And to say that our government policies are geared towards supporting the manufacturing sector. When I first became president manufacturing was down. Last year, our economy grew even manufacturing did not. Because our services grew and our agriculture grew. Our manufacturing sector did not grow because export did not grow. This year the source of growth has switch back to export and to manufacturing. And we should sustain this momentum that manufacturing has achieved once again.

It is for this reason that I made a special trip to CALABARZON today, to Nestle’s and to Ford to celebrate their respective expansions and to let the whole world know that the Philippines is a good place to manufacture products in. To Ford congratulations. And to the Philippines and to our Filipino workers thank you for making the Philippines a good place for investment.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Launching of Ford 2002 ‘ESCAPE’ and Third Year Anniversary of Ford Motor Co. Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409211724/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8393&Itemid=38