Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the revival of the Philippine Corporate Access Days of JP Morgan

[Delivered at the Rizal Ballroom, Makati Shangri-La Hotel, Makati City, May 17, 2007]

Thank very much, Justice Vitug.

Mr. Dybuncio, investors, participants in this conference, ladies and gentlemen:

First of all, thank you to JP Morgan for reviving the Philippine Corporate Access Days after eight years. Welcome back to the Philippines!

It’s a good time for you to be back in the Philippines. Last Monday, Filipinos demonstrated our political stability in peaceful, fair and free elections. The national elections are just starting their count, but in the congressional and local elections, the victory of the overwhelming majority of candidates sympathetic to the administration shows a vote for political stability and economic reform.

And the results will be a focus by our administration on continued economic reform — pro-growth, pro-trade and pro-investment strategies — that help lift up our people from poverty and help bring the Philippines, finally, into contention as a real investment destination. I think we are the best value in Asia today.

Mr. Dybuncio has said many things about why we are and I won’t have to repeat all of them. I would just like to say in summing up what he said, that our economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability with some of the strongest macroeconomic fundamentals in a decade. Politics will not alter the course of our economic comeback. It won’t undo our economic progress. The recent decision by Texas Instruments to invest an additional one billion U.S. dollars in the Philippines is a strong endorsement of our economic program.

Through hard-fought economic reform battles that we have led with some courageous members of Congress, the Philippine economy has finally broken loose of its historic legacy of lethargy. New revenues, better collection of revenue and a crackdown on tax cheats along with fiscal discipline has put the Philippines on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. And your coming back here shows that the world is taking notice. And I will repeat, I believe the Philippines offers one of the best values in Asia for domestic and foreign investors.

The biggest single act that led to the surge in our economy was the passage of our value-added tax. In one bold stroke it raised enormous revenue. It also sent an unmistakable signal that we are serious about moving the nation forward. That isn’t all, though. Our complete focus on the economy — fiscal discipline, a balanced budget and the need for long overdue human and physical infrastructure improvements, investments — help round out our economic gain. Our efforts are paying off in a strong peso, low inflation, a robust stock market — which we are relying on you to continue — rapid inflows of foreign investment and almost six million new jobs in the last six years. Our average unemployment rate is the lowest among several administrations. Our poverty rate is the lowest as well.

And I don’t want to keep, I mean, don’t think I should stop stressing that there has been a strong increase in investments. Not just Texas instruments but this is happening across the board in a number of industries. We are working to ensure this will be sustained. There had been notable successes, indeed, but much more can and will be done. We are committed to consolidating the gains in new revenue by, as I said earlier, making long overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure. This includes billions of pesos in education, health care and training along with billions in new bridges, roads and ports to upgrade the competitiveness of the Philippines.

We take great pride in the discipline of our administration to focus on the economy and our overall economic health. We are proud of the fact that we are prepaying external debts, optimistic that we will soon balance the budget, and we are making sure to use the gains, as I said, to invest in vital social and economic needs. And let me be very clear: I will not sacrifice long-term gains for short-term political expediency.

And in the southern part of our country, which I’m sure investors are looking at as well, we have developed a new paradigm for peace. Our Philippine model for dealing with the flashpoint area of Mindanao has focused on a unique combination of soft and hard power to promote peace. We have been able to weld together confidence-building measures grounded on strong interfaith dialogue and cultural awareness; investments in economics and basic infrastructure development; and mutual security arrangements to keep the peace in Mindanao.

The U.S. has worked side by side with our military on a number of community public works projects. The positive impact of these projects cannot be overstated: from health care to building schools, the outreach has built more than buildings, it has built trust, which is the basis for effective and lasting diplomacy.

Besides the U.S., we are also working with a broad range of international organizations and nations from across the spectrum including Sweden, the European union, Japan, Malaysia, Libya and other OIC countries. This broad-based coalition is working to keep the peace and isolate genuine security threats and promote the economic well-being of Muslim and Christian residents of Mindanao. This is a model setting a positive example. It is something we all wish to share with the rest of the world. It will lead to a permanent peace in Mindanao.

Yesterday, I was speaking with a foreign reporter and he was telling me that he had been talking with some American generals and they are studying our model in Mindanao hoping to apply it somewhat to Iraq as well.

But, to come back to the Philippines as you are I hope doing, in Mindanao and in the whole Philippines the short answer to continuing the economic growth is summed in three words: invest, invest, invest.

And that is why I would like to end by repeating your theme, “welcome back to the Philippines!”

Maraming salamat.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Revival of the Philippine Corporate Access Days of JP Morgan. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412150606/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2013&Itemid=38