We are gathered today to discuss our continued cooperation for the peace and security of the Cordillera.

It is good to discuss peace and development. Even if the difficulty of the reason for the conflict is great, rebellion will only bring greater hardship to the people.

I am pleased with the announcement of the AFP and the PNP that a large number of insurgents in CAR have been neutralized in the past year. We commend the soldiers and police for our hope that the rebellion will end in 2010. We also sympathize with the soldiers who sacrificed their lives this year in Abra.

The entire organization, a lot has been done by the soldiers and police against the rebellion. In the past year, 6,000 armed insurgents have surrendered. We want them to decrease further so that the decades-long conflict can be ended.

The AFP's goal this year is to clear 38 insurgent fronts. We hope that this includes the six insurgent fronts in CAR that still have influence in 45 barangays, and Abra has the most of these barangays.

We have strengthened the AFP and PNP to achieve the goal of lasting peace and development in all parts of the Philippines. Under the Philippine Defense Reform being implemented by our administration, and the PNP Modernization Program, our soldiers and police are now intensely prepared to fight the rebels.

However, we will not win through armed conflict alone. The most effective weapon is the combination of force and confidence building – soft and hard power. This strategy has been proven in provinces that were formerly rebel areas but are now peaceful and progressing.

But we will be firm against the rebels who disturb the peace and progress.

Meanwhile, soft power is offering services for a good life and future not only for former rebels and those who help them, but for all citizens. This includes good and continuous dialogue with the people, and providing facilities and infrastructure to improve lives.

I want to emphasize that we are with the projects for the improvement of soldiers and police. Many of us see the police and our soldiers risking their lives to save people from typhoons, floods and other disasters. And soldiers from the AFP Engineering Brigade are deployed to areas dangerous for private contractors, to build roads and bridges. And in areas where classes are suspended due to unrest, soldiers also teach.

These new soldiers and police are the result of our reform of the military and police – confident in the right path of countering rebellion, and respectful of human rights. They are disciplined to better serve the people, but if necessary, their force is also strengthened.

There is no need to sacrifice lives to achieve lasting peace by providing enough opportunities to improve the lives of all. Soft power helps more because all citizens, including rebels who want to change their lives, have programs for them.

I hope that with unity and improvement, rebellion will be addressed before my term as President ends.

A good result of security and peace is food on the table and improved livelihoods.

Our near-term objective is to focus on putting food on the table for our people. The global rise in the price of basic commodities like fuel and rice is putting a strain on all hard-working Filipinos, particularly on our very poor provinces like Abra.

We aim to prevent these strains on individuals and their families from becoming a crisis be taking decisive action.

Specific to the rice issue, we have an Action Plan, comprising three phases, to make sure our rice situation remains stable. First, is to secure supply. Second, to ensure proper distribution. Third, is to guarantee enforcement of prices to protect our people.

To help secure supply, today we launch the Abra Sustainable Development Program that will improve small-scale irrigation and therefore boost agricultural production.

Here in CAR, agriculture is the livelihood of most people. The land in CAR is fertile and suitable for planting rice, corn, and other vegetables. Therefore, the priority for the people of CAR are projects that will help increase agricultural production in the region.

As a priority for the people of Abra, we are starting the Abra Sustainable Agricultural Development Program which is a special approach to planting in upland farming so that the lands can be used to increase rice production in Abra.

The program is an integrated approach to communal upland farming. It utilizes planning and the application of appropriate soil and water conservation technologies that will transform areas into productive self-sufficient farming communities.

A few days ago, I instructed DPWH Secretary Ebdane to complete the long unfinished Manabo Bridge, a monument to corruption because it was started many administrations ago and is standing half built. It needs P290 million for its completion.

For the entire CAR, the government will add transportation infrastructure such as Farm to Market Roads, so that your harvests can be easily brought to the market, and inputs for small farms. DAR will provide P5 million to Pilar. We expect the mayor to use it for the uplands in the area and use labor-intensive methods so that many of his constituents can be employed.

The DA Bureau of Soils and Water Management gave P5 million for an Upland Water Impounding Project and fruit trees that can be used for agro-reforestation in Pilar.

Let us establish various water sources such as Small Water Impounding Systems, Small Farm Reservoirs, and Shallow Tube Wells in different areas of the region so that your farms will have water and further increase yields and also increase the income of farmers.

For the first phase of DA’s Upland Development Program Sec. Yap has set aside an initial P100 million that I am instructing to include: 1) Organic Agriculture (production of organic fertilizers),

2) FMR, Small Scale Water Projects, Watershed and Spring, and Tramlines (Footbridges),

3) Education, extension and distribution of basic farm implements, tools and equipment,

4) Loans,

5) Dryers, and

6) Seedlings for upland trees suitable for sloping land above 18 degrees like Abaca, Jackfruit, Falcata (trees used for boxes), Rubber, Coconut, Mango, Pili, Durian and Rambutan), seeds for assorted vegetables and legumes like mongo, beans, peanuts, bataw and kadyos, and small ruminants dispersal like goats and poultry and hograising.

34.5% of families in CAR are poor, and 60% in Apayao and Abra. I immediately instructed the Cabinet to include Apayao and Abra as our Priority One provinces to be given assistance first, especially food for the poor. The government wants to ensure that immediate relief is provided to the poor and we also want to ensure that those who are helped out of poverty will no longer be among the poorest.

Provinces with Priority One will be the first to receive benefits through the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino program, which provides a small amount of money as assistance to families in need. The DSWD has already listed 10,000 families in Apayao and Abra who may be eligible to receive benefits from this program.

Let us all unite, leaders, so that we can overcome poverty, overcome hardship, overcome violence, and strengthen peace and order.

Let us all help to continue progress!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Local Peace and Security Assembly in Abra. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412122129/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1352&Itemid=38