To all of you, I’m very happy that we are together celebrating this event. And congratulations to our awardees of ‘Dangal ng Bayan,’ Pagasa’ and especially the ‘Lingkod Bayan’ awardees!

We are celebrating today the success not only of our awardees, but also of all civil servants in the government, your very important role in the life of our country. From the think-tanks, and we gave awards to many think-tanks today that formulate development programs, to teachers like Mrs. Banaag, police officers, doctors and other front line personnel, the Civil Service connects the government and the citizens.

Our awards are even more important now, in the face of the challenges of the global economy, which requires public service even more and also involved more of our civil servants who are less fortunate.

There is no doubt that the storm of the global economy hit every Filipino this year through the increase in the price of food, oil and rice. Because of this, inflation rose to an undesirable level and the burden of our poor increased, especially those among the government employees who are less fortunate.

The more than 40 percent increase in the price of crude oil and rice in the world market has been a huge challenge.

Our economy was not spared from the slowdown of the global economy. In fact, the growth of our economy slowed down.

Our growth in gross domestic product slowed down to 4.6 percent in the second quarter, a far cry from the sizzling eight percent growth last year. But growth eased in our neighbors as well. Singapore grew by only 2.1 percent, compared to eight percent a year before. Hong Kong posted 4.2 percent, compared to six percent in the same quarter last year. South Korea’s growth was similar to us, at 4.8 percent.

But we are hoping that these numbers only refer to the past. Nevertheless, our economic team is doing everything, including Secretary Favila, including those from the Central Bank, who received awards today to lower inflation, help those who have been severely affected and continue the growth of the economy which is the source of jobs and tax collection that is invested in the future of our country.

While the current economic situation is challenging, we are grateful that we had the foresight to prepare for this day, through the substantial reforms we deliberately implemented in our tax system. This has provided us with funds to allocate to assistance focused on our most vulnerable citizens.

I specifically requested that we invite many sub-professional civil servants today, not only our SBMA security guard who also received an award, but also many others like him to emphasize the expanded assistance programs during these difficult times.

When our economy experienced successive growth in 2006 and 2007, and the country's funds increased, I directed that all personnel of the national government share in the benefits of economic growth. Thus, in July 2007, the salaries of all national government employees and the combat incentive allowance of soldiers were increased by ten percent. And this past July, you were also given a second 10-percent increase.

And now, those earning only P200,000 or less are no longer required to pay income tax.

Last March, I directed the launch of a loan program for government personnel who wish to start small businesses. This is the ‘Go Negosyo, Go Gobyerno’ program, where Land Bank lends employees up to P150,000 each. So earlier, the 600 was not 600 pesos for them, but 600,000 pesos for them.

Since its launch in May 2007, the program has lent P2.89 billion to 164 cooperatives and organizations of government personnel. Nearly 19,000 employees are benefiting. And as an example, the 223 government employees from five cooperatives to whom we awarded checks today.

I want this program to grow further, so I asked that we give checks to some of you, I want this program to expand within the civil service ranks. So I expect the Civil Service Commission to push for Go Gobyerno, Go Negosyo.

The challenges we face today are generally from outside the country, but they nevertheless require strong, decisive and targeted action internally. The global price of oil and other commodities rose unexpectedly. It is still unknown how deep the current financial market turmoil in America will be. Nevertheless, our strongest defense is our own internal strength.

Although it is good news that we are becoming more self-reliant and taking our economic destiny into our own hands, it is also true that we need to be more capable of competing globally.

To be world-class for global competitiveness, we invest in reducing red tape in all agencies to cut business costs. That is what we symbolized earlier.

I congratulate Chairman Ric Saludo, that chairman, and the entire Commission; May and Cesar and also the other agencies that participated in the creation of the Anti-Red Tape Implementing Rules and Regulations which we are formally launching today. So we have a lot to do.

Let us continue to work together to achieve the national agenda of reform and development, where the role of our civil service is very important.

To all of you, Happy Anniversary, Congratulations on your service to our country!

Thank you all very much.

Source : Adamson University Library