Thank you very much, Secretary Nina Alabastro. It’s very good to see you again for the second straight day.

Ched Chairman Carlito Puno, Executive Director Dr. Montoya, Assistant Secretary Villaverde; PCHRD officials and scholars, members of the scientific research and education community, ladies and gentlemen.

Happy silver anniversary to PCHRD! It’s a good time for us to celebrate the 25th anniversary. May I take this opportunity to pay tribute to all the men and women of the Philippine Council for Health Research and Development for your contributions to a strong and healthy nation.

In the words of former director general of the World Health Organization, Dr. Gro Harlem Brundtland, “at the core of knowledge lies good research,” inluding knowledge about health.

I’m pleased to know that PCHRD has banded together with the DOH, the CHED, and U.P. Manila’s national institutes of health to establish the Philippine National Health Research System, and that was one of the prominent items in your exhibit.

You’re celebrating your silver anniversary at a time when we want to invest in our people in order to gain 8 blessings by the year 2008. Or what we call in our mantra — investing in people for 8 by ’08:

First, job creation;

Second, stable cost of living;

Third, strong, steady peso;

Fourth, more investments;

Fifth, pro-poor education;

Sixth, green Philippines;

Seventh, strong anti-terror;

And finally last but not the least, eighth, pro-poor hunger mitigation, housing, and health.

Let me talk about the first and the last: job creation and health.

On job creation. The jobless rate is down, and I’m very happy that more than one million jobs were created in the last 12 months. In fact, that’s three times what was created in the entire previous administration.

Every tough decision made and every policy laid down to strengthen the economy is geared towards the foremost aim of creating jobs. This administration has been attacked on various fronts and issues, but let it not be said that we did nothing to give Juan De la Cruz a chance to land a good job and bring home the bacon to a healthy and adequately schooled family.

The social payback of economic reforms consists of a double boost on jobs and basic services, including health services, so that the Filipino family is lifted not only from abject poverty but insulated from disease and ignorance. As more and more investors lay their premiums on the Philippine economy, the window of opportunity will open wider to accommodate the excellence and productivity of the Filipino. I shall remain unswerving in the task of creating, topping the more than five million jobs we’ve generated in six years with even more as we push economic growth and social justice to the limit. This is good governance at work. We affirm it as strongly as we vow to enforce criminal justice and human rights for the freedom and prosperity of the people.

Now let me talk about health. So that Juan De la Cruz can bring home the bacon to a healthy family, we want to increase the reach of health insurance to 85 percent of the population. We want to reduce by half the price of medicines commonly bought by the poor. We want to help local governments convert their primary hospitals to secondary hospitals capable of delivering childbirth and simple surgery.

One of the most important tasks of the Philippine Council for Health Research and Development is to help bring down the cost of medicine bought by the poor to one-half of what it was in 2001. That is why the DOST is pushing research and development on herbal-based pharmaceuticals. While the Department of Health has already identified the ten medicinal plants on the top of the list such as lagundi, sambong, akapulko, yerba buena, and ampalaya tablets. And I saw earlier in the exhibit that through your work, you have even discovered the medicinal use of virgin coconut oil against sepsis, a disease that plagues premature babies. I also understand that we are looking at virgin coconut oil in order to treat skin infections, fungus. I say that because virgin coconut oil is one of the things that I asked Nina Alabastro to develop. I told her that I want virgin coconut oil to be as famous someday, a part of our medicine cabinet or kitchen cabinet as Italian olive oil. And a lot of that will help me done by the Philippine Council for Health Research and Development.

The government is committed to increase expenditures for research and development, develop our domestic capability for basic drug research. I saw in the exhibit also that for several years now, in recent years, you’ve developed a partnership with laboratories like Pascual laboratories. And earlier while you were waiting for me while I was in Quirino, in Cagayan Valley, incidentally, I saw also an exhibit that you have a very, very strong research agenda in Cagayan Valley. Well, anyway, while I was there, you were here witnessing the signing of yet another memorandum of agreement with Pascual laboratories.

And just a few days ago, I inaugurated the first 1.7 billion-peso phase of a 7.5 billion-peso laboratory facility of Unilab producing prescription drugs. And that is going to be… They hope, the first domestic laboratory that will be FDA accredited. So much research is going on, so much research must go on for the health of our people.

The 7.5 expansion of Unilab is for prescription drugs that are commonly chemical-based. Pascual laboratories I supposed is doing on… Is that the one that you signed for… Based on our herbal medicines? But I think that Unilab would have invested even more in the Philippines if we were developed in biotech and biomedicine. Because much as they would have like to do it here, their biotech laboratory is in china because that’s where the research output is very rich. So that shows that we also need additional expenditures to go into biotech and biomedical research.

I am very happy that you have institutionalized during our administration the Philippine National Health Research System. This should help manage the health, social and economic consequences of natural and man-made disasters. It should safeguard the health of our farmers who must be adequately protected from noxious substances while at work. It should increase the people’s capacity to meet the specter of new infectious diseases such as SARS.

We should congratulate our health, agriculture, and our DOST research agencies. Because through these years when our neighboring countries were plague with SARS, and even more when our neighboring countries were plague with avian flu, we have had hardly any SARS and certainly no avian flu.

Nonetheless, the Philippines is also still being set back by traditional infectious diseases that continue to exact a heavy toll. Tuberculosis, for instance.

These are foreboding challenges. Yet, we have to deal with the continuing loss of our S & T professionals, including scientists, engineers, researchers and technicians to the careers in other parts of the world. That is why I want to create so many jobs in our country, good jobs that for a hardworking and talented Filipino, a job abroad will be a career choice and not the only choice left. I’ve been asked what are the examples of jobs you’ve created to keep them at home or bring them back home. Well, for one thing a lot of young people have told me, “thank you, Madame President, for promoting the contact centers because we don’t have to go abroad for a job. We’re quite happy working in the call centers and still being with our families and friends.”

And a few years ago, when I went to the Malampaya plant of shell in the South China Sea, I saw about four engineers who had come back from the Middle East to work there with expat salaries. Well, we hope someday we can do that with our scientists and our health scientists.

We must continue to fill the gap in the meantime by developing world-class health researchers and personnel by strengthening the curriculum — that is why Doctor Puno is here especially in the graduate level — and providing continuing training to health researchers and personnel.

Yesterday at PCIERD, we recognized the international award given in London to Doctor Rolando Dela Cruz, a health researcher for having developed a natural cure for skin cancer, probably so far the only known cure in the world. And he is practicing that here, he has many patients coming over. That is an example of an output of health research that has become useful not only to the Philippines but to the world.

And so I congratulate the PCHRD, the Philippine National Health Research System and its partners including private researchers like Doctor Dela Cruz and Unilab, that is a very big health research community we have, and with our newfound budget, with our newfound resources coming from our tax reforms, we hope that in the next 25 years, health research would even be more vigorous and truly become part of the mainstream of our society.

To all of you once again, happy silver anniversary!

Long live health research!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the 25th Anniversary of the Philippine Council for Health Research and Development (PCHRD). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151132/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1972&Itemid=38