Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 28th Catholic Mass Media Awards (CMMA) Ceremonies

[Delivered at the Carlos P. Romulo Auditorium, RCBC Plaza, Makati City, November 10, 2006]

Thank you very much, Ambassador Cabangon-Chua.

His Eminence Cardinal Rosales, Senate President Villar, other guests, members of mass media, ladies and gentlemen.

Congratulations! To all the Catholic Mass Media awardees that will be honored this afternoon. Congratulations! Also to the Catholic Church for this project of 28 years, so important to the freedom of the press, the freedom of the media and the responsibility of media.

We are here because we believe in the freedom of the press, the freedom of media and also media responsibility. We embrace the central role of the media in a free society. It gives us great pain to see any journalist harmed, any member of the media harmed. We don’t always agree with members of the media and what they report, but that is just part of the give-and-take of politics and our job.

On my part, I see my job as being totally focused on the economy because only a strong economy will lift our people out of poverty and expand our middle-class.

The first phase of our economic turn around plan was to stabilize our budget and spending, and then secure increase revenue through better tax and customs collection, and through an increase of the value-added tax. Thank you Senate President Manny Villar for the Senate and the House voting these very important measures.

These were painful but necessary steps. We achieved the goal. The nation is better for it, though I have paid a political price in public opinion, very much recorded by mass media. But it is a price well-worth paying.

Phase two of our plan is to take advantage of our improved economic picture to finally make the long overdue investments in infrastructure, education and health care. And also, to reduce hunger to one-half of what it is today within a year, to name a few areas. We are well into this phase.

The strength of the Philippine economy today reflects faith in the political leadership from the Filipino people and the world. Tough economic reforms and revenue measures are reaping the tide of confidence. The social payback would soon be flowing down in terms of better paying jobs, improved infrastructure and enhanced social services, including reduced hunger, cutting across the alleviation of poverty and hunger.

Investments are up. Inflation remains steady while our money and stock markets have surged to record highs. We are on full swing towards economic take-off and the people are rearing for more.

Finally, phase three is to turn our sights to truly joining the ranks of first world nations. We have a vision that we will take our place alongside other first world nations by 2020. This phase must be marked by increased attention to our natural environment and making sure we build up not just deplete our natural resources. We’ve already laid out the guidelines, the outlines of creating a green Philippines that encompasses conservation, energy independence, reforestation and designation of national parks and wildlife refuges.

Another hallmark of a modern first world nation is social justice and human rights. The poor not only suffer economically but also through a double standard imposed by an unjust society. We are determined to stop the atrocious killings of journalists and political advocates. We condemn any and all violations in the harshest possible way. There is no room for vigilantes undermining the rule of law.

We are very aware of the concerns these killings have caused both at home and abroad. To that end, we have personally invited members of the European Union to monitor and visit our activities — Finland and Spain have accepted. And I believe, I’m the first head of state ever to meet Amnesty International in London. I did so because we are deeply concerned about this issue. Finally, we launched an independent commission to get to the bottom of these killings once and for all.

I understand that a few days ago, the commission met with the Norwegian ambassador. And although the commission is independent, I have suggested that since the left do not want to cooperate with the commission, I’ve suggested that the commission turn their attention to interviewing the families of victims who are members of the press and mass media.

I wish we could wave a wand and end all the killings now and forever. We’re doing everything in our power to stop them. I hope that everyone remembers though that we do have a number of violent groups that operate in the Philippines — communists and religious radicals — and they are also responsible for a lot of violence.

We’re not excusing any killings, and certainly not if they are done by rogue police or military, some of whom are now in jail. We do want to make clear that things get pretty murky with all of these violent groups playing for keeps.

Having said that, let me say that I am happy that the Catholic Church provides for this mass media awards. Because in our government, in our administration, we not only seek to fight poverty, we seek to fight poverty in ways that are in accordance with the teachings of the church. That is why we do not have the death penalty. That is why we promote natural family planning.

And let me make one final note about the Philippines we want to create. Perhaps, more than anything, we want to create enough economic opportunity here at home, including a high quality of life so that Filipinos will want to stay and live in their own country. Millions of hardworking Filipinos live abroad and do our country proud. But we want to make sure that the next generation has a choice to stay at home and live and prosper, or to live abroad and do the same. In other words, a job abroad should be a career choice and not a necessity for a hardworking Filipino.

So much is going well in the Philippines, if you can cut through the headlines and the clutter, and mass media has so much to do with that. Much remains to be done. I hope to leave office in 2010 with a nation well on its way to first world status. And I hope that mass media will do its part, being free but equally responsible. Equally important being responsible.

To all of you once again, congratulations!

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 28th Catholic Mass Media Awards (CMMA) Ceremonies. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409203513/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3038&Itemid=38