God is very good, Mayor Fariñas.

Governor Bongbong Marcos and all the officials of the province of Ilocos Norte; Congressman Roquito Ablan and Mrs. Vicky Ablan; all the officials of the city of Laoag and all the members of the Fariñas family; the mayors of the province; the barangay captains; also with us is our neighbor, Congressman Baterina from Ilocos Sur.

Greetings and fellow provincemates. Fellow provincemates, I am also like my father, from the side of my father, I am also a son of the north. Because my father came from Binalonan, Pangasinan. And my grandfather came from Bacarra, Ilocos Norte.

I would like to wish you all a happy celebration and a successful “2007 Pamulinawen Festival.” This is a welcome to my fellow overseas Filipino workers. Are there any overseas Filipino workers here who came from different places to join our celebration? Welcome to all of you!

Millions of Filipinos, especially those from Ilocos Norte, are our ambassadors to the world.

I also want to use this opportunity to thank you for the strength you have shown. Not only the overseas Filipino workers, but all the sons and daughters of Ilocos Norte.

I want to tell you all my thanks for your love, thank you for your warm welcome when I came in tonight. And for your great help in improving our country, strengthening the economy and providing peace and order in every corner of your province and the city of Laoag.

Important in our lives as Ilocanos, I said because my father is also Ilocano, so I am also an Ilocana from my father’s side, and from the side of my grandfather who came from Bacarra, Ilocos Norte, it is important not only for those who came from Bacarra, but important is our life in this festival. This is gratitude to God and to our beloved patron for their blessings and guidance in what we want to do.

And what do I want to do? I want to create high-paying jobs here at home, here in the north, here in Ilocos, here in Laoag so that Filipinos no longer need to go abroad for a job. I want overseas work to be a career choice, and not the only option for a talented man or woman in search of a better life. You our balikbayans, our overseas Filipinos are heroes, you contribute much to our nation. But it is time to plan for the day when our heroes can come home, be with family, buy a home and live in comfort and dignity right here in the Philippines, right here in Ilocos, right here in Laoag.

Truly, when we were going around the province, I learned that one of the priorities of Ilocos Norte is to have retirement homes for balikbayan Filipinos so that you can come home in your old age or in your senior years, and have the best medical care, the best nursing care right here rather than have to pay such expensive fees for a nursing home in America. So we thank God for our talented doctors, nurses, care givers.

We have many things to be thankful for to the Lord God.

For our government, there is more than 22 billion pesos because of the money we saved last year and we will use it to improve public services, such as food, health, education, employment and to start small businesses.

And the money that we saved last year, because our peso is so strong and our interest payments are so low, will also go to the release of the first six months’ worth of Republic Act 7171 for the year 2007 for the province and the different cities and towns of Ilocos Norte. And I got a text message before I came here from the secretary of the budget, he will release this amount this coming Monday. One-half year’s worth will come on Monday.

And like every Ilocano family, we will spend every peso to make a happy, educated, healthy and good home.

This project is a good example, the wind power project in Burgos, Ilocos Norte. More than the first wind power in the town of Bangui, Ilocos Norte. Many benefits will be given by the windmills of Bangui and the windmills of Burgos. Hopefully, cheaper electricity will be available to consumers. These will also provide funds for the host community and create jobs for the people of Bangui and Burgos and the various nearby towns, including the city of Laoag.

Because according to the law, 80 percent of Bangui’s royalty and the upcoming royalty of Burgos for the power plants must go to electricity. Therefore, the local government of Bangui and Burgos can subsidize the electric bills of its residents including the companies that will locate in those two towns. And because of that, we should be able to attract electronics companies and call centers and hospitals, and old age care facilities which use a lot of electric power but which also hire a lot of people. And if that happens, no Agbalin, not only Bangui and Burgos, but the whole Ilocos Norte including Laoag can benefit from the increased employment.

We will do this together for a single desire, that we may reach progress.

And now these works of ours are beginning to bear fruit — which can be seen in the strengthening of the peso, the strengthening of the stock market, the increase in exports, the increase in foreign investments like the windmills of Bangui that we visited earlier, and the increase in overseas remittances — thanks be to God for our fellow countrymen — we can all see this now, may we continue to unite so that the beautiful things that have become our beloved north, our beloved Ilocos Norte, our beloved Laoag, our beloved the entire Philippines may continue.

And that is my message to all of you. Have a wonderful fiesta. Congratulations! To our beautiful queens and princesses tonight. Have a wonderful fiesta to all of you.

God bless you all, my friends.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the 2007 Pamulinawen Festival and Laoag City Annual Fiesta. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151722/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1935&Itemid=38