Dios ti agngina unay, Apo Secretary Esperon, anak met ti amyanan, naggapo ti Asingan, Pangasinan.

Apo Governor Keon; Apo Congressman Ablan; Apo Mayor Nalupta; amin nga mayors ti probinsiya ti Ilocos Norte addadtoy tatta; Secretary Vic Domingo, anak met ti Laoag,

Secretary of Public Works; all officials, of course, President Pascua; the officials; teachers; male teachers; and students, good day to all of you, Sir.

And congratulations to Apo Pascua and the whole MMSU for your leadership in Agribusiness, Research and Education in the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle.

But I am very proud to say that in our administration had a great deal to do with that leadership. When President Pascua return to our seat, after she enumerated all the things you’ve done and with all the funds, I asked her, “Has any administration ever helped you as much as my administration?” She said, “No one. I’ts been in this administration.”

We are undertaking a thorough and aggressive tour — which I’m starting today — to each region to review our legacy of accomplishments in each of our super regions, and that’s why I’m glad that we started with the review of the accomplishments of MMSU which is a vital element in our agribusiness development.

Our super regions are the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle, where we are; the Luzon Urban Beltway; Central Philippines; Agribusiness Mindanao; and the Cyber Corridor. Let us continue our Regional tour to Region I, where I also come from the side of my mother who is from Binalonan, Pangasinan. And my grandfather, came from Bacarra, Ilocos Norte. And I’m happy to visit you in this school because your school is an essential backdrop to any visit, to any review of accomplishments in the Ilocos Region.

Congratulations! to the Ilocos Region. You’re one of the four… top, you’re number one… ah, no. You’re number four among the most progressive regions of our country. Idi year 2000 nga awanak pay, your per capita income was 23,000 pesos. Itatta it’s more than 30,000 pesos.

Since the recovery of the Philippines, not only Ilocos, since January 2001. You were still very young in the year 2000, year 2001, ten years ago, you were all very, very young. You were children, and we thank God that we have erased from time, memories of that tumultuous time that was less than ten years ago, when the nation teetered on political chaos and financial bankruptcy.

Iti ekonomya was jammed in reverse. Bassit iti agipupuonan, bassit iti baro nga trabaho. The national debt was 3.6 trillion pesos, bigger than the gross national product of 3.3 trillion pesos. Itatta, haanen. It’s much, much lower.

That is, when we were growing at four percent in production, we spent every year just to pay the interest on our foreign debt. Our foreign reserves were dwindling ten years ago.

For the people, that time was just manual labor, low income, low salaries and high inflation. In the Ilocos at that time ten years ago, unemployment was double digit. Not anymore today. Ten years ago, because the government had little money and a large debt, there was a lack of funds to expand healthcare, improve education, provide clean water and necessary electricity to remote barangays.

Internationally, the Philippines was forgotten, and far from the radar screen. It had forfeited its strategic importance, weakened its alliances in the region and in the world, and was removed from its place in the choices of investors as a place for funding and new jobs. But today, I’m glad, courtesy of Congressman Ablan, we have here an investment from the Middle East who is looking at where to invest in the Ilocos.

It was in this dismal picture that we entered in 2001. In 2001, I did not accept the Office of the President; it was thrust upon me. But instead of shirking from this onerous task, I rolled up my sleeves, determined to change the Philippines.

As a laser beam in my eyes to deliver real results to improve the lives of the ordinary Filipino. As an economist, I know that to change many years of economic decline, it is necessary to instill fiscal discipline, strengthen the economy and invest in human and physical infrastructure.

From the very beginning, these efforts have become the building blocks of change that have led to 35 consecutive quarters of growth, the creation of nine million jobs, the addition of 53 million healthcare coverage, and a stable fiscal situation.

Nangted tayo ti sangkailian nga sistema iti transportasyon that binds the nation together, tapno dagiti tattao ken produkto can be delivered faster, cheaper, and safer from one end of the nation to another.

Region I kasla kunak pay itattay, kadua ti North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle. Here, that is why MMMSU is doing so much agricultural research, agribusiness research and education is because we prioritize agribusiness investment in North Luzon. The agricultural and fisheries potential of Ilocandia, the Cordilleras and Cagayan Valley can feed Luzon affordably. And nearness to North Asia holds the rich promise of agricultural exports and tourism. Haan laeng agricultural exports, even mineral exports like the sand in Sarrat which is an export to China.

Well, we have provided MMSU with more assistance than any other administration. But I’m also proud that we have built more roads and bridges than three previous administrations put together.

For Region I, that means more than 1,000 kilometers of roads, including farm- to-market roads and 15 major bridges, and improved highways such as the Patapat Road linking Ilocos and Cagayan.

Last December, I inaugurated two half-kilometer bridges: the Amburayan Bridge in the La Union-Ilocos Sur boundary and the Quirino Bridge in Ilocos Sur. And today before coming here, we inaugurated the Sarrat Bridge, also half a kilometer. These bridges cost about half a billion pesos for each bridge. S 500 million pesos for the Sarrat Bridge of half a kilometer. And why did that 500 million pesos well invested? It used to take one hour just to cross the river in Sarrat, and you had to go through Laoag to go from the farms of Sarrat to the market of Sarrat. But now, with that bridge it’s only five minutes — a very important farm-to-market bridge.

We have other big ticket items such as the Laoag River Flood Control. In Pangasinan, the Agno River Flood Control. In fact later today, we will visit the Agno River project in Pangasinan.

We have not yet even counted in this 1,000 kilometers the La Union-Pangasinan-Tarlac Expressway which will make it so easy to come to Ilocos when that is done years from now. Later today, we will go to Rosario, La Union to launch that build-operate-and-transfer project.

Well, of course, Ilocos is quite far, we want to make it nearer with this improved roads but we also need upgraded airports and we have done that. Two of the upgraded airports have been elevated to international status: Laoag and Poro Point International Airports. Those are important for the transport of people and the transport of our agricultural products.

For instance, our friends from the Middle East, why are they coming to look at the Philippines? And the Philippines is I understand was one of the top five choices for investments from the Middle East on agribusiness and food. They started doing this in 2008 when there was a food crisis. Of course, you remember the food crisis two years ago. That affected the whole world including the Middle East, which is mostly desert. Therefore, it is not self-sufficient in agriculture and they experience a very great difficulty in importing their food requirements. So after that they made a decision that they would use their accumulated petro dollars to look at other countries where they can produce agribusiness products for exportation back to the Middle East. They went to maybe like 20 countries, brought it finally down to five countries as finalists, and the Philippines is one of them. And I am glad that Agribusiness North Luzon Quadrangle is one of the choice areas for these investments.

Iso nga para dagiti mannalon tayo, importante ti tulong ti imprastraktura. So we have filled especially for our farmers or rehabilitated irrigation systems to water a 156,000 hectares; in 2001 it was only 16,000. One of the important irrigation projects is in Ilocos Sur, the Banaoang Irrigation Project which we will also visit today. And to further encourage agricultural development, we distributed 48,000 hectares of agricultural lands.

Whether in agriculture or in other sectors, the people of Region I have benefited from increased release also to finance Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. In the last five years, haan pay counting the last ten years, P5 billion has been loaned out to 200,000 clients in this region. And to help in the skills, TESDA has enabled almost 60,000 trainings just for one year 2009. We have attained gains in the quality of education in Region I. And I am glad that MMSU is one of the centers of excellence for education.

Going to basic education, the biggest gains are in the retention rate in elementary grades, meaning keeping children in school because. In the past, in grade school, there was a 9% dropout rate; now it has gone down to 4%. So the dropout rate has gone down to one-half. That is in grade school. The same thing in high school, it used to be 8% dropout rate; it is now down to 4%. Among the reason for this, sapay kuma are the scholarships. I don’t know if you know it, young ones, but even in private schools, half of the students are on government scholarships and that is something that is new, that quantity is new.

We also made energy and environmental policy that created more jobs, reduced reliance on energy from other sources, and provided a blueprint for a green and sustainable economy.

I’d like to congratulate Region I for hosting the first commercial wind mill farm, the Bangui Bay Wind Project in Ilocos Norte, (applause) which now provides electricity for the whole town and has reduced the oil dependence of the region and the country as a whole. And for rural folks, if you remember the beginning of my statement, idi year 2000, ado nga barangay nga awan ti kuryente. I’m very happy that today in Region I, all the barangays already have electricity.

Iti pagpili iti nasayaat nga trabaho wenno clean economy is a false choice: mabalin tayo maaddaan iti rumangrang-ay nga ekonomya ken iti berde, healthy economy. And we have achieved that in our last nine years in office.

Mangibati tayo iti legacy of hard work, a strong and stable economy, a renewed global engagement, kaduwaan dagiti sumsumrek nga investors, major investments in healthcare and education kasla dagiti investments tayo ti education toy MMSU, and dramatic improvements in physical infrastructure as I was mentioning some examples earlier.

In fact, I was so happy driving from the airport to Laoag to Sarrat to see how many things there are now in the skyline of Laoag. Now, many new dormitories for students which means bustling education, very nice developments for housing like the one of Robinsons, beautiful malls and so these are signs, visible signs of progress not only government infrastructure but private sector investments.

Adu pay iti masapul nga aramidin, ngem determinado tayo nga ipasa to a new government, anew Philippines, one that is ready for bringing our nation to the verge of first world in 20 years.

But to do that, free and fair elections are important. And you, the students, need to get involved in a positive way in the civic life of the nation. That is why I felt that for a regional tour, I must have a visit to a school and I chose MMSU to be the school to visit.

So, one that I ask you to do is to involve, be involved in civic life. Two, that I ask you to do is to encourage a “no guns, no violence” campaign. I think it is the young people who can do this campaign, so we can try to change the culture of violence.

Young people of this region and all of the youth of the land, we, your elders, count on you to be bold — not for yourselves only but for others: for your family, your friends, the generations after you, and for our beloved Philippines. I remember when I was young long ago, full of dreams — and I know you are full of dreams — dreams that will bring our country to greater glory and give the Filipinos the quality of life that we deserve. And I can only pray that during this past nine years of our administration, we gave you the means to be able to dream those dreams and the foundation on which you can make your dreams for yourselves and for our country come true.

God bless you all.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the launching of the PGMA projects on modernizing agriculture in Region I. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100407235329/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27372&Itemid=38