Thank you very much Secretary Ople for your introduction.

Executive Director Molano; Congressman Cagas, who is here because his sibling is an outstanding Filipino whom we have given an award; and I’d like to also greet the members of the Executive Committee for the Presidential Awards of 2002 — Bishop Ramon Arguelles, Bil Luz, Senator Benitez, Justice Luciano; the chair of the donations committee of the Philippine National Red Cross; Excellencies of the diplomatic corps, and we have here identified — the Ambassadors of Libya, Italy, Brunei, Switzerland, Indonesia; other members of the Cabinet — I see Secretary Bunye here; and of course, to all of you, the distinguished awardees of the 2002 Presidential Awards; other officials in government; other distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.

I’d like to begin by congratulating the 35 outstanding Overseas Filipinos and partners in community-building that we are honoring tonight. I’d like to thank Dr. Abella for his erudite acceptance speech. Don’t apologize, you gave us very good food for thought. I hope that we can use some of your thoughts in our longer-term planning for having prosperity in the country so that many of our Filipinos don’t have to look for that prosperity abroad. And to him, to those of you who don’t know him, to those who know him, it’s not surprising that he should give such wise words because he is the number one expert on migration in the international labor organization. So, we’re very proud of him.

We are very proud of him, we are very proud of our honorees. So, to all our honorees, I say, congratulations and thank you for what you do for our country. You epitomize the seven million great Filipino workers and great Overseas Filipino investors who labor patiently in the great Filipino tradition of pagsusumikap at pakikipagkapwa.

Indeed, as Dr. Abella said, the migration patterns have changed so much and have accelerated so much over the past several decades.

Forty years ago, when my father was president, there were 8 Filipinos in Kuwait; now, there are 60,000. Thirty years ago, when martial law began, there were 201 Filipinos in Guam; now, more than one-fourth of the total island population of 160,000 are Filipinos. And in fact, we are proud that the richest tycoons of Guam’s are Filipinos. They received their awards several years ago. In Daly city, one-third of the population are Filipinos, thereby earning for itself the monicker “Adobo country.” when I visit friends in Daly city — and I do have many of them — in fact, I feel like I’m in Quezon City. I go in — Filipino house, Filipino household; turn-on the TV — Filipino channel. And so, the community is so Filipino. And we’ve even elected a Filipino mayor many times over — Mike Guingona, one of our awardees tonight. To date, as Mr. Abella said, close to 10 percent of the Filipino population live or work overseas. These Filipinos shape the history of our nation. They also shape the history of their host countries. And they shape the history of the world because of their numbers.

Thus, early in my presidency last year, when I spoke about my eight realities of foreign policy I said — as one of them — that overseas Filipinos will continue to play a critical role in the country’s economic and social stability. And Mr. Abella said, until we reach a per capita income of five thousand dollars, then you will continue to play this crucial role.

I said yes, for the foreseeable future. And also I said, in as much as we will continue to be heavily dependent on overseas worker remittances. Then indeed, that gives us our own obligation to our overseas Filipinos. We have an obligation to our overseas Filipinos not only because of the crucial role that you play in our country — that economic role and the role in our stability — but also because of our humanitarian obligation. Because our country has a humanitarian obligation, our nation has a humanitarian responsibility to our people wherever you are. And that is why, the government works doubly hard to strengthen workers’ protection from depradations of domestic recruiters as well as of overseas employers, agents and officials. And on the other hand, we strengthen bilateral relations with countries, with corporations, with associations, with individuals that host large numbers of Filipinos especially those that do so in a just way.

The Filipinos here in the Philippines are truly very proud and give praise to our countrymen who live and work abroad. Our Filipinos have shown to the world that Filipinos are great.

And because of the remittances, millions of young people are able to study, finish their education with the help of overseas Filipinos.

Thousands of new houses are being built.

And because of the help of overseas Filipinos, many businesses are being launched, whether small businesses or medium-scale businesses. Sometimes large businesses throughout the country.

That’s why I’ve been saying for a long time, because the former label for overseas Filipinos was overseas Filipino workers. Workers, that’s true. But when the amount of remittances increased, and the large amount reached our country, while our overseas Filipinos were still overseas Filipino workers, they also became overseas Filipino investors. Because the Filipino, with your 7 billion dollars that you send to our country, you are a major economic investor in our country. That’s why I really like calling overseas Filipinos overseas Filipino investors. Not just those who bring large investments like Joann de Asis, those who send their remittances. Because the 7 billion in total, is a very large investment in our country.

And the country should only reciprocate your help.

And that’s why even when I was a senator, and this is true of senator ople as well, who’s now Secretary Ople, we already felt that way. That’s why, we at that time filed our respective bills for overseas voting. At that time though, when we were senators, none of our bills that we filed were able to hurdle the resistance that was taking place right in the committee level. None of our bills at that time, when I was a senator, graduated from committee. None of them got to be deliberated on the Senate floor.

And because I remembered that frustrating experience — it was so fresh in my mind — when I became president I certified as one of my five most urgent bills the Overseas Voting Bill.

Now at last, for the first time after so many attempts for so long, the Overseas Voting Bill has not just passed committee, it has even passed both houses of Congress. The farthest it has ever gone in the history of our legislative attempts. And let’s pray that the house and the Senate can iron out their conflicting provisions because as soon as they do so I’ll sign the bill into law within 24 hours.

Secretary Pat Santo Tomas is not here today, but Pat and I discussed what additional bonuses or gifts we can give, as it is Christmas, to our overseas Filipinos. We want to launch programs to help Filipinos working abroad build a future, while preparing their lives and the lives of their families in the Philippines.

So we created a program called “Kabayanihan.” and I hope you can share this with your fellow Filipinos in the places where you reside. The “Kabayanihan” seeks to install an integrated delivery of basic services to overseas Filipinos at worksites abroad and at home in the Philippines.

Under the “Kabayanihan,” overseas Filipinos will be able to avail of the following services:

First, from the Overseas Workers Welfare Administration (OWWA) is Virgilio Angelo, our new OWWA head. They are now providing on-site welfare services, including expanded and voluntary membership with OWWA;

Second, DOLE/OWWA/POEA electronic identification card or e-card services. The e-card is the ultimate identification card of Overseas Filipinos. With this e-card, it will no longer be necessary for an OFW to fall in line at POEA to obtain an overseas employment certificate for the purpose of exemption from the travel tax and the airport terminal fee. By simply presenting the e-card, the holder can have immediate access also to OWWA welfare services, POEA processing requirements, and even duty free shop discounts. It can also be used as a credit card and as an ATM card for Philippine commercial banks. This and many other electronic cards eventually, we would want to put together to have something that would approximate a national I.D.;

Third, we are now part of this integrated program providing health maintenance services through the OWWA Medicare program. Nung minsan – saan ba yon? When I was in Japan — pumunta sa akin ‘yung mga Filipino doon, “tulungan n’yo naman kami kasi ang mahal na mahal ng pagpapagamot dito.” ay, no wonder they were having a lot of medical missions in Japan for the overseas Filipinos because medical treatment is simply too expensive. But now, with this Medicare, the OFW and the members of their family will be entitled to benefits over and above those which are granted by PhilHealth. Because PhilHealth is for services here. But this health card subsidizes services that the OFW needs even in the host country;

Fourth, Pag-Ibig funds housing services. The DOLE and the Pag-Ibig fund — that’s why we have here the housing people — have already signed a memorandum of agreement for the joint implementation of the Pag-Ibig Overseas Housing Program. This program aims to expand Pag-Ibig membership among OFWs and other overseas Filipinos, and provide them the opportunity to acquire their own homes at affordable means. I’d like to inform you that the Pag-Ibig fund has reduced the equity requirements of its housing program for OFWs. What is the equity requirement now? It is only ten percent. Because that used to be the complaint of the OFWs;

Fifth, we have the SSS provident fund or flexi-fund services. This flexi-fund is solely for OFWs. It was designed to enable OFWs to save their hard-earned money while working abroad. By investing in the flexi-fund at a very affordable cost, the OFW is guaranteed continued earnings after retirement. And so, I would like to ask you, our Filipino leaders, to encourage the OFWs that you know in the places where you live to invest in the flexi-fund. It is like a savings account with higher than bank interest rates. And more importantly, it is withdrawable anytime.

Starting in January, “Kabayanihan” will launch its own website that overseas Filipinos can use to also reach me with suggestions on how the government can further improve services for our overseas Filipinos. Well, we are also doing this for the Filipinos in the country. We have TXT GMA. And we’re working on a website.

Besides “Kabayanihan” — the program I mentioned earlier, which is called “Kabayanihan” and is led by DOLE — besides “Kabayanihan” but I also support several programs for OFWs where Vice-President Teofisto Guingona initiated and leads. This consists of an overseas Filipino investment bond that will provide medical services and insurance to OFWs, as well as housing at the end of the bond. Vice President launched this OFW bond in Japan last month. The OFW housing he is working on will be built in Taguig. This is in partnership with Pag-Ibig. And I’m very happy that earlier, the presentation was made to me about the whole Pag-ibig program which includes this. And I’m very happy that we have on board as consultant for this housing program, the husband of Joann de Asis, Jolly Benitez, and the nephew of Senator Benitez. And for the seafarers, after extensive consultations, Vice President Guingona created a proposed Magna Carta for seafarers that we shall be submitting to Congress.

And tonight, I’ve handed out these Presidential Awards tonight for Overseas Filipinos for the same reason I make trips overseas: to focus on the economy and security of the Philippines.

Whether it’s reaching out to you, the overseas Filipinos, or fighting>against global terrorism, at the end of the day, it’s always about the economy and improving the lives of our Filipino citizens. If you remember, when I became president 20 months ago, I inherited an economy with 4 million jobless Filipinos and a 40 percent poverty incidence. And that was complicated by 9-11 and the aftermath. Employment has grown so far by 3 percent this year, but I still feel sad that even with such employment growth, we still have great unemployment, there are still many Filipinos unemployed.

Nonetheless, today, inspite of the global slowdown, including in many countries where you live, the Philippine economy has delivered one of the highest growth rates in Asia. In the first three quarters of this year, Philippine GDP grew by 4.1 percent.

This economic growth in this first three quarters of the year is surpassed only by the industrial giants — China and Korea — and by Vietnam, which started from a much lower base.

Our inflation and interest rates are at their lowest in more than a decade. And inflation is low not because of low consumption — because in fact, consumption has grown. Thanks to the large extent, as Mr. Abella said, to many of the remittances coming in — but the Christmas shopping causing all that traffic that prevented you from having an enjoyable trip to Malacañang illustrates the big consumption spending that’s going on. So, it’s not the low consumption that is causing low inflation. Rather, there is greater productivity in food items like fisheries. That’s why the price of fish is low. And rice for the masses — not the well-milled rice for the middle or rich people — but the rice of the masses is 15 or 16 pesos per kilo. And because our interest rates are low, construction, especially housing, and car sales are moving again. That’s why I would like the overseas Filipinos to take advantage of this low interest rates now and buy houses for their loved ones now.

And as far as tourism is concerned, since may, we have had double-digit growth in tourism. So, therefore — because between January and may it was negative and then it went to double-digit — our overall year-to-date growth in tourism is a very decent seventy percent even after the Bali attack.

We are taking further steps to strengthen our macro-economic fundamentals. We will continue to be vigilant in our efforts to reduce our deficit. And Customs, BIR, and the new Anti-Smuggling Intelligence and Investigation Center, all of them — and I see here Tony Bernardo, who is our fairly new commissioner — I’ve been telling them, I even told our new Commissioners that they need to work diligently. Smugglers are slippery and are on the order of battle. Ask Tony Bernardo, because the shipments they seize are not under their names. So I said to Tony, “you know who they are. Harass the transactions of their shipments. Each one should be inspected upon leaving Subic or Clark, or entering or leaving their duty free shops, Tony so they know that we know who they are even if their names are not on the documents.”

We are sustaining a no nonsense drive against corruption. I have already dismissed five prosecutors and three bureau directors, as well as the entire board and senior management of the Public Estates Authority. Several judges have also been charged. The PIATCO airport — with due respect to bill, I saw his comments about that — is now in the hands of the court, but I assure you that it will be opened soon so that you have a world-class airport to be proud of when you, your relatives and friends visit our country. Joann represents one of the contending parties. Yes, her principals are here. So I asked, “Joann, what do you think of what I did with PIATCO?” she says, “just fine.” so, thank you.

And we are insulating our procedures better from graft. I certified as urgent an E-Procurement Bill, and I’m glad it has… It passed the House of Representatives sometime ago and it passed the Senate last week. This Bill will reduce graft in government procurement because it will computerize the procurement and bidding procedures. And it is expected to save at best or at best performance 30 percent of government expenditures. Because that is the estimate of what is lost to corruption in procurement.

So please, tell the Filipinos who are abroad and also the foreigners in your adopted country that we are doing all these, and also that the peace and order situation in the Philippines has improved. Especially kidnapping, it has gone down. So my order now to Secretary Joey Lina of the Department of Interior is, identify the drug lords and the rascal in uniform. That drug bust they made – was it yesterday or the day after tomorrow? – the biggest shabu bust in the history of our country. They traced where it came from, the precursor was in Navotas. They are there now, the raiding party. So, I told them, you have to sustain this and let the people know what you are doing.

The adverse global environment has provided opportunities to address our national security concerns. Nine-eleven, the subsequent war on terrorism, the looming war in Iraq have all combined to dampen the world economy. But even before 9-11, we in the Philippines had already been waging a war on terrorism. You will recall that the Abu Sayyaf was able to generate at least 20 million dollars in ransom from Sipadan in the year 2000, which strengthened their capability for terror. But with our decisive response to 9-11, we gained foreign allies in their war against terror, which enabled us to neutralize the notorious Abu Sabaya in June of this year, and to degrade Abu Sayyaf strength from thousands to a couple of hundreds. And I think you might have been seeing in the newspapers everyday now new arrests of Abu Sayyaf.

Therefore, I appeal to you to continue your cooperation with the government so that our unity towards a single national goal is further strengthened: to lift our country out of poverty.

No president can build a strong republic single-handedly and certainly not overnight. And I can only begin to do this successfully if I can count on the support of the Filipinos overseas.

You, our outstanding Filipinos overseas, are leaders of the well-spring of support, the network of Filipinos all over the world, that I’m counting on.

I thank you for your concern for our fellow Filipinos. So many have received awards because of what you are doing in the Philippines. I thank you for your concern for fellow Filipinos and our country. And I hope we continue these good deeds, continue our strengthening of ties, continue our unity.

Again, our heroes, our great Filipinos abroad, thank you very much for what you are doing for our country.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Awarding Ceremonies of the 2002 Presidential Awards for Filipino Individuals and Organizations Overseas. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409204809/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8511&Itemid=38