Muchas gracias, Secretary Cito Lorenzo, Nieto de Zamboanga City.

Mayor Lobregat, thank you very much for your beautiful speech and for the welcome to all of us; Congressman Celso Lobregat; members of the Cabinet who are here, and I would like to introduce them to you, ladies and gentlemen of Zambonga City: Secretary Angelo Reyes; Secretary Dinky Soliman; Secretary Joey Lina; Secretary Ging Deles; Secretary Mai Jimenez; General Abaya and the other soldiers and officers; City Councils of Zamboanga headed by Vice Mayor Fabian; PNP Chief Ebdane and the other policemen and women; governor George Hofer of Sibugay, Zamboanga; and the other visiting officials from out of town; my beloved countrymen who are listening there at Quirino Grandstand and in Luneta; I greet Vice President Guingona and Secretary Richard Gordon, and everyone parading in Luneta.

And to all of you, to all of us, a You all, good afternoon, of all national people, this Zamboangueños who champion of democracy of ours. This is the front in the war against terrorism.

I am here now in Mindanao in commemoration of Independence Day because here we need to fully realize the promise of true freedom.

Mindanao, the land of promise, is also our final frontier of freedom. The fight for freedom is no longer in Cavite, Bataan or Corregidor but is here in the promised land, Mindanao.

Our most important focus of human freedom is Mindanao. Freedom from fear, freedom from want, freedom from injustice. We shall continue the fight against terrorism and poverty until peace, security and prosperity take root in this part of the country. Freedom cannot wait. The people cannot wait.

Included in this fight is the implementation of selective arrests and punishment of those who are guilty. The launch of peace talks. Providing economic assistance and cooperating with our friendly countries and organizations.

We are wielding the strong hand of government authority, the compassionate hand of development, and the even hand of enlightened diplomacy to win the peace for our people. We continue to do these things.

There is a Tagalog proverb: “Habang ang tao ay nasusugatan ito ay tumatapang.” it means hardship makes people stronger. I’m gratified to show the world how mindanao and therefore the Philippines has become stronger.

Last year, I raised the Philippine flag in Poblacion of Lamitan in Basilan. Before that, almost no one could raise a flag in Basilan. Even hope, even planting could not thrive even if the land was fertile because of bandits and terrorists. Nothing was left where they spread terror and plunder except despair, pain and suffering.

Now, Basilan is in peaceful reawakening. As the people have started to take hold of their future using their own hands and resources aided by well- meaning allies for peace and development. The relationship of the Philippines and the world now is stronger than ever. Cooperation is the natural law of progress and I am here in Mindanao to emphasize a new era of cooperation to promote peace, security and economic development of the Philippines.

Stability and predictability are essential for creating jobs. That is why I have labored to rebuild key strategic alliances for the Philippines in Asia, Europe, North America including the United States. The Philippines needs these alliances to promote trade. Attract investors and get help to fight the elements that want to destabilize the Philippines. We know the capital needed for this. We know the courage needed for this.

Strength and security and foreign policy is one facet to the jewel that’s the Philippines. Another is the great Filipino worker. I admire the Filipino and my focus is clear — jobs for the great Filipino worker. Jobs for the Filipino.

I am not only a leader responsible for a country of eighty million people. I am also the leader of a global organization of eight million Filipinos living and working abroad. And generating billions of dollars in income each year.

We all share a desire to improve the economy and make things work to the advantage of the Filipino. The great comparative advantage of the Philippines is our rich human resources. Highly-skilled, well-educated and English-speaking. This includes the millions of Filipinos working in over a hundred forty countries of the world and the millions more employed in the Philippines.

The basis of this success of the great Filipino worker is simple– education. This is a trait ingrained in our people. Every family is proud when an open book today means an open door tomorrow for work and opportunity.

When I became president two years and four months ago, I took a hard look at education, and I asked myself — is it preparing the youth for the jobs of the new economy? Or is it just keeping them off the streets until they’re thrown there jobless after graduation, if they finish school at all.

Sa aking unang Ulat sa Bayan noong 2001 sinabi ko, to prepare our youth to be the next generation of the great Filipino worker, the knowledge workers, we will upgrade math and science teaching in basic education. We have done that with the new curriculum that we implemented this past school year. Now, we will upgrade English teaching so that our great Filipino worker will continue his or her advantage in this increasingly competitive world.

To expand the chance to graduate, our children in school we ensure that there is a school in every barangay. But more than that, in all schools with more than fifty students per classroom, I order that classes be alternated so that it is not crowded and difficult to study.

In elementary schools with more than one hundred students per classroom and in high schools where there are more than two hundred students per classroom, this school year we will build additional classrooms. In this way, we will once and for all address the severe lack of classrooms that has long plagued our students.

In addition, I am mainstreaming distance learning in the school system. This is education by television. In barangays where there are still no classrooms, chapels, barangay halls, multi-purpose centers or even shades of mango trees can be the venue. This distance learning module which I call the “strong republic school” will provide basic courses in English, math and science. It will be mainstreamed into the country’s formal education system. Because the students who will take this up will be promoted to the next level as long as they pass a qualifying examination.

Supervision will be the responsibility of the nearest formal school. Para-teachers will be tapped from among retired school teachers, teacher soldiers, college level members of the community and socio-civic organization members. They will be trained to shepherd the students through the different modules. Because the communication system does not yet reach all remote areas, the technovans of the technology and livelihood resource center will be used to deliver distance learning.

The communication system of the Philippine Information Agency will also be used. And Channel Two and all government television stations have offered to air these educational programs at appropriate times so that parents and children can both learn to read, write, and count. My goal is to have a system… A complete satellite system for this year of study.

In our country, the student-teacher ratio is 34 to 1. That’s not bad. Therefore, our problem is not the total number of teachers. It is the distribution of the teachers. There are many barangays all over the country where teachers refuse to be assigned. Largely, because they are wartorn barangays. The distance learning system will address this problem as well.

I believe in the Filipino. Thank you for your hard work for your loved ones and for the Philippines. And I have tried to return the loyalty and dedication of our great Filipino workers, our great Filipinos, by working to reform the Philippines, to shake it from its lethargy and outmoded ways of doing things so that we can all prosper. Yet, like every year, this past year has seen its shares of ups and downs. But overall, the march of progress is clear and irreversible.

Let us continue to eliminate corruption in the government. We will pursue those who evade taxes. And work to make sure the people finally get the fair deal they deserve.

Let us use the law to stop terrorists and fraud in the government while strengthening the financial system of the Philippines.

We’ve moved forward on BIR reform and customs reform. Revenues are up. The key reform area now is the electric power sector, because we don’t want 2006 to begin a period of darkness.

We have passed legislation to direct greater liquidity into the banking system so that our banks can provide more funds for small and medium enterprises and for housing.

But not only laws but funds must be put in the right things if we are to get good dividends for the country for the coming years. That is why we are investing in infrastructure to help the travel of people and products and improve the quality of life.

We’re making new investments in small and medium enterprise. Remember, if we are to build a big middle-class, we must empower the people who will populate it. My small and medium enterprise program is a long-term investment in the future of our people. I know the talent is there. This small and medium enterprise program starting with ten billion pesos of funds available through the small banking system is the financial encouragement that they need and they deserve.

And we continue to seek investment in health, in agriculture, in technology. Of course, in modernization we also need to face the legacies of the past. It is a challenge to take care of our heritage and grow our opportunities while maintaining fiscal discipline. The challenge is exacerbated by the weakening global economy.

Our challenges remain: many economic, many social, many political. But you have my word that I wake up everyday determine to make progress for our country. And I believe we have made progress.

This is a spirit of the independence of a new day and we need to promote it and thus more strength for a progressive future for our world. We have strength and independence for and thus this.

I believe in the Filipino.

Thank you very much. And long live the great Filipino!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the 105th Philippine Independence Day Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412200727/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6471&Itemid=38