Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, to the Congress of Government Beneficiaries.

Thank you very much, Secretary Pamintuan, for your introduction.

Thank you also to Congresswoman Nayda Angping, who, on behalf of her spouse, Philippine Sports Commission Chairman Harry Angping, allowed us to use this venue for our activity. Thank you also and welcome, Congresswoman Nikki Teodoro, and thank you to Ms. Daisy, the representative of the beneficiaries who is on stage, but to all of you, thank you very much and we are together here. Thank you also to Congresswoman Nayda Angping, who, on behalf of her spouse, Philippine Sports Commission Chairman Harry Angping, allowed us to use this venue for our activity. Thank you also and welcome, Congresswoman Nikki Teodoro, and thank you to Ms. Daisy, the representative of the beneficiaries who is on stage, but to all of you, thank you very much and we are together here.

This day is unique. In my more than eight years as President, this is the first time that representatives from various sectors have gathered to prove our relentless efforts to improve the lives of the Filipino people.

Thank you for the resolutions you presented recognizing the achievements of our government in helping your sectors. When I became President, I said that our challenge is to fight the poverty of the people.

Since then until now, we continue to strive to face this challenge. Your recognition of our hard work warms the heart and gives additional strength to be even more diligent in what we do.

Even then, we saw that we needed to implement a massive reform that would improve various aspects of our lives. The immediate need for change was the state of our economy and finances. What I found when I first took office as President was that while the economies of many countries around the world were rising, our economy was weakening. That was the start of 2001, Asia was surging but our country was on the brink of bankruptcy.

Therefore, we made thorough reforms. Our economic plan is focused, first and foremost, on the people – on you. Above all, the goal of our policies is to help the ordinary Filipino – to help you.

We began implementing difficult but necessary financial and economic reforms. Many opposed, got angry at me, but the new taxes helped pay for better healthcare – who are the beneficiaries here of Philhealth? – that comes from our reforms. Better roads – who here from Tarlac experienced their business improving because of the better roads, the SCTEX, who is that? That’s it! Those whose businesses improved because of the better roads that will bring you customers and deliver your products – that comes from our reforms.

And a stronger education system – who here are our scholars who graduated (crowd cheering) and got jobs – that also came from our reforms. Housing policies were shaped to lift more of the poor so they can live and care for their families with dignity. Who now benefited from our housing? That also comes from our reforms.

Our investments in agriculture aim to recognize our farmers as the backbone of our country, and provide them with modern equipment to feed our country and also feed their families. Who here are the farmers who benefited from our family’s programs? Hey! I saw Ariel. That also comes from our reforms.

And these are the various details of the overall picture that for thirty-four consecutive quarters, our economy grew until it reached our fastest growth in 2007. And perhaps you are among those who would say the poor decreased from 59% to 47% of those who said they were poor.

And that is even as our population grew, even as our population two million people rose out of poverty, two million graduated from the ranks of the poor, they became middle class and are no longer poor. Another reason why some have risen is that in eight years we created eight million jobs, or one million per year, far more than any other administration. Who here got a job in our administration? Someone went up earlier, asked what blessing you received – employment. And that is very important to rise out of poverty. And the increase in the price of goods, even though we had typhoons. Before, if there was a typhoon, the price of goods would rise sharply, but now our inflation is the lowest in a generation, and the peso has further strengthened.

Our credit rating with lenders and investors has increased, that’s important because when our credit rating is high, interest rates on loans decrease. So more people can open or expand their businesses. Who here was able to build or expand a business? There! That is part of our reforms.

Investors flocked back to the country. Who here works in the new investments here? Ah, we should recruit them in the coming times as Class 2010 because they too have benefited from our administration.

Above all, because of the growth of the national treasury, we had a larger fund used to implement infrastructure programs and necessary services, including the programs you are benefiting from. That is the fruit of our reforms.

Now we all know, from a year ago until now, the global economy collapsed. Don't we all know that? And I know that each one of us here in this stadium felt the disaster that came from the collapse of the world economy. And the poorest citizens are the most vulnerable to the effects of the global situation. The poorest are the ones who feel it the most when the price of goods increases or when they lose their jobs or when food is no longer affordable. The poorest feel the true pain when that happens, when they lose their jobs, when the price of food becomes unaffordable.

But I came from Singapore, compared it to different countries, what was the effect of the crisis on different economies compared to many other countries. Here in our country, we fared better than the storm that the global economy experienced.

The Philippines, despite the challenges of a developing country, is prepared for global crises. Things would have been much worse here if we hadn't made the necessary economic and treasury reforms a few years ago. These reforms prevented the impact of the global crisis from reaching our doorstep.

We do not forget that you are with us in supporting our reforms. Therefore, it is only right to return to the people, to return to you the fruits of the reforms which are also the result of our collective sacrifice. So I hope that starting here in this congress we will work together to lift up those who are still struggling. And I am happy that you remembered to give thanks earlier for the blessings you have received.

You are representatives of millions who have benefited from our various programs. Perhaps no other administration has as many beneficiaries as you do in our various programs. There are some who are not here, of course, because there are millions of them—this place, the stadium, only holds five thousand—so, there are also those outside who recognize the many good things that have happened in their lives in the past eight years. And I hope we hear their voices through you.

You, along with those who quietly support us, are the ones I expect to uphold, defend our reforms so that the vitality of our economy returns and our progress continues.

I ask you, let us trust in the Lord. Let us trust in ourselves and our aspirations for our country will come true. But above all, Class of 2010, we expect, I expect your support. So thank you very much for your trust in the government and in your servant.

Long live Class 2010! Long live all those who have benefited from the programs of our government!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Congress of Government Beneficiaries. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133828/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26861&Itemid=38