Thank you.

Thank you very much, Dr. Tan for your introduction.

Former President Ramos, Former First Lady Madame Marcos, Secretary Romulo and the other officials of the Philippine government, Ambassador Wu, and of course, the other members of the diplomatic corps, Francis Chua and the other movers and shakers of the Filipino-Chinese business community, our members of the Filipino-Chinese community, ladies and gentlemen: ni hao! and happy 30th anniversary of our diplomatic relations.

It is said that the 30th anniversary is also the pearl anniversary. But on this 30th anniversary, when President Hu Jintao came to the Philippines to indeed celebrate the 30th anniversary, rather than calling it our pearl anniversary, he called it — and I agree — the beginning of the golden age of friendship between the Philippines and the People’s Republic of China.

Indeed, we stand boldly and full of hope on the frontiers of a golden age of partnership with the People’s Republic of China. This will be a golden age built on the firm foundations of three decades of formal relations, and centuries of close ties, deep understanding and shared interests.

The visit of the Chinese heirs of the Sultan of Sulu from Shandong is a symbol of the century’s old people-to-people relationship.

Today, the century’s old relationship takes on a new golden era. And with great significance China has become a natural engine of growth in Asia. Its economic expansion is nothing short of miraculous. Its ability to withstand the Asian financial crisis in 1997 and the continued growth of its economy when others in the region have faltered have only shown the rest of the world that its rise is genuine.

During this decades of China’s phenomenal rise there was a great debate, “Is China’s rise a threat or an opportunity to the rest of the world in countries like the Philippines?” In our administration, we have made the choice very clearly. We have embraced the opportunity to become China’s strong partner.

Indeed, as our previous speakers have pointed out, China has become a major trading partner of our country. As Secretary Romulo has pointed out, our trade has grown to more that 13 billion dollars as of last year and I might add that trade is with a trade surplus of almost five billion dollars in favor of the Philippines. Aside from being a vigorous and generous trading partner, China is an investor in our industries, in our mines, in our oil exploration. China is a partner in development assistance, China is a source of technology in rice and corn, and China is a fellow crusader in the war on drugs and other transnational crimes. Thank you, People’s Republic of China for all these manifestations of partnership.

The Philippines enters this golden age of partnership with China as a nation that has also completed the first phase of our economic reform agenda.

I entered office with a strong agenda and a firm electoral mandate to lead the nation. I ran on a pro-poor, pro-growth, pro-peace platform built on specific achievable programs. The defeated mounted challenges, but despite the challenges, I wasn’t deterred and I put my plans into action. We’ve come a long way and achieved the first phase of our reform program.

To illustrate, just recently we announced a record for tax collection for the month of April, a 44 percent increase that beat our own estimates, and for the first time in many years, achieved a budget surplus.

I’m now done with the first phase of my economic reform plan and have in hand the largest revenue increase in a generation and the authority to raise more if necessary to ensure that we are on the path to economic stability and growth.

I see some congressmen in the table over there. I’d like to take this opportunity to thank you, Ex Javier and the other congressman if they are here, thank you for the passage of those important revenue measures. Thank you for being the ones who completed the first phase of my economic reform agenda.

This first phase of the economic reform agenda includes the passage of revenue-generating measures that will provide 80 to a 100 billion pesos in new annual revenue, a law that encourages internal revenue and customs workers to intensify their collections, other administrative reforms to improve tax collections, a fiscally responsible national budget and the opening of the mining sector and the thousands of new jobs that it will represent. And by the way, thank you People’s Republic of China for bringing the biggest single investment in mining, one billion dollars in Philnico in Surigao.

Going back to the economic reforms, the first phase. Being an advocate of raising revenue isn’t very popular anywhere in the world. And that certainly is true in the Philippines as well. The recent survey ratings are evidence of that. But something had to be done to undo layers of neglect and corruption in the revenue system, and I decided I was going to be the one to spend my political capital on tough decisions. I have paid the price in the surveys and this days even in the destabilization attempts. But those revenue measures were long overdue. The reform needed to be done. And I thank the Filipino-Chinese business community for supporting me in those difficult reforms.

Of course, one of the biggest factors in my survey ratings has to do with the high price of oil. Now, I wish I had control over global prices of oil, but I don’t. But I do pay the political price because I’m the one in charge. People don’t really understand that. Nevertheless, the poor are feeling it the most. I understand the pain of the people, and I make an effort to spend time with our struggling middle and lower class people on my sorties to the provinces. In the time I spend with them especially in private focus group discussions, away from the eyes of local politicians and the media, what I find is that it is not ‘One Philippines’ we have, it is ‘Two Philippines.’

And for too long there has been two Philippines — the one that represents what’s positive about our nation and the one that doesn’t. The one that rewards hard work and entrepreneurial spirit and the one that doesn’t allow for social mobility or economic opportunity. It’s time to change all that. We need ‘One Philippines’ because we’re one people.

Tonight I asked you, movers and shakers of the Filipino-Chinese community, help me build ‘One Philippines.’ And as Francis Chua said, if only you would let me then help me challenge those who would want to foment more disunity in the Philippines. We must challenge those who would only tear down but have no idea how to build up the Philippines.

We must oppose those who peddle fear and worse who foment dissent on the backs of the poorest and most vulnerable.

We must make ‘One Philippines’ where we combine the best of a strong economy with social justice; where good business goes hand-in-hand with a good environment; where company profits and rising wages are something to be proud of and aspire to; where paying taxes is recognized as something to be proud of, not something to run from. Leaders of the Filipino-Chinese community, I need your help.

Phase II has begun. In the months ahead, I will work to complete phase two and then take us to even more challenging steps until we rebuild the nation from top to bottom. In addition to economic reforms and social investments, we must also build a strong and moral society. And I want to assure you that in my administration and in my family, nobody is above the law.

To build a strong nation, we need a new coalition for peace and anti-violence. Ex, I want to look at legislation that can tackle access to firearms and bring availability under control and new stiffer penalties.

And now that I’ve done phase one, which are the revenue reforms, I know that you would want me now to turn my attention to defying the critics and defying the gravity and open the new terminal at Ninoy Aquino International Airport.

In sum, I’m confident that we’re on the right course and that history will look back and judge these decisions and these years as years of genuine transformation when the Philippines turned the corner. And I believe I will be strongly vindicated and recognized as a catalyst for change and reform.

In that change and reform against a deeply entrenched status quo. In the difficult task of change and reform, I’m inspired by China’s reforms that have boosted its economy, reforms that paved the way for it to take on the challenges and opportunities of a globalized world.

I’m inspired by the ancient Chinese proverb which says, “great souls have wills; feeble ones have only wishes.”

Our two countries, our two peoples have the will, the fortitude and the determination to succeed in bringing peace and prosperity to our nations.

On the occasion of our 30th anniversary, let’s continue to work together in building our golden age of partnership.

Xie xie! Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the 30th Anniversary Celebration of RP-China Diplomatic Relations. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412081133/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5085&Itemid=38