Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas. Thank you for introducing me. Thank you for taking care of Filipino Workers whether in the Philippines or abroad. And we are also proud of you, and I want to let our workers here in Bahrain know that Pat Sto. Tomas is in charge not only of Filipino workers but of workers all over the world because she is also the President of the International Labor Organization.

I also thank Ambassador Maglaya for his kind words and he well remembered my instructions to him, because when President Ramos came here, upon his return to the Philippines he immediately gave me a memo regarding the problems, as Ambassador Maglaya said, not the problems of the community, but the problems of the Embassy. I hope that has been resolved and I am thankful that the Embassy and the Philippine Community here in Bahrain are united.

I would like to introduce my colleagues here in our delegation. With me is my Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process, Secretary Ging Deles. She is here because Bahrain plays a very important role in helping our peace talks with the MILF. Also with us is my Presidential Spokesman, Secretary Toting Bunye, and the Governor of a Muslim province, although not part of the Autonomous Region, Governor of the province of Sultan Kudarat, Governor Datu Pax Mangudadatu. And because his province is far and difficult to reach, your donation of school buildings, one of them will go to Governor Mangudadatu’s province in Sultan Kudarat. I believe you know him, as I sent him to the Middle East during the height of the Iraq war to ensure the safety of Filipinos, Ambassador Roy Cimatu. Then, my fellow Ilocano from the mountains, a very important personality in the north, is my Presidential Adviser for the North Luzon Growth Quadrangle, former Governor of Ilocos Sur Chavit Singson. And one reason why we have become very close to the leaders of Bahrain is because of the good hospitality he shows them when they visit the Philippines. This is the one who spoke earlier, thank you for your additional scholarships, Ambassador King Aguiluz. I also congratulate Ambassador King Aguiluz for his good AMA University here in Bahrain. As I told the Bahraini businessmen this morning during our meeting, Ambassador Aguiluz has already invested here in Bahrain, you should be the ones to invest in the Philippines, I told them.

Representing the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs, we are saddened that Secretary Blas Ople was on his way here when he suffered a heart attack and passed away, so representing the DFA on this trip is Undersecretary Rafael Seguis. I believe he is known to our delegation from Saudi Arabia because he was formerly Ambassador to Saudi Arabia; representing our Trade and Industry is Undersecretary Tomas Aquino; representing our Department of Tourism is Undersecretary Evelyn Pantig; and providing you with services from the Overseas Workers Welfare Administration is Administrator Ver Angelo; and we had an agreement earlier in Bahrain regarding training, skills development in various capabilities, so the Director General of TESDA, Alcestis Guiang, is here; and because construction is ongoing in Bahrain, they have another… They have another reclamation project in North Bahrain. It is important that we are involved in those kinds of businesses, so the head of the Construction Industry Authority of the Philippines, Catherine Josephine dela Cruz, is here; we have a business delegation and two of them are here. Here is one of the giants in our construction sector, FF Cruz or Felipe Cruz; and in the packaging business, Mr. Mason Ang is also here.

I would like to greet the various community leaders here in Bahrain. First of all, the Acting President of the Filipino Club, Ibrahim Concepcion; the sports coordinator, Roland Bayubay; the Professional Group Coordinator, Tony Ocuenco; the Artist Group and Robert Paraan; the Hairdresser Group, Acelito Culaban; the Volleyball Group and Cecille Ignalaga; the Bowlers, Lyn Fiel. Thank you all for your donations, so you were the first to donate five. That is what we will give to Governor Pax Mangudadatu; AFAEAT under the leadership of Ramon Anghel; TASCOM especially Noni Elario; the Safety and Order Group, Ric Tabanao; the Media, Luz Refe; the Arts, Ofelia Baptista; and also donor, Bobby Calimoso; and everyone here from Bahrain as well as from Saudi Arabia, good afternoon to all of you and Merry Christmas my beloved countrymen.

To my fellow Kapampangan, good afternoon to all of you. And to the relatives on my mother’s side, good evening to all of you. To those from Mindanao where I grew up, good evening to all of you. Assalaamu Alaikum to our Muslim brothers and sisters. To the fellow provincemates of my husband who are Ilonggo, good evening to all of you and I heard a greeting from somebody from Zamboanga, buenas noches!

You know, here in Bahrain, I feel the love of the leaders here for Filipinos and for the Philippines. Please excuse my late arrival because the Prime Minister brought me to his island. And on his island, even in his hotel, there are so many Filipinos working, many Filipinos work for him, and some have been there for a long time — 10 years, 20 years — so they got to know the Philippines through the Filipinos working for him and they came to love it. The Prime Minister recounted that once, when he was in Bali at a meeting, because of the many Filipinos working for him, he became curious and wanted to visit the Philippines. Last minute, he went to the Philippines, and King Aguiluz was assigned to take care of him. King Aguiluz was very good at taking care of him, and since then, the Prime Minister has fallen in love with our country, the Philippines. That’s why they often visit the Philippines, not just him but also his relatives. They really go as tourists in the Philippines. They love the Philippines very much. In fact, officially during my administration, the Prime Minister has visited twice. It would be embarrassing to invite him a third time until I came here. So that was also a reason why I came here, so he wouldn’t be embarrassed to visit again for the third time in my administration.

And it’s a very good opportunity, I really chose this time so we could have a Merry Christmas with each other. You know, God really chooses the date. I was supposed to come here last month. However, we had some things I needed to take care of in the Philippines. That was a ten-day trip, I split it into five days and postponed my trip to Bahrain to today. But look what happened yesterday upon my arrival, the significance of my visit to the Middle East was increased by the fall of Saddam Hussein. Since day one we were with the International Coalition for the Liberation and Reconstruction of Iraq, and this event is a major milestone in that historic effort. We had deployed our peacemakers and humanitarian workers in that country, so Ambassador Cimatu is still there until now. Before, he was taking care of civilians, now he is taking care of our humanitarian mission.

And we shall continue to stand beside the Iraqi people in their quest for democracy and prosperity. The late Secretary Ople was one of the stalwarts of our Iraqi policy, and he led both the effort to keep our nationals in the Middle East out of harm’s way during the crisis, a significant role was played by Ambassador Cimatu while he was stationed in the Middle East, and also in our effort to help the Iraqi people rise from the crisis.

The nation mourns the death of a great Filipino. We were awed by the vision and indomitable wit of Secretary Blas Ople. He was an architect of Philippine Foreign policy in the finest tradition of enlightened and pragmatic diplomacy. A champion of peace, human rights, collective security and the rule of law. We will miss him and the world will miss him.

Secretary Ople was here last month, when I wasn’t able to attend. He was my assistant in requesting help from Bahrain for peace in Mindanao. That was what we used to expect in Mindanao – Malaysia, Indonesia, Brunei, Libya – but because of the frequent visits of the Prime Minister to the Philippines, he became a friend of Ambassador Aguiluz as well. And he said, what exactly do you want Bahrain to do to help in your search for peace in Mindanao? So I said, we hope that Bahrain will be one of the four countries that will monitor the peace. That peace… Ah, the Ceasefire Monitoring Team, with Bahrain included, and because of that, peace in Mindanao is within reach.

I am not surprised by Bahrain's interest in such things because they are very capable. Bahrain is a modern Financial Center in the Middle East. And Bahrain is the freest economy in the entire Arab World, the freest economy in the Arab World. And not only that, according to the United Nations, Bahrain also has the highest human development index in the entire Arab world, which is a measure of longevity. Measure of health, per capita income and also literacy rate. So you Filipinos living here in Bahrain, of course, you also share in that high standard of living. So I congratulate you and you are truly fortunate to be here. Fortunate not only because you are adapting to their standard of living but also because of their ability and love for you, they also help the Philippines. For example, earlier, I was there talking to businessmen, talking to the prime minister and his Cabinet, talking to their king, who gave a great honor because yesterday when we arrived, the king himself met us at the airport.

It is a beautiful expression of love for the Philippines. And as I was telling the businessmen earlier, if Ambassador Aguiluz has invested here, you should also invest in the Philippines. And I was telling the prime minister that in the Philippines… Because here in Bahrain, it is a financial center and the center of what is called Islamic Banking. Their Islamic bank here lends money to our Makati-based institutions, not only to Muslim institutions. But I told them that we in the Philippines also have a small Islamic bank, called Al Amanah Bank. It’s just a bit of a failure, perhaps because we don’t know how to run an Islamic bank. But I told them that other banks are successful. So it’s not because the economy is bad that the Islamic Bank is failing, we just really don’t know how to run an Islamic Bank.

And a mission will arrive, coming here from the Central Bank to study how to operate an Islamic Bank. But I said on top of that, because Bahrain has a free enterprise economy, I said I hope you bankers here, Islamic Bankers, wouldn’t you also look at our Al Amanah bank. Why don’t you just buy it and rehabilitate it? Well, the Prime Minister told me earlier, who should he talk to because he already gave instructions to rehabilitate our Al Amanah Bank.

Therefore, it is fitting that the leaders here in Bahrain reciprocate your love and your love for the Philippines. And that’s good because we also need this kind of friendship for our progress.

Our country has long been lagging behind its neighboring countries in terms of development. Fortunately, under my administration, our growth rate is now number 6 among the twenty-one economies of the Asia-Pacific region. Our growth rate now is faster than that of wealthier economies like Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Korea. One reason why, despite the Asian crisis and global slowdown of 2001, 2002, and 2003, we continue to stabilize is your remittances. So thank you very much.

You are truly Overseas Filipino Workers. But beyond that, you are also Overseas Filipino Investors because you invest eight billion dollars in the Philippines every year. The remittances you send are used for housing, education, and the capital of your relatives, isn’t that investment? That’s why we, I, want to reciprocate your love for our country.

This is one reason why, despite the long periods when Congress failed to pass the Overseas Voting Law, the Overseas Voting Law was passed under my administration. Not only that, I also pushed for the passage of the Anti-Money Laundering Law, why? One reason is that if it wasn’t passed, international bankers would add red tape when you send your remittances. So, to avoid you having difficulty sending your remittances to the Philippines, I also pushed for the passage of the Anti-Money-Laundering Law.

I also expanded the housing program. In the two and a half years of my leadership, the Philippines had the most extensive housing program in the history of our country. And one reason is that many OFWs are buying houses. I hope you will buy as well. I encourage you to invest your savings in meaningful things like housing. Contact the Embassies on how to enter the housing program of the Pag-ibig Fund. In Saudi Arabia, Pag-ibig is very enthusiastic, many OFWs are buying houses. I hope the same happens here in Bahrain.

And thank you again for your contribution to the five classrooms for parts of the country that lack classrooms. And I also congratulate your Embassy on the skills development programs. For those who want to acquire new skills, especially those who will return to facilitate a faster reintegration program in the Philippines.

I hope, my friends, you will continue the exemplary work that you are engaged in here in Bahrain. May your success and the success of our Filipino nation continue wherever we are.

To all of you, thank you very much for the remittances. Thank you very much for the good reputation you give to the Philippines. Thank you very much for your continued love for our country. And Merry Christmas, you are loved by the Philippines.

Thank you very much to all of you!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during a meeting with the Filipino Community in the Kindom of Bahrain. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140449/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7537&Itemid=38