MANAGING FOR GLOBAL COMPETITIVENESS: PHILIPPINE PERSPECTIVE

In a period when the global economic order is transforming the economic, political and social landscape, this summit is a significant move by developing and least developed nations to move forward in confronting the challenges of the period. In the case of the business sectors of Asia and Africa, the most important response to these challenges is to manage for global competitiveness.

We can draw our inspiration from the “Bandung spirit” of the first Asian-African Summit of 1955, the spirit of striving to attain a just, peaceful, progressive and prosperous world order.

We can also draw inspiration from what happened forty-five years after the Bandung conference, when on November 6th to 7th in the year 2000, the Asian-African Business Association Summit was inaugurated in Kuala Lumpur, with the aim of building bridges among the private sectors of both nations. In that summit was emphasized the role of the private sector and its efficiency in promoting economic development.

Now, 50 years after the Banding Conference and five years after the first Asian-African Business Summit, this Golden jubilee of the Banding Conference is a golden opportunity to rekindle the Banding spirit and to work together to face the challenges of today’s realities, including the challenge of managing for global competitiveness.

Managing for global competitiveness requires dealing with various factors such as the protection of natural resources and varied environmental issues, the flow of international capital, foreign exchange, interest rates, trade barriers, training and education, and now the steep increase in the world price of oil.

There’s no question that the high price of oil today has the potential to put the brakes on economic expansion. And we all know that the poorest among us suffer the most as a result of high prices in food, energy and transportation. That’s why we must do everything in our power to manage our way through these rough seas by protecting economic growth while minimizing the impact on rising prices.

I therefore take the opportunity of this summit to call for unity between Asia and Africa for stronger collective action toward preventing a full-blown economic crisis that could be triggered by an unsustainable level of crude oil prices. While there’s been some softening of oil prices in the past few days, the trend could worsen to levels that could halt economic growth or even I prompt a global recession. It is certainly stripping oil-importing countries of Asia and Africa of our ability to manage for global competitiveness. It’s preventing us from pursuing our economic development programs with a rigor that we want to have. It’s requiring us to face the specter of economic decline. Restricting our respective governments’ ability to provide much needed social programs for the marginalized sectors in our economies. It’s increasing poverty and further widening the gap between rich and poor countries. This is a toxic formula that could increase global terrorism.

Therefore, in behalf of the Philippines, I take this opportunity to call on the Asia-Africa Summit to do its share in pushing for greater stability in oil prices. I call on the world leaders, including the petroleum exporting countries of Asia and Africa, to offer solutions that will temper the volatility of crude oil prices. Most of the demand for oil and most of the supply of oil come from Asia and Africa. Thus, it’s especially important to strengthen cooperation between Asia and Africa at this time, but even without this crisis for the strategic future.

We in the Philippines trade extensively with our neighbors in Asia. But we are eager to expand our meager trade with Africa. South Africa is our largest African trading partner, followed by Mauritius as our second largest African export market. We sell cement, garments, gear boxes of motor vehicles and aircraft parts, and we buy tobacco, iron and steel, smart cards, cotton, sardines and copper. We’re willing like to buy more from Africa. We have the balance of trade in our favor but we’d also like to add Africa to our growing list of automobile export markets. And we invite the African mining industry to invest in our rich but still largely I untapped mineral resources.

It’s you, the businessmen. It’s the free, open and competitive markets that must ultimately drive the engine of job creation and the eventual elimination of poverty in many countries of our two regions.

Open markets and free enterprise are the centerpiece of my philosophy and drive the policies of my government. I believe a strong, growing economy is the best hope to alleviate the crushing pain of poverty. But many of the poor pay the highest price for free markets, and it’s my moral obligation to ensure that the poor are protected as we transition to a global economy.

I hope that globalization will be a rising tide and lift all boats, but I fear that too many boats will have holes in the bottom. As business and political leaders, we must not only work to integrate our economies and create wealth and opportunity but we must also make sure the poor have a strong, seaworthy vessel that includes a decent wage, access to health care, a sound education and social justice.

We’ve seen the globalization of terrorism, but we’ve also witnessed the globalization of peace. In the Philippines, I’m inspired by a peace process in our island of Mindanao that includes an Asian-African cast of friends — friend from Asia, Africa and the Middle East — helping us in our quest for peace and stability.

The continuing success of our peace talks is driven by a firmly entrenched ground level cease fire supported by an international monitoring team led by Malaysia, with participating contingents from Brunei and Libya. I’d like to take this opportunity to thank Malaysian Prime Minister Abdullah not only for supporting the cease fire process but for hosting this week and facilitating the substantive negotiations. The forward impetus of the peace talks will continue to jack up confidence and investments, spur agri-business, and provide a wider swath or jobs and livelihood in the conflict- affected areas and throughout Mindanao.

The lesson of Mindanao for the Philippines is a lesson for our two continents. As we integrate our economies in Asia, Africa and the world, we must also integrate the basic human values or compassion, tolerance and social justice. Economic development I must always go hand in hand with the development of the human spirit and the liberation of the poor.

Corruption remains a barrier in many of our countries, and we must face this squarely if we are to develop our economies, attract investment and provide equality of opportunity to all our citizens. I’m committed to transparency and openness in government for a very simple reason: the bright sunshine or day is a great disinfectant to the dark recession of corruption.

I aim to eliminate red tape to encourage business, both domestic and foreign, to invest in the Philippines. But I will not give a green light to unfettered exploitation of workers, the laws or the environment in the pursuit of cut and run economic exploitation. I want to encourage full, lifetime partnerships with businesses. We must always provide balance and think about the long-term well-being of the entire nation.

We must have an energy program that creates genuine energy independence and harnesses the creative forces of the marketplace to bring in a range of new, clean and cost-effective alternative sources of energy in the Philippines.

We need a strong United Nations, but we also need nations, strong nations that are united to solve problems regionally as well as on a global basis. I believe we’re at a tipping point in the evolution or globalization where individual nations, in ones and twos, and regional blocs, must take greater control of challenges closer to home. Not every challenge needs to be first made into a global problem before being solved.

Finally, I hope all nations of Africa, Asia and the world never lose sight of the promise of democracy and the democratic form of government. For those of us who live under it, we sometimes complain, but democracy is the best system in the world. And for those who only dream of it, Fm convinced that history is on your side and you will bear witness to democracy’s promise within the coming generation.

Thank you.

Source: Adamson University Library