Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, during the celebration of Gawad Kalinga’s tribute to Filipino heroism (Gawad Kalinga Congress 2005).

Thank you very much, Mari. You speak so well. All of Singles for Christ speak so well, you know, because I think the Lord speaks through them.

Our leaders of Couples for Christ and Gawad Kalinga: Frank and Gerry, Tony; my colleagues in the government who have become partners of Gawad Kalinga; Cabinet members; local government executives; NGOs like Cito Lorenzo, a former Cabinet member who managed productivity. He is the advisor, he taught productivity so that there would be “food for the hungry,” and there would be “homes for the homeless” and “land for the landless.”

Thank you that we are all here today. Thank you that you are all here today. There are five thousand of you here. Five thousand building new homes, new lives, a new nation. You are the true people power. The true people power is the one that wants to build, not the one that wants to destroy. And I can truly say that Gawad Kalinga is a product of people power.

Couples for Christ was one of the most effective sectors of civil society that was there at EDSA Dos, 2001. I remember in 2002, there would be an anniversary of EDSA Dos, I said instead of us having a big rally again there at the EDSA Shrine, let's make it forty days of re-engagement with the different groups that went to EDSA Dos. Forty days starting from January 16, the first day of EDSA Dos and ending February 25, the last day of EDSA One. I told my colleagues let's make this an opportunity to re-engage with the different groups. One of the groups that was invited to chat, to exchange ideas during those forty days was Couples for Christ.

I remember we had lunch, right Gerry, Frank in one library? And Couples showed this Gawad Kalinga, the seed of Gawad Kalinga at that time. They showed me a hundred houses that they had already built in Gawad Kalinga and invited me to go to the next project where I could see how they simultaneously build, as we say, simultaneously build Gawad Kalinga.

I remember in DSWD we were building houses for thirty thousand. So I said, thirty thousand is doable. Thirty thousand is doable, you'll see. So I joined them in Dumaguete and I saw what they were building. I also joined, I built a house too. Thirty thousand was the cost at that time. So I said my program is land for the landless, home for the homeless. During my father’s time, his main project was land reform, land for the landless. I said land for the landless plus home for the homeless, housing for the poor. This is the key because some of the houses being built were two hundred thousand, one hundred thousand. This is thirty thousand. So, I said this is where the government’s little money for housing should go.

So, with my great admiration for what I saw in that build, I went on stage and said you have 100 houses. I want this to be 1,000 houses so the government contributed 30 million pesos. So from 100 to 1,000, June, there was a simultaneous build across the Philippines, different places built a thousand houses, Youth for Christ, Singles for Christ, Couples for Christ. Kids for Christ wasn’t there yet. Thank you, you’re with us now. Wasn’t Kids for Christ part of that June in 2002? And the whole Philippines and the whole world saw that day when a thousand homes were built simultaneously, and what happened was a tsunami. A tsunami of contributions and partners of Gawad Kalinga and now we can aspire to 777 — seven hundred thousand houses in 7,000 communities in seven years since 2003. So until 2010 we will finish our project together.

So now this is like the measure of housing. Of course, the price of goods has increased worldwide, it became 50 thousand… And the standards have also improved, the designs have improved, it’s 50,000 now. Besides, it’s easier to count 50,000 than 30,000. Right, the change? So, the partners who came and presented themselves were great.

And now this construction of ours has not only increased, the government now uses this as a model. Okay, the 200,000 is okay for the lower-middle class but the poor were shut off from our low-cost housing because before, it was thought to be unviable if it was less than 200,000, but it’s very doable. Even at 50,000 as long as there is a heart in the investment.

What Nonong Cruz mentioned, two billion is our partnership for new homes when we lost our four big typhoons. The soldiers now because we have this way of building homes that they can afford, the government will counterpart the land in our many military camps. After the soldiers, Nonong, these military camps if there is still space, I think there is, let's open it up to other civilian employees of the Philippine government. Nonong said two billion for the victims of calamities: one billion from friends, partners of Gawad Kalinga; one billion from the Philippine government.

Why are we bold enough to promise one billion? We couldn’t do that before. The 30 million I gave was already difficult. But now we can promise not just 300 million, one billion. Why? Because you, Couples, local government officials, supported me in dismantling the old system where everything was debt for development, and finally have taxes for our independence, the Phase One of our economic reforms. I always tell the story land for the landless, home for the homeless, food for the hungry.

Our country before we made this phase one reforms was like a family that doesn’t have enough income for their needs. Like a household that has a small home industry. The income per month is 700 — three hundred is paid to the sari-sari store because food is always on credit; two hundred fifty is paid to an assistant who does his food processing; the one hundred fifty helps the parents in the province who are sick. So that’s 700. Where will the money come from to improve the house? More food? Debt again from the sari-sari store. So the 300 monthly payment to the sari-sari store will increase.

That’s what happened to our country. Seven hundred billion was our tax. Three hundred billion goes to paying and interest on debt, inherited debt. Two hundred fifty goes to salaries. One hundred fifty goes to local government units. So that’s seven hundred billion. Where will we find money for housing? Where will we find capital to open land for agri-business? Debt again. And if it’s debt again, the 300 debt service will increase. Where will we get it? From salaries? From IRA? Or not pay the debt? Then we’ll become like Argentina. That’s why we had to do a drastic surgery. Thank you to you. Thank you to Congressman Zialcita and colleagues in congress, they gave me 100 billion pesos in new taxes.

So with the coming 100 billion, Nonong Cruz is happy to promise one billion for Gawad Kalinga for calamity victims.

But of course, asking for new taxes isn't popular. That's why I'm suffering now because of my requests to Congress. Adding to that is the increase in oil prices outside the Philippines, which not everyone understands is imported inflation. So my opponents say, those who want to take over say, this is the time, Gloria is about to fall. Let's really hit her hard. Let's throw everything at her, even the kitchen sink. But the kitchen sink should be where it belongs, in a home for the homeless. Not thrown away like this government that you helped in EDSA Dos, you helped in the elections and our NGOs, NAMFREL, foreign observers, 100 foreign observers, embassies of other countries said, this is a truly elected government, a government.

Thank you, Gawad Kalinga, for your faith in our administration. You are one of the best good news of our shared burden. And because there are Couples, Singles, Youth, Kids, we now have a future. Land for the landless, home for the homeless, food for the hungry and tomorrow for our future.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Gawad Kalinga Celebration of Filipino Heroism (Gawad Kalinga Congress 2005). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412080841/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5069&Itemid=38