Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Cyber Corridor Visayan Tour: Visit to Qualfon Philippines Quality Contact Services

[Delivered at the Skyrise 3 Bldg., Asiatown IT Park, Lahug, Cebu City, Cebu, February 3, 2010]

Thank you.

Thank you very much, Secretary Rey Chua for your introduction.

I’d also like to thank Mayor Tommy Osmeña for your kind words of welcome to your city. To acknowledge also Governor Gwen Garcia in the province of Cebu who are partners with Ayala in this development project here. Of course, Mr. Monera, Mr. Belen, thank you for your presentation.

I’d like to introduce aside from Rey Chua the other members of the Cabinet who are here. We’ve our new Press Secretary, Cris Icban; we have Secretary Boboy Syjuco whose TESDA has been invaluable in developing the manpower for the ICT and BPO industry; and Secretary Ric Saludo, our spokesperson aside from being the Executive Director of the Reconstruction Commission on typhoons Ondoy, Pepeng and Frank which fortunately does not have to include Cebu in the reconstruction.

Members of the media whom I especially invited to be here today. You are actually the guest of honor because we are doing this for you making this presentation. IT executives especially our hosts from Qualfon, ladies and gentlemen.

I am very happy to be here in Cebu City. We always talked about Cebu as the most popular destination for foreign tourists in our country, but you are two things, not just the most popular destination for foreign tourists in our country but number one in the Tholons list of emerging cities for IT and BPO. So, congratulations!

And so today for once we are not here as a tourist. We are here on a tour but a tour of the Super Regions again, not the Tourism Super Region of which you are a part but of the Cyber Tourism Region. But just to refresh everyone’s mind, our Super Regions are: Agribusiness Mindanao, Tourism Central Philippines of which Cebu is such an important part, the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle, the Urban Luzon Beltway and the Cyber Corridor which we want now to stress Cebu is also an integral part. We designed this Super Regions to spread development away from an inequitable concentration in Manila.

The Cyber Corridor was identified by the private sector, the academe and government together as the corridor that comprises the strongest potential and actual locations for ICT investments like call centers, back office, software development, medical transcription, engineering design, animation and game development. It includes 10 urban areas being promoted as new destinations for ICT: Metro Laguna, Metro Cavite, Iloilo, Davao, Bacolod, Metro Pampanga, Metro Bulacan, Cagayan de Oro, Central Bulacan and Lipa, and of course, the two original Philippine ICT Centers of Excellence: Manila and Cebu.

But I should say as far as Tholons is concerned, they have listed among the top 50: Quezon City, Pasig and Mandaluyong but they listed number one Cebu City, so I should say Cebu City and Metro Manila. So to be in that survey of the “Top 50 Emerging Global Outsourcing Destinations,” and as Mr. Belen pointed out, better than many of those world capitals that we all read about in the front pages. And why do they put Cebu as number one? According to Tholons, it’s mainly due to the scale and quality of the workforce, of the modern infrastructure, of the business catalysts, of the risk profile, and the cost and quality of life.

So that is why we should not be surprised that there are now, what? Seventy, I was surprised outsourcing and offshoring companies here. I knew there were more than 50 but 70 is a very big number employing more than 20,000 individuals. It is attractive to investors because of the high quality of the graduates from nine universities and 50 colleges. And because also our administration has invested in or promoted the necessary infrastructure support to create a better business environment for Cebu.

Aside from miles and miles of roads, there is now three-fourths completed a 200-megawatt power plant expected to be finished next year. And as we can see from this IT Asiatown, Class A facilities are available to accommodate BPO-IT locators in Cebu.

I was supposed to sign today ceremonially the Cebu Business Park, that would be still another location but the paper work wasn’t completed. So anyway, that’s another one upcoming and when entering this and entering that I’m sure when it is completed, it’s really like entering the first world, isn’t it? So world class, congratulations to Cebu!

Mr. Belen said, he pointed out about your industry, how it’s gone long way since early 2001, and indeed I can say that about the entire Philippines.

The Philippines has come a long way since January 2001. Most of you probably don’t remember much about that time anymore, the tumultuous time ten years ago. Many of you may have forgotten that at that time the nation was on the brink of political chaos and financial bankruptcy. That the economy was jammed in reverse. That few investments were being made. That few jobs were being created and maybe, many are not aware that at that time, the debt of the government and its corporations of 3.6 trillion pesos was bigger than our GDP of 3.3 trillion pesos. There were almost no foreign reserves.

It was a time of lower salaries and high prices. Tax revenues were so low that we could hardly invest in expanding healthcare, improving education, and providing clean water and needed electricity to remote barangays.

Into this dismal picture we stepped. I didn’t seek the Office of the President in 2001; it was thrust upon me. But rather than shirk from this onerous task, we rolled up our sleeves, determined to turn the Philippines around.

We were focused like a laser beam on delivering real results to better the lives of ordinary Filipinos. As an economist, I knew that to reverse years of economic decline we had to instill fiscal discipline, grow the economy and invest in human and physical infrastructure like roads. Like I remember that road to the south, from Cebu to Santander. You know my grandfather built that road when he was working for the… well, at that time, the American administration. And when I came here in 2001, oh! it was so ugly. So I decided now… 2004. So 2004, we started constructing that road, now it’s not an ugly road anymore, it’s a beautiful road. And then the Cansaga bridge which is going to make the northern part of Cebu, also very accessible especially given that the second biggest employer in the country is there, Mitzumi in Danao City. It used to be the biggest employer, it’s now the second because it got beaten by a BPO teletech. It’s now the biggest employer in our country.

And then, we also built the RORO Nautical Highway System. So these thing, all these actions would form the building blocks of a turnaround that would deliver an unprecedented 36 quarters of uninterrupted growth, create 9 million new jobs, add 53 million people to healthcare, with government coffers that helped us withstand the global economic crisis.

In my first State of the Nation Address in 2001, after your very important ICT Conference here in Cebu City, I said that we would create wealth by developing the labor-intensive, skills-intensive sectors such as ICT. From scratch with only 2,000 workers in year 2000, we created what is today a global powerhouse: the Philippine BPO industry. And we promoted this… we achieved this by promoting strategic investments in three areas:

First, digital infrastructure. We encouraged more broadband services in cities and identified growth areas. Thus the cost of international calls went down from 40 cents a minute to 2 cents a minute for those using the VOiP. The number of internet users jumped from 2 million in 2000 to more than 24 million today. No wonder we had the stage set for BPO. And so that no Taiwan tremor or tsunami can cut off our cyber services from their clients for even one minute, we encouraged PLDT and Globe to invest billions in having more than one international telecommunications gateway.

For instance, Ayala who is partner with the province in this IT Park, has built an international gateway from Ballesteros, Cagayan going all the way up to Manila and then to the rest of the Philippines, so that if there’s a tremor somewhere else and the other gateway collapses that is still there. And that is one very important reason why investors come to the Philippines, they know there’ll be not a single minute of service interruption even if there is a calamity somewhere in the region.

Second area of investment was an appropriate policy and legal environment. We created the Commission on ICT, appointed Rey Chua with the guidance that the ICT sector should be guided by the market, with minimal government interference. For example, if the market calls for call centers, we should not force them to specialize in doing something else like programming or software development. Let the market determine that. So instead of regulating, we gave incentives to developers of IT parks like this, assisted investors in identifying promising provincial sites hence our cyber corridor, and built more transport facilities to those sites.

This philosophy drove the fast growth of call centers. Now the market is leading to the growth of higher value added segments of the offshoring and outsourcing industries, like accounting, legal, medical, personnel and administrative services. And also, the very high end IT services themselves. I saw in your chart that IT has been here since a long, long time ago. But now, it is expanding again in an explosive magnitude. And the other day, we inaugurated an IT center in Global City in Taguig and the Chairman of the Board who is one of the company, UST Global, which is one of the top 21 IT companies in the world said that the reason why he decided to come to the Philippines after he met me on one of my trips to New York in 2007, was that he was convinced and he’s still convinced that we have a good intellectual property protection environment. So an enabling environment rather than an environment that dictates to the investors what sector they should specialize in.

Third area of major strategic investment, the development of human capital. To increase the country’s share in the global market for offshoring and outsourcing services, the government intensified the implementation of programs that will train the workforce to enable them to find jobs in the BPO and also to educate the young on the use of computers and internet for the next generation of IT and BPO workers. That’s why more than 4,000 public schools now are connected to the internet, including 117 schools in Metro Cebu. And that was the job that my daughter used to have when she came here to Cebu in 2005, she was the Executive Director of an NGO called FITEd, Foundation for IT Education, because we were putting internet and computers in the schools that teachers had to be taught how to use that. And that was part of my daughter’s work until she moved over to the environment field. She is now to the Worldwide Fund for Nature.

In technical education and skills training, we have invested three times as much as the combined budgets of three previous administrations. A very large portion of this goes to scholarships for the BPO industry, including more than 8,000 scholarships here in Region VII. So thanks to these strategic investments, billions have been poured into the country by investors creating half a million new jobs in BPO alone.

So today, the Philippines with its 90 million people has challenged India’s one billion population for BPO supremacy. Compared to $0.02 billion in 2001 or almost nothing, our BPO industry earned 7.3 billion dollars in 2009. And I must congratulate Cebu because you are a center of excellence, one of only two and a bigger center of excellence than any city in Metro Manila.

The 500,000 jobs created in the ICT are part of the legacy that I am honored to leave, and I’m happy to say and I hope you will agree with me, that this is a legacy of hard work, a strong economy, a stable economy, renewed global engagement, major investments in healthcare and education, and dramatic improvements in physical and human infrastructure.

Much remains to be done, but I am determined to turn over to a new government a New Philippines ready for the challenge of bringing the nation to the verge of first world in 20 years. When we entered this IT park, I said, “Wow! it’s like we’re in the first world.” So, Cebu and this IT park are a forerunner of the first world Philippines in 20 years. Congratulations to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Cyber Corridor Visayan Tour: visit to Qualfon Philippines Quality Contact Services. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100407235108/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27448&Itemid=38