General Abaya and the other major service commanders, fellow workers in government, my beloved countrymen:

I am leaving today for the United States, Italy and France in connection with our foreign policy objectives based on peace, development and the fight against terrorism.

What happened in Oakwood is already a thing of the past. The unity of the country has been rebuilt.

The process of justice for the military and civilians continues. Our fight against poverty continues, especially now that there is an expected long-term peace in Mindanao.

The spread of intrigues and disturbances will be set aside.

I have designated Vice President Guingona as caretaker while I’m away. This is an institutional act. Some people are sowing intrigues about our policy differences with the Vice President but these are not pertinent to his designation. I am confident in his full capacity and resolve to uphold and implement constitutional governance and he will have the full support of the executive branch. The fears caused by the war in Iraq, the threat of SARS, El Niño, destabilization have completely dissipated, and have been replaced by new hope in the cities and countryside.

I chose Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process Eduardo Ermita as the next Secretary of National Defense. He will move to Defense when he feels he can leave the peace process job to his replacement, that is National Anti-Poverty Commission Secretary Ging Deles.

I call on the Armed Forces, the Defense department and the public to lend their full support for Secretary Ermita when he assumes the position sometime in the near future. And also to support Secretary Ging Deles when she also is ready to assume after Secretary Ermita decides that he has reached a stage when he can leave it to her. Not that Ging is not capable but of course Secretary Ermita I’m sure would like to be there when some of the early fruits of his hard work are bearing.

Secretary Ermita comes with an impressive track record in peace, development and security management. I am giving him three priorities: one, sustain the momentum of reforms in the military organization; two, bring the peace process into the mainstream of defense doctrine; and three, push forward the AFP modernization. I’m confident his impressive government record and vast experience will lead him on.

I will meet with Prime Minister Mahathir in New York — Ed Ermita is there, that’s still OPAP’s work — I will also talk to the foreign ministers of the Organization of the Islamic Conference or OIC and deliver a speech at the United Nations. The message I will convey to them is about peace and security.

In the Vatican, I will convey to the Holy Father the warm love of our people, and will ask him to bless every Filipino citizen, family and home wherever they are.

In Paris, I will thank UNESCO for its help to the Philippines in promoting peace, development, the well-being of the minds of our youth, strengthening our culture including the care of our rice terraces in our most remote barangays.

In my meetings, I will emphasize the importance of peace in Mindanao and helping our fight against poverty and terrorism.

After Cancun, we need to face the changes in trade politics that are reasonable for developing nations and value the good of humanity.

In October there are four events related to our national interest: the Asean Summit in Bali, the APEC Summit in Bangkok, the OIC Summit in Kuala Lumpur and the visit of President Bush to the Philippines.

World leaders will warmly welcome the Philippines’ new engagement with the world, proof that our efforts are already bearing fruit. We need the best relations with the world if we want to progress.

So join me in prayer as we introduce the Philippines to the world and set in motion great change in our national life, unity from division, peace from turmoil, and certainty from doubt.

Let us continue to promote and take pride in the excellence and principles of our country.

Thank you very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Departure Ceremonies for a 5-day Visit to the U.S.A and Europe. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194225/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7103&Itemid=38