Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, on the enactment of Republic Act No. 9239 or the Optical Media Act of 2003.

Thank you to the Chairman of the Videogram Regulatory Board, who will now, due to our new law, become Chairman of the Optical Media Regulatory Board, Edu Manzano.

I would like to congratulate our senators and congressmen who enacted this law that I am signing today, under the leadership of Senate President Franklin Drilon and Speaker De Venecia. I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate those who will be Senate President Franklin Drilon’s colleagues in the next Senate. We have four re-electionist senators: Senator Bobby Barbers; Senator Pong Biazon; Senator Bobby Jaworski; Senator John Osmeña.

We have two former senators: Senator Orly Mercado; Senator Miriam Defensor-Santiago.

We have two Cabinet members: future senator, Dick Gordon; future senator, Mar Roxas.

From Muslim Mindanao, Governor Parouk Hussin; from local governments, Governor of Pampanga, Lito Lapid; former Governor of Cavite and former Chairman of the Videogram Regulatory Board, Bong Revilla; and representative of young professionals and women, Attorney Pia Compañera Cayetano.

And I congratulate those who will be… no, those who will be leaving to Frank Drilon in the Senate but he will become the Vice President of the Philippines, Noli De Castro.

I would like to congratulate our hosting officials here in the province of Laguna, led by Governor Ningning Lazaro; our hosts here in the town of Los Baños, led by Mayor Cesar Perez; and here are also the various mayors of the province of Laguna.

I would also like to congratulate our stars, producers, writers of showbusiness. Thank you to the stars of showbusiness for your support of me.

I would like to congratulate and invite to be the audience of your program today, the citizens who have already been awarded land from Camp Eldridge.

First, I will talk to the stars of showbiz. Thank you showbusiness stars for recognizing, as Edu, Vic, Leo, Laurice, and others who spoke, that in the history of our country, I, of all presidents, have helped the showbusiness industry the most. Sorry to say this, I’ve surpassed even leaders who came from showbusiness.

The lowering of the amusement tax, the 50 million support for cinemas in the film festival, and there’s more coming, the rehabilitation of the Metropolitan Theater, the fight against film piracy and others, especially now with the enactment of the Opti-Media Law which will further strengthen the fight against piracy.

Not only that, future senator Mar Roxas reminded me that when I went to America on a state visit, in front of Mar Roxas, I told President Bush, President Bush, in English, I expect that when the Optical Media Bill passes in the Philippines, Filipino artists will have more opportunities there in America itself.

I did all of this because I was a movie fan, a movie fan since I was little. Well, I was small then and I’m still small now, so I’m still a movie fan until now.

When I was a small child in Iligan where a large part of my childhood was spent, that was in the 1950s. Iligan was just a small town. In the countryside, the cinema was our only entertainment, so all the movies that came, they were all Tagalog movies, we watched them, my grandmother, my driver Romeo, and me. We always went to the movies as a triple date.

And when my father was a young Congressman, here in Manila, my mother always brought us to Times Theater to watch double feature films. That's why I'm very used to watching movies, so I know how important movies are to the ordinary Filipino citizen. The ordinary Filipino loves movies. They love singers, like those who sang earlier, and they also love to have a definite home of their own, land to build on.

So today, in addition to our signing of the Opti-Media Law, I invited some of those living in Camp Eldridge for two things: for them to see some of their favorite showbiz stars, and to receive my proclamation granting them the power to buy the land they are building on. To clarify, the Camp Eldridge residents are from barangays Lalakay, Bambang, Timugan. You from barangay Lalakay, you are included there. You are no longer squatters in your own country.

These two things we are doing today: the Opti-Media Law; the proclamation of Camp Eldridge are examples of the change desired by ordinary citizens regarding their livelihood, such as jobs and homes.

Jobs – showbiz is not only a source of entertainment for our ordinary citizens. It is also a source of many jobs. In the three years before I became president, only one million jobs were created. So I inherited more than four million unemployed. And I know that among the jobs lost during those times were those in showbusiness because film piracy was rampant and amusement tax was high.

But in my short presidency, because I saw, I understood what you needed: lower the amusement tax, stop film piracy and other necessary things, compared to one million jobs created, in the three years before I became president, in my short presidency, we created more than three million jobs. I think we saved many jobs by lowering the amusement tax, by subsidizing films in the film festival, and by Bong Revilla strengthening the fight against film piracy.

So friends, regarding homes. Those we are blessing today in Camp Eldridge are part of the widest land given the power to be purchased by squatters, so more than three hundred thousand families are no longer squatters but homeowners now. That's why even the low-cost housing developers who build housing for workers said that the policies of the Gloria administration are the most housing-friendly in the history of our country. This is just a down payment. In May, I ask all of you – because I didn't serve a full term – give President Gloria and Vice President Noli, our senators: Bobby Barbers, Pong Biazon, Bobby Jaworski, and who is the fourth reelectionist, John O, the father of the cellphone industry, the opportunity to build the next installment. Together with Orly Mercado, Miriam Defensor-Santiago, Mar Roxas, Dick Gordon, Parouk Hussin, Lito Lapid, Bong Revilla, Pia Cayetano, and all the candidates of K-4 (Koalisyon ng Katapatan at Karanasan para sa Kinabukasan). For the future, experience is unparalleled, experience is irreplaceable, and that is what we offer to all of you.

Thank you very much, friends from Laguna.

Thank you very much, showbiz personalities.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Signing into Law of Republic Act 9239 or the Optical Media Act of 2003. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090706/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5648&Itemid=38