Thank you very much.

Thank you very much Director General Guiao for your introduction of me.

Congratulations! also to Dr. William Co and the other officials of ICCT Colleges, and we express our condolences to all for the loss of Dr. Consuelo Co, the president of ICCT Colleges.

Governor Jun Ynares, thank you very much for your story about my father, President Diosdado Macapagal, who was a great proof that education is the key to opportunity and all that many poor people need is someone to help with a scholarship so they can obtain this key to opportunity. Congratulations! to you as well and to all of those from Rizal that you represent.

Our batch 2010 scholars of ICCT, congratulations!

I congratulate all of Dr. Co's colleagues, officials, staff, and teachers for their enthusiasm and dedication to teaching our graduates.

And thank you also to the parents and other loved ones of our graduates who helped you get here where you can receive a scholarship and finish an important course that can provide employment.

Chairman Co and I were talking earlier about your school. Fifteen thousand are their students in regular courses, but through our scholarship program in technical and vocational education it increased by five thousand, so five thousand of our students have now graduated.

And given the size of Dr. Co's school, they separated the regular graduates from those with VocTech scholarships – that's you all – so congratulations to all of you!

This provision of scholarships for vocational and technical education is part of the hands-on governance that we are continuing until the last moment of my leadership. For this, we are implementing thorough initiatives that our administration has advanced since I took office.

We identify three aspects: First, giving more power and development to the regions, away from the domination of Manila; second, continuing to uphold the value of the three E's: education, economy and environment in our efforts to create sustainable and equitable development; and third, continuing to focus on you, the youth of the country, as our greatest hope for a more vibrant, better Philippines.

We have made progress in many areas. The overall budget of DepEd, TESDA, CHED and state universities and colleges has doubled since we assumed the Presidency. When we started in 2001, the education budget was less than P100 billion, now it's over P200 billion. That's why we can provide scholarships because the budget has doubled.

We have already given 600,000 college scholarships under our administration, and in VocTech alone this year, almost 600,000 as well. But more needs to be done. All the efforts of our administration are aimed at making the future brighter for the next generation, that's you, the next generation of Filipinos. You, our youth of our country as I said earlier, are our hope and inspiration. Everything we do should be to build a better life for every youth of the country.

While we are proud of the achievements of our administration, what has been achieved in the past is only as good as the country's ability to grow and develop. I want the progress we have made to not stop; that what remains to be done will be taken up by the next generation of leadership. For example, I told Dr. Co, “Wow! Dr. Co, you have 5,000 TESDA scholarship graduates, I hope the next administration will match that or even surpass it.”

As a nation, we must firmly define a vision for the future, to build on what is good and strive even harder to face the challenges of what remains to be done. And you, our youth of our country, are the bridge between the past and the future. The correction of our mistakes, our struggle for change, and our search for a brighter tomorrow are all for you.

Our country has come a long way. Most notably, we have made major progress improving our national infrastructure with more roads. I remember one time… I don't know if I was a new senator or vice president? No, not a senator. Vice president or new president. When did Junjun's mother become governor? 2001. Okay, I was just a new president. So I said, Governor Nini, how are the investors here? She said, how will investors come here, it's so difficult to get here, traffic, bad roads. But now we have widened the roads leading to Rizal so many investors are coming here.

Another accomplishment we have made is the expanded commuter rail system, so that from Manila to nearby provinces like Rizal, you can travel on our LRT-MRT. Included in the roads we built are important bridges.

And we have made major gains in education, building more classrooms especially in public grade school, installing Internet access especially in public high schools, improving teacher salaries, and more scholarships for the young people like you, our youth.

Because, as my father proved, education is the source of opportunity. As Governor Junjun Ynares’ story goes, my father was poor but Don Honorio Ventura sent him to school, he became a lawyer, topped the bar, and that was the key to his success. We are also sending you to school, the government is sending you to school, you are being given the key to a better life.

Education opens the mind, opens doors. And in today's world, a strong education must be accompanied by a strong backbone of technology. That's why I'm happy that ICCT is well-known in the field of ICT. I asked Dr. Co, what does ICCT mean? He said, Institute of Creative Computer Technology. That's where ICCT started, with computers, back in 1981, before we even had the internet age, ICCT was already teaching computers. Congratulations! to your vision.

That's why I am pleased that out of our 5,000 graduates, 2,000 are graduating in computer programming. I also expect that the other courses you have chosen are the courses studied by TESDA, which have a high chance of getting you a job after you graduate.

So you young people, we have great hope in you, you have been given the key to opportunity, use it for your own good and for the good of our country.

Congratulations! to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Pangulong Gloria Scholarship Graduation Exercises from the Institute of Creative Computer Technology (ICCT) Colleges. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080225/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27762&Itemid=38