Good morning everyone. I told Secretary Francisco Duque that instead of having programs and discourses, let's really have a meeting of the National Nutrition Council regarding our hunger mitigation program.

But first of all, we congratulate those who received the crown award, (applause) as well as our honored national outstanding barangay nutrition scholars.

It is only right that we praise them, praise you—awardees of our nation for your zealous and unique efforts.

Towards the complete eradication of hunger and poverty. Thank you very much.

We continue to struggle with the challenge of hunger. Last year, we tasked the NEDA (National Economic and Development Authority) to formulate a plan for this purpose. The plan is centered on affordable food, aid for the hungry, jobs on the streets and in the fields, family vegetable gardens, microfinance, and wage increases under the regional wage boards.

The NEDA Hunger Mitigation Program Framework is based on the recognition that hunger occurs. Can we have the framework now? First, because of a lack of affordable food, (that's from the left, right?) The supply side. A lack of affordable food. And second, on the right side, the demand side, there is no money to buy food.

Therefore, we should increase… (on the left side) affordable food—this is the supply side strategy—(and on the right side) increase the income and livelihood of the masses—this is the demand side.

Let's go back to the left, to the supply side, part of the NEDA plan, if you'll see the parts below, first (the furthest left) strengthen food production, then the second one, what is said to be enhance efficiency of logistics—improve the food delivery system.

On the right side, on the demand side, if you will see the middle, we need to put more money in people’s pockets, number one, increase people’s income, secondly, in the middle portion, teach proper nutrition or promote good nutrition, and thirdly, promote natural family planning, including a certain number of years between births or birth spacing.

Today, instead of having many discussions about motherhood, we want to highlight programs to strengthen the left side… Food production and improve the transport of food.

That first portion, increase food production to strengthen food production, as you can see there, we are promoting programs for poultry, swine, and cattle raising, agriculture, irrigation, mass vegetable gardening, and the rehabilitation of fisheries in the sea. Including aquaculture.

This is what we tasked the department of agriculture, that’s why Secretary Art Yap is here, the department of natural resources and the national irrigation authority. So let’s listen to their report on this, the first part, the increase in food production.

(Report of Sec. Art yap)

Do you remember the second part there of the supply, to enhance… Can we go back to the framework?

So there you are… So, I’m reading them now: and this is under the responsibility of the Department of Transportation, Philippine Ports Authority, that’s letter b. Letter c is the farm to market roads under the responsibility of the DA, Public Works, and DAR, that’s why Secretary Nasser Pangandaman is here and the Armed Forces of the Philippines in remote areas with rebels.

And then letter d is efficient local transport at hinihiling natin na ito ay under the responsibility of the local government units, the Leagues of Provinces of the Philippines, the Leagues of Cities of the Philippines, the League of Municipalities of the Philippines and the League of Barangays of The Philippines together with the Department of Interior and Local Governments and the Philippine National Police. And then letter e, ayun, ayun na.. Letter e. Is the food for school program under the responsibility of the Department of Education and the DSWD.

And then, and letter f. The creation of an NGO network to support feeding programs under the responsibility of the DSWD. Then letter g. The farmers option to buy back under the responsibility of the NFA.

I just want to know if we have some reports coming from the second portion, for example, ‘tindahan natin’ (our store). Do we have somebody who will report on ‘tindahan natin’?

Then, another important part of this program, the food-for-school program of DepEd and DSWD. Do we have someone who will report on the food-for-school program? Oh, Secretary Jing Lapus is here. Just recently, elected as a member of the board of the UNESCO International (applause) okay, Jing.

(Sec. Jing Lapus)

(Audio cut) Agencies regarding the programs on the supply side because it is very important that we have additional food and better delivery so that it reaches the table of every family. And these are the activities they’re doing and to be able to improve ability to produce and deliver food more affordably to our households.

Last week, I talked to Secretary Nonoy Andaya and I instructed him to release one billion pesos to the agencies that shall continue to implement food production and delivery plans for the rest of this year.

That is why we expect that through the DOH through the national nutrition council will continue to monitor where this one billion pesos will go for the rest of the year for production and distribution.

And we hope that our efforts including the efforts of our crown awardees and other LGU’s who wish to emulate what they are doing and have been doing. And also with the support of our barangay nutrition scholars na napaka-importante ang papel sa nutrition education. We hope that this will yield dividends in terms of lasting food security.

So now, I will turn over the meeting to Secretary Pingkoy Duque who as supervising secretary for the national nutrition council oversees these programs, so he can have additional interaction between the participants of this meeting and those who are representing the national government agencies here.

Once again, congratulations! To our crown winners; (applause) our barangay nutrition scholars. (applause) if there are more like you, the more we will suppress the problem of hunger.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech at the National Nutrition Council Awarding Ceremony. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140044/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2290&Itemid=38