Thank you very much Secretary Reyes and congratulations for the SWITCH convenor Ito Carlos and the other convenor, our very distinguished mayors of Metro Manila, other officials present, representatives of different sectors with a stake in energy efficiency, ladies and gentlemen.

We are launching today another program from the extensive proceeds of the VAT funded by taxes on oil from those who can afford it. Now, our focus is on the proper and economical use of electricity. Congratulations to Secretary Reyes and the D.O.E. organized this program, SWITCH, to inform and mobilize the people for projects including the light replacement program we are launching today. SWITCH is starting today here in Metro Manila. In the coming days, it will be launched in various regions of our country. The importance of proper and economical use of electricity will reach all Filipinos. Around the world, oil prices have increased due to forces in the global economy and market.

The global crisis did not catch us unprepared or without reserves. Thank God and thank the Value Added Tax. We took hard decisions, hard on people, unpopular with business, but good for the country as events have shown beyond doubt. We raised new revenues from bold fiscal reforms, more money for more and better roads, bridges, ports and other infrastructure to create more opportunities for new wealth and new jobs all towards a self-sufficient, self-reliant, economically strong Republic.

With more money, we spent a lot on health , and education; we spent a lot on train and retrain a growing workforce and not just for specific task but for whatever challenges a wayward world economy may throw in. And because we prepared for it, we have been able to shield our nation on the worst effects of food and fuel crises worldwide. So, we remain committed to the path we have taken, the best solution is the one that has worked.

With zero tariff on oil starting last month, we have curbed pump price increases to some degree. But refilling other taxes on oil and power will strip the vast majority of our people of the means to ride out the world food and energy crisis. In our discourse on the most effective solutions to our people’s travails, we will not agree on everything. It’s easy to understand why many would want to see taxes on oil and electricity removed but we have to carefully address some hard questions. If VAT on oil and power is lifted, how do we replace more than P70 million in revenues, mostly used to fund projects for the poor? VAT boosted investor confidence in recent years. From P56.50 to $1 the peso strengthened to P40.23 before the oil and rice imports brought it back to P45.55. Imagine, if without VAT our starting point was P55.00. Wouldn’t the removal of VAT erode confidence, lift exchange rates, lift interest rates and therefore raise cost anyway and slow down the economy?

Will scrapping VAT not be pro–rich who consume 84 percent of energy products . Isn’t it better to use the VAT collected mainly from the well-to-do for direct assistance to sectors hard-hit by rising global prices of food and fuel? Like for instance, this movement as Ito says, he’s been in the energy conservation movement for 13 years. And I remember the movement to switch to fluorescent has been there since 2005. It was supposed to be done last Christmas. It was supposed to be launched last January. Why did it take so long? Because we needed funds to be able to make the many who cannot otherwise afford the initial purchase, make them be able to afford it now. And that is the reason why as we launch this program, this is part of the fruits of the VAT collections on the additional price of oil in the first three months of this year of P4 billion. We allocated P1 billion of that to help 4 million poorest of the poor families pay their electric bills. We allocated half a billion to be able to help the transport sector shift to cheaper fuel like LPG, CNG and Biofuels. And we allocated another half a billion to be able to provide scholarships and student loans for college students whose families have to pay higher electric bills. And now for this Palit Ilaw we are allocating P500 million to fund the procurement of fluorescent bulbs.

We have come too far, made many sacrifices on the hard but wiser road taken to turn around now and give up enduring strengths for popular but counter productive short term gains. Yes, let us discourse, debate and without delay decide, but wherever our discourse leads let me assure our people of one thing, your government shall continue to harness all the resources at our command to help ordinary Filipinos pressured by cost and calamity like, helping them switch to fluorescent while still pursuing investments needed in our people, our infrastructures and our institutions.

National Fuel Conservation is now entrenched as a first principle of state craft. All government agencies have to reduce their energy bills by 10 percent. And as I said, for the Palit Ilaw project, half a billion pesos from the additional VAT revenue has been allocated with your help to encourage all Filipinos to replace their incandescent bulbs with fluorescent lights. We are starting by replacing the bulbs on streets, government offices, hospitals and other public places. And I am pleased that the mayors of Metro Manila are here today, as well as Congressman Binay of Makati who has shown support for the SWITCH program.

To those present and to our fellow citizens throughout the country, including the thousands of local government leaders who support the SWITCH and Palit Ilaw programs, to all of you, thank you very much. Let us switch fluorescent. Let us be for energy fluorescent.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). Speech of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo during the attendance to the launching of “Palit Bombilya” Electricity Conservation program of the Department of Energy (DOE). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412115909/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1608&Itemid=38