The assistance of Filipino workers abroad who need government support is a policy that our government will not violate. At any time, we do not turn our backs on doing everything possible to help expatriate Filipino workers who are suffering hardships.

In these trying times for the expatriate Filipino worker, the government should not be negligent. Our expatriate Filipino workers should be rewarded for the heroism they show. It is the government's moral duty and policy initiative to quickly respond to their immediate needs.

Currently, it is only a trickle of our overseas Filipino workers or expatriate Filipino workers that have lost their jobs because of the world financial crisis. In fact, some of these have already found new jobs. We have 200 Filipino workers on shipping companies coming back but they have left again or are leaving again because they have found new employment.

We are currently cooperating with some, over 100, who have lost their jobs in Taiwan to provide the following assistance: Here is our president of PhilHealth because they are being given PhilHealth cards for medical insurance; here is the vice president of SSS because we are also providing SSS cards; and, here is our Chairman and Director-General of TESDA, Buboy Syjuco, who has a very high approval rating, second to the highest, only a few points behind the highest in TESDA. Congratulations, Buboy! And what he brought, which is in your baskets, are scholarships from TESDA so that you can acquire new skills and hone your abilities, and so that you can compete anywhere in the world.

Now, the checks we gave are only for paying for the materials of the Technology and Resource Center or TRC, and here is our head of TRC who will provide training for you. This is not yet the livelihood assistance, the livelihood check is different, and that will be given after an assessment of what you plan to do to help you with your new livelihood. And that check, the next check, will be used to start businesses under our Emergency Livelihood Program.

These serve as programs that provide temporary assistance to expatriate Filipino workers who have lost their jobs. Your contribution to our country is very important, so it is only right that you receive the full and unconditional support of the government. While we are implementing a rapid response to your immediate needs, we are working on policies that are larger and more comprehensive to help our new heroes.

We will implement a full program of gratitude to our expatriate Filipino workers, to help those who are forced to return home because the countries where they work are currently being hit by an economic crisis whose intensity and scope are unimaginable.

The Department of Labor and Employment and OWWA will lead the implementation of this payback program of the government for expatriate Filipino workers. The first phase of this repayment program is the establishment of the Filipino Expatriate Livelihood Support Fund in the amount of 250 million pesos from OWWA, and if necessary, supported by government agencies that will lend money. Expatriate Filipino workers who have lost their jobs can get from this fund, a loan to help start a business, continue their studies or acquire skills, or for start-up capital in any livelihood activity.

The DOLE should immediately create the Implementing Guidelines.

The guidelines should be simple so that one can borrow immediately. Returning expatriate workers should not be subjected to complex and irrelevant regulations or red tape.

I have instructed the DOLE and OWWA to coordinate with government agencies, which is why they coordinated with the TRC for economy and investment to identify businesses that returning expatriates can venture into.

The second part of this reciprocity program is government support, which will be provided in full, to help returning Filipino workers find well-paying jobs. Two policies are included in this part:

First, the creation of jobs here in our country that can provide good income. Some of you said you are looking for jobs here.

Second, the intensive search for new markets abroad for our workers, including those working on ships.

And earlier, Secretary Nitoy Roque happily reported to me that over 100 lost their jobs in a factory in Taiwan, but Nitoy Roque said there are 1,000 jobs available in the hotel and restaurant industry of Bulgaria, so immediately four times the jobs are available compared to those you lost.

So, to avail of these services, I am directing the DOLE and OWWA to set up offices in all provinces or desks, which will match jobs to the skills, abilities and experience of the returning worker. There should also be constant online information about vacant jobs, and this information should be free to returning expatriates.

And for our returning expatriate Filipino workers who want to move to other countries where your knowledge and skills are needed, I order – in addition to Bulgaria where 1,000 jobs are immediately available in the hotel and restaurant industry – I have issued an Administrative Order that the Philippine Overseas Employment Administration should implement a marketing blitz to expand the market for Filipino expatriates.

So again, the government, even if it’s only a trickle of our workforce that’s coming back, the government will not sit idly and do nothing for our modern-day heroes in this time of great economic uncertainty.

The government will not abandon our modern-day heroes in this time of economic uncertainty.

We assure you of full and unequivocal support.

To all of you, our returning expatriate Filipino workers, good luck with your new step in your career path!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2008 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].