As Chairwoman Quisumbing said earlier, this year’s celebration of human rights is a milestone because the United Nations just launched a full year of activities to mark the 60th year of the Uiversal Dclaration of Hman Rghts. And we are very proud that the Philippines was one of the first signatories of that declaration.

In the spirit of the constructive interaction urged by the United Nations, we thank our international partners – represented by the diplomatic corps here – who have gone beyond just expressing concern about human rights issues in the Philippines but they have gone on to extend offers of cooperation and assistance to strengthen our capacities to address these issues.

We take the Alston report seriously today, as we did when it was made almost a year ago.

The history of our country is sadly marked by political violence from the left and the right. We expect to completely end this cycle of retaliation. No one should die because of their political beliefs.

We condemn any and all assassinations of activists and journalists. We have already interviewed groups of journalists as well as human rights activists. We stand in solidarity with their outrage.

We are following the recommendations of the Melo Commission, including the designation of special courts, expedited trials, as well as greater assistance to victims, and additional funding for more investigators.

As shown in our video, more than fifty cases are already in court. We are asking the courts to fulfill the Chief Justice's proposal for sixty days of uninterrupted trials.

And we have told our military, and if they have taken it to heart, that if there are rogue elements, they must be brought to justice. They know and we all know that no person is above the law in this nation. Whether a former president, a member of the military, or an average citizen, all men and women in this nation are equal before the law. The death of any Filipino in pursuit of their right to political expression violates human liberty.

But let it also be noted that terrorists like the Abu Sayyaf and armed communists are a threat to the sovereignty of the nation. And they must be checked once and for all.

We will continue to bring perpetrators to justice, work with congress to pass new laws to protect victims and jail criminals, and the other legislation as recommended by chairwoman Quisumbing and exhort the nation to leave behind its terrible legacy of political violence and clan vendettas.

Thankfully, as was dramatically shown in the video, political killings are way down this year. We have been meeting with success in the fight to put an end to the legacy of political violence in the Philippines. But we should not rest until we reach zero political violence.

The Presidential Human Rights Committee , mentioned in the video, chaired by Executive Secretary Ermita, is now mandated to begin activities necessary to bring all stakeholders in consultation for a national human rights action plan and program, which will set the roadmap for human rights work for the next five years.

We urge all sectors of our nation to participate.

The United Nations Country Team is supporting our national action plan. Thank you. And through its various agencies, helping us to promote the rights of children, women and other vulnerable sectors as described in our video. Japan, the U.S., New Zealand are working with our investigative and security sectors which protect our society from lawless elements. And we look forward to hearing soon from the European Union on the kind of assistance it can extend to us.

As we have said, we do not tolerate any form of human rights violation. But let us clarify a few things: as I said in the video, I am personally promoting the peace process in Mindanao to a new level of communication, focused on interfaith dialogue, economic development and security for all parties. Many countries are our partners in this. Peace in Mindanao is a human rights issue, as is liberation from poverty, which is our primary goal.

We are making progress in alleviating poverty which as is part of the theme today is closely intertwined with human rights. The rate of poverty is down. Employment is up. Our education and health care services to the poor have vastly improved. We have a long way to go, we know, but only through a strong economy can we improve the plight of the poor. To that end, we have turned the corner on our economy.

While we face short-term challenges in meeting our projections, for example in the BIR, our revenues are up this year compared to 2006. Our credit rating agencies recognize that the new revenue sources which congress passed in the last session are here to stay, that our budget will be balanced, and this is the reason why our stock market is up and the peso is strong. This allows us to invest in job creation, better health care and more educational opportunities. These are the keys to lifting the poor up. We are doing that in that magnitude for the first time in a generation. We are optimistic.

We envision the Philippines that is ready to reach first-world status in 20 years, when we will have dramatically reduced poverty, created a robust middle-class and have all the hallmarks of a modern society in strong, stable institutions. One of these institutions which we have all agreed that must be strengthened is the Commission on Human Rights.

And therefore, we endorse all the recommendations and request made by Chairperson Quisumbing earlier; measures that will protect its fiscal autonomy – which means that Secretary Ermita will have to transmit the appropriate instruction to the department of budget and management; measures that will strengthen its financial resources; measures that will give it quasi-judicial powers and this would be in the realm of legislation.

A strong and independent commission is vital to the protection and promotion of human rights. And we will ask the DBM to study how the savings of the Commission on Human Rights can be applied to other programs and salary augmentation rather than being returned to the National Treasury.

We can claim advances on human rights because the Philippines is the most democratic country in the region. The universal declaration of human rights underscores that all of us have a responsibility to respect, promote and protect human rights not only within our respective national borders but throughout the world.

We stated unequivocally at the United Nations in September and again in Singapore just a few weeks ago that Aung San Suu Kyi must be released now. The government there needs to deal with her as a genuine political force and move quickly toward a democratic path. For its part, now that ASEAN has taken tangible steps to be a true union, it must accept its responsibility to advance the cause of economic and social justice within its membership.

The Philippines places great value on our responsibilities in the world, from the ASEAN to the deployment of peacekeeping forces to countries with conflicts around the world. We are firm believer in our commitment to be a true global citizen to advance the cause of human rights, economic progress and mutual security to secure global peace. And we’re gratified that both the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special Rapporteur, Mr. Alston, have commended the Philippines for being a good international citizen, open to scrutiny on our human rights challenges.

Yes, we acknowledge the challenges. And today, we repeat our strong commitment to move onward and upward in our shared mission for human rights in the Philippines and in the world community.

Long live human rights!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches [of] Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].