Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During a Luncheon with the Foreign Correspondents Association of the Philippines (FOCAP)

[Delivered at Ballroom 1 and 2, Mandarin Oriental Hotel, Makati City, October 9, 2002]

Thank you Gabby.

Speaker De Venecia please join my table for lunch after my speech. Other members of Congress; Sonny Alvarez; I am not acknowledging any other member of the Cabinet because I tell them they should not make it a habit to follow me all the time where ever I go. Angie Reyes would have come though but he is defending his budget before Congress today. Members of the diplomatic corps; the men in uniform; members of FOCAP; officers; other media practitioners; ladies and gentlemen:

First of all to FOCAP and everybody else who were here last week, thank you for waiting one week for me. I apologize that I have a bout of pharyangitis last week ant that prevented me from speaking before you. The night before I was suppose to speak before you.

The night before I was supposed to speak before you in Zamboanga City, an American serviceman died in an explosion. So it’s Sgt. Mike Jackson was part of the contingent left behind after exercise Balikatan to complete humanitarian projects in Basilan. We will bring his killers to justice.

His death shall be a monument to the partnership is what I would like to speak about today. This partnership is especially important in our righteous fight against terrorism and poverty.

Today, the war against terrorism has reached another defining moment as the issue of Iraq sharpens in focus. It is a moment for the Philippines to calibrate, recalibrate its foreign policy so that we can continue to achieve our goals of peace, prosperity and stability in the context of the realities lying today in the international and regional environment.

When I first became president, a few days after I became president, before the diplomatic corps in my Vin D’Honneur in their honor, I enumerated these realities. It is my first foreign policy statement after becoming president a year and half ago.

Let me restate these realities today, emphasizing mainly the relationship between the Philippines and the United States.

One reality is that, more and more Philippines foreign policy decisions have really been made in the context of ASEAN. Thus, soon after September 11 last year, we initiated a trilateral agreement with Indonesia and Malaysia to check terrorist incursion in our common seas. Thailand has agreed to join this agreement.

Second, the international Islamic community will continue to be important for the Philippines. Thus, we continue to pursue broad inter faith dialogues to promote Christian and Muslim solidarity. In fact, this is among the programs of the Christian Democratic International of which Speaker de Venecia is a vice president.

Third, the coming years will see the growing importance of multilateral and inter regional organizations to promote common interests. We look forward to the strengthening of the United Nations for example. Thus, the Philippines supports the case brought by the United States against Iraq before the U.N. Security Council. The U.N. Security Council must give these charges the most urgent and serious consideration for the sake of the whole world.

Fourth, the defense of the nations’ sovereignty and the protection of its environment and natural resources can be carried out only to the extend it asserts its rights over maritime territory and gets others to respect those rights. Thus, though this is unrelated to the war against terrorism I am happy that the case against the Chinese fisherman has come to a satisfactory conclusion.

Fifth, our country’s economic growth will continue to heavily involve direct foreign investment. This, for instance, gives a strategic importance to our relations with Europe which is now a major investor in the Philippines.

Related to this sixth, a country like the Philippines can benefit most quickly from international tourism. Thus, we deplore that our bid to attract investments and tourism have been sabotaged by those who relish the notoriety brought about by barbaric acts such as hostage taking, political assassination, destruction of property and senseless murder.

Seventh, overseas Filipinos will continue to play a critical role in the country’s economic and social stability. Thus, even in the shadow of conflict in Iraq, it is our duty to all Filipinos in the Middle East to prepare for any contingency and to be able to move them to safer ground at a moment’s notice.

Finally, but of utmost importance, China, Japan and the United States and their relationships will be the determining influence in the security situation and economic evolution of East Asia.

By virtue of its dominant military and economic order the United States will continue to be an important factor in the affairs of the region and the nation.

The Philippines has had enduring historical, cultural and economic ties with the United States. The Philippines and the United States stood beside each other over a half a century of military cooperation. We fought together in the last World War. We helped maintain the strategic peace of the cold war. Our partnership was redefined with the closure of the military bases in 1992.

The current Philippine-US alliance is a moral partnership. This is a partnership governed by the common belief in strong democratic institutions that will create peace and freedom for people everywhere. We are determined to fight terrorism to the end. We have offered political, security and humanitarian assistance to the United States in the pursuit of her most vital interests against terrorism which coincide with our own.

Our strategic partnership reached a high point in the training exercise Balikatan 02-1. The tenacity of our soldiers coupled with the superior technological assistance of the United States ripened into the correct strategy that has severely decimated the Abu Sayyaf and kept them on the run.

This partnership is fully supported by our people. It is clearly shown in the polls. A minority thinks the Philippines is being slavish to American citizens, to American interests that is, but they do not see the point. Our motivation is not about pleasing America on this issue. Our motivation is, working with the world to save mankind against the perpetuation of terror. Maybe our critics have forgotten the horror of September 11. Maybe they believe that terrorism has gone away, it has disappeared. Maybe they believe that Osama Bin Laden and his cohorts have been reformed. The truth and reality is that we are at war. The whole world is at war with an enemy that is as tenacious and incorrigible as ever in its evil designs. In our own society, we have paid dearly for the persistence of violent groups.

Our efforts at modern democratic governance have been undermined by a climate of incessant conflict. Our determination to bring progress to our nation has been tested by fanatical armed groups who find every ideological excuse to block development. These include the terrorist in the radical left who have lost all moral force to lead any revolution for the poor.

In contrast, our moral partnership with America extends beyond military cooperation. Our strategic partnership with the United States enables our country to maintain political, social and economic stability and growth in an environment of uncertainty and unpredictability. It is a partnership that sustains the most important battles in our own land; the battles against poverty, ignorance, disease and social injustice.

In this pursuit, I met last year with President Bush in Washington. We agreed our military hardware and software for security and development operations. Mutually beneficial trade arrangement, tourism expansion, broader overseas employment for Filipinos, veterans’ welfare and direct assistance to Mindanao peace and development program.

The United States Agency for International Development is pouring in some P4 billion assistance to the Philippines for fiscal year 2002, more than half of which is for economic and social projects in Mindanao. This assistance to Mindanao is more than double what USAID provided that island last year.

The agency growth with equity in Mindanao program helps strengthen the competitiveness of Mindanao’s fishery, fruit and vegetables industries. It’s livelihood enhancement and peace program, or LEAPP, helps former MNLF fighters reintegrate into the local economy. There are already about 13,000 former MNLF fighters who have received such assistance under the program. And now USAID is ready to pilot the same program for the MILF starting with 300 returnees.

The USAID is likewise helping local governments in Mindanao to improve the quality of family planning and rural health services. Efforts are also being exerted to help local governments’ combat illegal fishing and logging.

The Bayanihan Assistance which runs from August 1 to December 31 this year aims to improve socio-economic conditions in Basilan and Zamboanga. This entails $2 Million for the construction of hospitals, medical clinics, school buildings, water wells and water treatment facilities.

The next Balikatan which will be held to August or October 2003 will involve the implementation of five security assistance training modules and the improvement of AFP competency on helicopter night flying capability, intelligence fusion, training of light infantry battalion and light reaction companies. These will be supported by some $25 million in military assistance from the United States, and as per my recommendation, it will be done back in the traditional camping grounds of Fort Magsaysay and other nearby camps like Tanay.

America is not only our strategic ally. She is also our largest export market. Cumulatively, she is our largest foreign investor. She is one of our largest tourist markets. She hosts the largest Filipino Community in the world.

The Philippines, therefore, is determined to push forward this relationship to a new era of stronger and more equitable partnership with the United States, a relationship that derive its main promise in greater security and stability for our nation, for the region and the world. We live in trying times. Close partnership and alliances are imperative for peace, security and democracy. This is the strategy of survival. This strategy stands on the determination to shape our relations with America in consonance with existing treaties with our shared goals, but most of all, with our Filipino interests.

Thank you therefore to our friends from FOCAP and the diplomatic community and our policy-makers and policy-implementors for listening to this recapitulation of our foreign policy mainly our policy on the United States.

Now, I’m ready for your questions. Thank You.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during a Luncheon with the Foreign Correspondents Association of the Philippines (FOCAP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210958/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8415&Itemid=38