Your Excellency the Right Honorable Jean Chretien, Prime Minister of Canada; Les Membres distingues du Gouvernement Canadien; Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps; Colleagues in the Philippine Government; les representants de la Communaute Economique; members of the Filipino Community in Canada; Mes Amis, Mesdames et Messieurs:

My visit today to this great country, Canada, is indeed a propitious occasion to renew strong friendly and historical ties. For more than a century, our relations have demonstrated growing dynamism.

In this regard, I am grateful to the Canadian government for its gracious invitation and warm welcome.

For more than a year, I have accepted the challenge of assuming the presidency of my country during a difficult period. I promised to restore the Filipino people’s trust in their government, to establish a truly democratic society, and to improve the quality of life of each of its members. I am happy today to note that we are on the verge of attaining our objective, despite the various problems posed by the global economic situation and those created by September 11th.

The economic prosperity of Canada is remarkable. Information and communications technology or ICT, which I learned is centered in Ottawa, is one of the major reasons for this. I hope that Canada can share its expertise towards the development of the ICT sector in the Philippines.

Although the Philippines was not spared from the effects of the global trends of 2001, we gained resiliency through maintaining economic fundamentals while pump-priming domestic demand. As a result, our GDP growth of 3.4 percent and GNP growth of 3.7 percent was among the highest in the world.

Our country’s growth relies on investments. This is where we look towards Canada and the international business community to spur the Philippine economy and to contribute to its long-term stability and security. And Mr. Prime Minister, I know that many Filipinos have investments in Canada, they have even residences in Canada. So it’s a two-way street.

Trade and investment between our two countries can and must be developed further. Canadian businesses can continue to take advantage of the best of both worlds — knowledge from Canada and capital from Canada and skilled human resources from the Philippines, the home of the great Filipino worker.

Stronger partnerships will make Canadian companies more profitable, while giving our country the benefit of high technology and greater economic activity.

Thus I have extended an invitation to His Excellency the Prime Minister to visit the Philippines in the near future and lead another team Canada mission, similar to those he led in 1995 and 1997.

There is no better proof of the skills of the great Filipino worker than the contributions of Filipino migrants to Canada. This wonderful country is the adopted home of, as His Excellency said, some 320,000 Filipinos who have either taken up citizenship or residency in Canada. We are proud of Rey and we are proud that many other Filipinos have contributed to the well-being, cultural diversity, and economic prosperity of this great country.

Our meetings today reinforced the excellent relations that have existed between our two countries since that historical point mention by his Excellency when Sunlife assurance of Canada established a branch in Manila in 1895.

It is always a great honor and privilege therefore for Filipinos and Filipino leaders like me to be in the company of our Canadian friends, and strengthening a friendship that began more than a century ago and that without doubt, will continue for many centuries more.

Allow me also to express the gratitude of all Filipinos for the continued assistance the Philippines receives from Canada. Through CIDA, Canada continues to be a partner in our development efforts through projects pursued in tandem with both government and the private sector.

Tomorrow, after meeting the business community in Ottawa and Toronto, and after meeting the Filipino community in Toronto, we shall leave Canada confident that the goodwill between Canadians and Filipinos is steadfast and secure.

In the spirit of friendship then, I ask you all to join me in a toast to the government and people of Canada, to the enduring bonds between the Canadian and Filipino people, to his Excellency the Prime Minister and Madame Chretien.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during a Dinner hosted by the Right Honourable John Cretien, Prime Minister of Canada and Mrs. Aline Chretien. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412231007/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7588&Itemid=38