Today, we celebrate the special partnership between the Philippines and Japan, on a very important sector of both our economies — the Filipino seafarers who work in Japanese vessels.

We are proud of Japan’s faith in the ability of Filipinos, particularly our seafarers and caregivers. The doors of Japan to Filipino caregivers will open, once the Philippine Senate ratifies the Japan-Philippines Economic Partnership Agreement. In the meantime, we have a robust partnership with regards to our seafarers who dominate the manpower on Japanese vessels. More and more Filipinos are becoming management level officers such as masters and chief engineers. And so that is another welcome development.

Most Filipinos are natural-born sailors. The country’s 7,000 plus islands with a total coastline of 18,000 kilometers, make our people comfortable with the sea. This inborn inclination and the great Filipino workers’ drive to excel in whatever he does, explain the country’s stature as the world’s manning capital. A quarter of our kababayans comprise 28 percent of the international maritime industry’s total workforce.

Our Japanese friends have acknowledged the superior quality of Filipino seamen. The 30,000 Filipinos working in Japanese ships comprise 80 percent of the total manpower complement of Japanese vessels.

Being the largest sector among our OFWs, seafarers also constitute a major factor in the rise of the Philippine economy, and contribute to the 14.4 billion-dollar remittances last year. Our seafarers are truly making waves in serving not only the nation but the world.

The rising remittances and the continued effectiveness of the economic reforms we have implemented for a few years now, have made 2007 a banner year in our economic history. We achieved 7.3 percent, the highest in more than three decades.

A strong and growing economy is the central pillar we have labored to create to help guarantee peace, order and stability in our economy. This is our motivation for getting up everyday to work hard and focus like a laser beam to fix our economy. We have made tough and unpopular decisions to raise revenues and crackdown on tax cheats, so that we could invest in our physical infrastructure and in our people.

We are reinvesting the gains of our growth in people. People-oriented programs, for instance, to further hone the skills and talents of Filipinos. We are making sure the marginalized have better chances to acquire relevant and adequate skills training.

We would have to spend a lot more on seafarers and marine officers training if we did not have the Filipino and Japanese private sector. So, we thank the Japanese shipowners and their Filipino partners who not only employ Filipino seamen, but who also aggressively invest in maritime education and training of Filipinos. Our Japanese-backed maritime schools and training centers contribute, superior as they are, to ensure that the Philippines will continue to be the undisputed manning capital of the world.

Furthermore, the Japan Seamen’s Union and its Filipino counterpart, the Associated Marine Officers and Seamen’s Union of the Philippines headed by Captain Gregorio Oca, attend to the well-being of Filipino seafarers, not only in ensuring that their wages are competitive and good for their families, but also by providing social facilities like the hospitals located in Manila, Cebu, Iloilo and Davao, housing projects for seafarers plus a world-class maritime school, the Maritime Academy of Asia and the Pacific. Do we have some of the cadets from there?

I also thank the Japan Seamen’s Union, which is dominated by Filipinos, that’s why they always allow me to use their facilities as a venue when I want to meet the Filipino workers in Tokyo.

Any way you measure it, Japan-Philippine relations have never been stronger. Aside from the human link provided by Filipino seafarers and officers on Japanese vessels, there has been a welcome influx in Japanese tourists, an impressive upswing in Japanese direct investment. We only need to remember, for instance, Marubeni and Tokyo Electric who have invested about four billion dollars in our power sector or Sumitomo which has invested almost a billion dollars in our mining sector, Toyota which has put up additional facilities in our country, and so many other Japanese contributions. And very importantly, Japan is making a major contribution to peace and stability in Mindanao.

We thank the Japanese investors when we bring in investments and create jobs, our people have a more stable and predictable life. With more investments come more revenues in taxes that can be invested in schools, roads and bridges as well as health care, education and the environment. And over time, everyone will benefit.

Yet we are aware that no matter how much improvement there is at the top of the economic ladder, many of our people still struggle mightily. And we are deeply aware that many hardworking Filipinos work hard every day just to put food on their table and provide adequate shelter for their families. And furthermore, we are aware that many of these hardworking Filipinos find their way to Japanese vessels.

And so we thank you, shipowners, investors in maritime training, investors in the manning industry for preparing our youth for a better future as world-renowned seafarers and officers.

Congratulations! Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: Adamson University Library