We hold this assembly in the midst of our continuing gains in keeping terror at bay, drastically reducing insurgency and advancing the cause of peace. In all security fronts, Region 8 has been at the vanguard. Congratulations!

The regional crime rate continues to drop. The AFP has dismantled several guerilla fronts of the Eastern Samar Regional Party Committee. Insurgents have been taken into account, including ranking operatives; and barangays have been removed from rebel control.

We are near declaring the provinces of Leyte and Southern Leyte as insurgent-free.

For over three decades, this region was the cradle of the communist movement that spread throughout the country, but not any more.

Through the end of my term, we aim to provide increased political stability, continued economic growth and sustainable peace and order. We will not let the nation slip into election year instability. We want this to be an era of peace, reassurance and hope.

The people can be assured that we lead with a steady hand to guide the nation to a new election and new leadership. We will not falter in keeping our hand on the tiller of the ship of state.

Our goal is to leave this nation stronger and more stable. To provide even more jobs and build more and better schools. And to lift up the poor through investments in infrastructure, healthcare, better housing and improved social justice.

Eradicating poverty is the central mission of this government and our society. As we enter the holiday season, it is essential that every person of means help those in need. The government is going to do everything in its power to be a catalyst for this process.

Rice is not only a staple for our people, it is symbolic of our ability to deliver on our promise to feed those less fortunate. We are committed to ensuring that the needy throughout our nation have access to affordable rice during this important holiday season.

We can’t say that we have moved forward as a nation if we don’t lift up the poor and hungry amongst us. Let us be a society measured by our ability to live by our faith.

Our long term vision is for the Philippines to reach the verge of first world in 20 years. To do so, we will need a robust middle class, world class infrastructure and strong institutions of government.

The Naval and Maripipi RORO ports in Biliran have been completed. Eight airports in the region are undergoing improvements, including Tacloban, Ormoc and Calbayog.

Yet in the near term, we must address the very real issues of hunger and poverty that affects us here and now.

Those living in poverty have declined.

From the 1970s through the latter part of the 1990s Region 8’s provinces ranked among the poorest in the country. Only in this decade, in this administration, was a breakthrough achieved for the region’s sustainable development. Your regional employment rate this year has reached 95.3%, higher than the national average. None of your provinces belong to the ten hungriest or 10 poorest provinces.

But we must accelerate the trend to eliminate poverty more aggressively. That is why, during the holiday season and beyond, we will do everything in our power to bring rice to those who need it most and work hard to protect the poor from high prices.

For the easy transport of agricultural products, farm to market roads have either been built or are being completed. Some LGUs like Ormoc City have added to the national government’s assistance for agriculture and achieved a surplus in rice production. Congratulations!

I am instructing the National Food Authority to set up 100 Tindahan Natin outlets in Region 8 before Christmas.

The people want results, not rhetoric, action not political posturing. Let us get on with the people’s work.

The people of the Philippines are tired of negative political rhetoric.

I thank our Congressmen here for demonstrating that when it sets aside self-interest it can produce legislation that improves the quality of life of all Filipinos. The most notable recent example is the bill that reduces the cost of life-giving medicines.

But much more needs to be done to improve human rights, secure budgets for healthcare and education, invest more in peace and order and advance our national interests with other nations on trade, economy and security issues.

Thank you all for what you have done for peace and progress in Region 8. United, we will do even more.

Good day and welcome!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). 3rd Regional Peace and Security Assembly (Leyte-Samar), Tacloban City. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140014/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2287&Itemid=38