Thank you.

Thank you Secretary Reyes and welcome to DILG on your first day of work as DILG Secretary.

His Eminence Cardinal Vidal. Thank you so much for your contribution to the anti-drug campaign in addition to your many contributions to the improvement of Philippine society.

General Ebdane, Chief PNP; General Aglipay, Commander of the Special Task Force against Drugs. Men and women of the Philippine National Police, awardees of different plaques of merits and recognition, government officials, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. And also our elected officials, especially our vice mayors.

I sincerely congratulate the Philippine National Police Anti-Illegal Drugs Special Operations Task Force on the celebration of your first anniversary and our awardees today, led by our beloved Cardinal, His Eminence Cardinal Vidal. Your dedication to the performance of your duty, which has yielded many successes in a very short period of time, is undeniable.

We saw in the presentation of General Aglipay your outstanding accomplishments. Well, I’m want to repeat all of them but just to point out how successful you were in taking down 239 local drug groups since last year. Congratulations for a job well done. Along with these, big manufacturers and distributors have been put out of business. Victims have been rehabilitated. And all these, within the rule of law. The rule of law is indispensable to our fight for change. And I’m glad to be able to come here and face you today with the fresh mandate and the will to confront all crimes and forces that threaten our political and economic security.

We have brought together critical government agencies at all levels to do the job. The interlocking web of drug syndicates cannot withstand your resolve.

The theme of your anniversary, “Ang bayang iwas droga, bida sa matatag nga republika,” points the way indeed to a drug-free Philippines in the year 2010. I instruct you gentlemen and ladies of the task force optimize your consolidated capacity, exploit all opportunities, go beyond traditional approaches but all is within legal bounds, and pursue seamless operations. With what you are doing, let us aim that drug syndicates will live in an environment of zero tolerance. Not only within the Philippines but also internationally, we will secure our shores and borders against the entry of illegal drugs not only by direct interception at sea and in the airports, but by strengthening the vigilance of our local government units.

We must work together with the LGUs and I’m glad to have the vice mayors of Metro Manila here, we must work together to strike at the source of illegal drugs, not only in our localities but also in other parts of the world. We must work together therefore with our friends in China and India. We must also enable, through close operational liaison, to carry out our agreements with Myanmar, Laos and Iran against the illicit traffic in drugs. And I’m glad that you have elicited the support of the NGOs civil society. We will sustain our partnership with civil society in drug abuse, prevention, education and rehabilitation.

Because though driven deep underground, drug laboratories, clandestine laboratories and chemical warehouses continue still to mix the deadly brew, drug dealers and pushers continue still to ply the deadly trade. And we want to have a moral society, we must address this. It is immoral for any society to stand by while the agents of ruin terrorize our youth, undermine our political stability and jeopardize the social order. The root causes of illegal drugs are well known — poverty and corruption — corruption both public and private — as well as other socio-economic dislocations and dysfunctions that rend social cohesion and family life.

In this light, therefore, relevant to our drug campaign is the pro poor agenda that I have pledge to lift up our poorest and provide them with dignity and hope which are the best antidotes to drug abuse.

When I was vice president of the Philippines, I couldn’t help but symphatize and feel so sorry for the little streetchildren who were all sniffing the rugby. And I asked them why are you doing that, because they said, one peso worth of rugby can kill the hunger the one peso or more or ten pesos worth of, or twenty pesos worth of a sandwich can do which they cannot afford. It’s also important for our youth that they learn again the values that they need to learn nor to live life as adults. I have found out in my going around the country and putting up daycare centers, etcetera that we no longer have religious instruction in schools. When I was in high school, I used to teach religion, catechism to the grade school children. But now that system is gone supposedly in the name of the separation of church and state. I don’t think that’s the meaning of the separation of church and state.

And that is why, I would like to instruct our department of education to allow NGOs of various religions to teach values formation once again in our public schools.

To all of you, ladies and gentlemen of the task force, you have my full support and I shall continue to drive the momentum you have created.

Congratulations! Salamat at mabuhay! Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 1st Anniversary of the PNP Anti-Illegal Drugs Special Operations Task Force. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133350/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5686&Itemid=38