Thank you, Secretary Teodoro.

Troop Commander, give ‘Tikas pahinga.’

General Ibrado, our new Chief of Staff; General Yano, our recently retired Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces; other officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; members of the Diplomatic Corps; members of the civilian officialdom; Bishop Tumulac; our other guests; the great Filipino Soldier:

Every day of this year is Labor Day. Since the recession in America occurred and a global economic crisis ensued, we have been pouring our efforts every day to rescue and create jobs for the Filipino worker.

So today, May the 1st is the occasion for the nation to celebrate the resiliency of our economy that has so far protected us from the worst of the global recession and allowed us so far to continue to grow. The skills and talents of our workers at home and abroad are confounding the gloomy forecast of pessimists, as they continue to seek out ever more jobs. And may I say at this time that among the jobs available to the great Filipino worker are jobs in the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

We salute our great Filipino worker for remitting more funds to our shores, for sustaining the hopes of our country and the dreams of their families. Yes, we honor the Filipino worker today.

A grateful government pledges its unwavering support to the great Filipino worker and the bright future that our workers are building for our country.

Today, we also honor a particular sector of the working class — the great Filipino soldier. As General Yano calls it, calls him or her, the ‘Kawal Pilipino’ — the men and women of the Armed Forces of the Philippines who continuously demonstrate their devotion to duty and to our Constitution. Our military men and women are good, upstanding and loyal patriots, fighting to protect our country everyday.

We honor the great Filipino soldier for being ready to make the supreme sacrifice in war, as well as for exemplifying the spirit of sacrifice that uplifts people in times of needs and succor. In honor of the great Filipino soldier, our administration has invested heavily in new and better equipment, more training, more cooperation with our allies to professionalize our military. We have invested in higher pay, more housing, better healthcare, better force protection.

So it is in this special regard that on top of his many achievements enumerated in the citation on the legion of honor, enumerated in the invocation of Bishop Tumulac, enumerated in his own tour-of-duty report, enumerated in the tributes paid by his successor. In addition to all this, I applaud our recently retired General Alexander Yano because as fiercely as he fought the enemies of the State, he worked just as passionately to secure the well-being of the ordinary soldier and to give former rebels a chance, a second chance to live in peace, a second chance to be part of the great Filipino workforce.

To modernize and strengthen his revered Armed Forces of the Philippines, Alex Yano focused on improving the life of the ordinary soldier. He was the one who proposed to me the issuance of sleeping bags and prepaid cellular cards to the soldiers fighting in the wilderness of Lanao and Cotabato. These benefits, funded by the value-added tax were soon followed by scholarships for soldiers’ children and financial assistance for parents of military men, the senior citizens, parents of the military men assigned to the field.

More benefits were provided during the tenure of General Yano not only to the soldiers fighting in Mindanao, but also to every man and woman in the Armed Forces of the Philippines. With his frequent reminders, the Department of Health continued the rehabilitation of military hospitals. The housing program for soldiers proceeded with the highest priority given to families of soldiers killed or severely wounded in action.

As the only son of Mindanao so far to be named Chief of Staff, General Yano applied his knowledge of the intricacies of the conflict in Mindanao and went all out in support of the peace process through the various developmental and cultural integration programs, as well as through the efforts and successes of the fighting kawal Pilipino.

And now General Yano will continue to pursue peace in Mindanao as our next Ambassador to Brunei Darussalam. (Applause) General Yano, if he were to retire on his birthday, would not be able to reach the confirmation of the Commission on Appointments because that would have happened after the Congress adjourns sine die. Therefore, upon recommendation of the Foreign Affairs Secretary, his retirement from the military was advanced by a few weeks in order to have sufficient time for his confirmation, hopefully, before Congress adjourns in early June. He has had smooth-sailing in previous confirmations in the Commission on Appointments. And I hope this one will be just as smooth and so that soon enough, we will be able to congratulate Alex as the next ambassador to Brunei Darussalam. (Applause)

Once again Alex, congratulations and thank you for all that you have done in the Armed Forces and for the great Filipino soldier.

Now we welcome the former Commanding General of the Philippine Army, Victor Ibrado, as our new Chief of Staff. This member of PMA Class of 1976 and holder of a Master’s degree in Public Administration is one of the most bemedalled of our soldiers.

There is one important thing going for our new Chief of Staff — the respect and admiration of the ordinary Filipino soldier. From the lowest ranks to the top brass, our soldiers whom I consulted have all given their vote of confidence to General Ibrado, who is well-known for his fairness and collegial style of decision-making as well as his excellent commanding skills in the field. (Applause)

I expect General Ibrado to build on the gains of his predecessors, not only on the military front, and we have heard his no-nonsense declarations of what he intends to do on the military front. But I also expect him to build on the work of his predecessors especially with regard to the soldiers’ welfare. I hereby instruct General Ibrado, along with the heads of civilian agencies, to do the following:

First, implement the shuttle service for government employees. Well, I know the soldiers have their shuttle service, but the civilian employees in the Armed Forces, in the Defense Department, and the other departments of the Philippine government should likewise have a similar service.

Second, financial subsidy and other needed support to make the Botika ng Bayan more accessible to government employees, including our soldiers in the various military camps.

Third, more scholarships for the children and siblings of government employees, including those of our soldiers.

And fourth, implementation of PX markets and provision of seed fund so that we can have them all over not only in the military camps but in the various large agency offices.

I count on General Ibrado to do this within the Armed Forces not only using the budget of the Armed Forces but also to harness the Filipino spirit and commitment to caring to prompt those who benefit from peace and security provided by the Armed Forces; for instance, the business community and the NGOs, many of which have been enumerated by General Yano. For all of them, I count on General Ibrado to inspire and to count their blessings and give back to those who are less fortunate among our ordinary Filipino soldiers.

Bong Ibrado, you have talked about the great challenges that faced you, but with your background, with your character, with the support of the great Filipino soldier, with the support of all the civilians who have learned to care for and to take care of our Filipino soldiers, I have faith that you can hurdle all the challenges of the times and in your unique way make a difference in our shared goals of peace and prosperity.

Once again, to you Bong, congratulations and best wishes! To you, Alex, congratulations and may you have the same success in the next stage of your career.

And to you, the valiant Filipino worker, Filipino soldier, thank you very much.

Congratulations to all of you!

Thank you. (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) Change of Command Ceremony. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412103149/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=24940&Itemid=38