First of all, congratulations and thank you to the DOTC for the quick response to the order to help jeep drivers and other public vehicle drivers during this time of the sudden increase in oil and other commodity prices around the world, not just in the Philippines.

The successive increases in oil prices come from the global market. At this point in world history, with the rapid increase in global fuel and food prices coupled with the rising frequency and intensity of disasters, the Philippines needs to take control of our own destiny. We must become more self-reliant and self-sufficient.

In this new and uncertain time, we must navigate uncharted waters.

As we ponder the weighty issues we face, the first imperative is to listen. To listen to the cry of our people for succor and support. To ponder the call of well-meaning sectors for longstanding policies to be reviewed. And to lend our ears to one another’s insights and ideas, united by a singular wish to ease the pains and address the concerns of ordinary Filipinos.

We have been listening, pondering, lending our ears, and taking needed actions, harnessing all the resources at our command.

To give relief to the millions of our poor burdened by escalating world rice prices, we have maintained NFA rice at 18.25, and to do that we have spent eight billion pesos and counting. In Thailand, rice is 56 pesos per kilo, in Vietnam 67, and that's where we buy it. Indonesian rice with subsidy is 25.30 and Malaysia is twenty-seven. So our price is lower whether commercial or NFA. Either we are all good countries at handling the global crisis, or we are just as bad as each other.

For jeepney drivers and commuters squeezed by the quadrupling of diesel’s cost, we are fighting kotong and colorum to boost driver’s income while keeping fare increases to the cost of one text message per ride.

Last month, we were together again, we released four billion pesos from the collection of value-added tax on oil — two billion for the payment of electricity for four million poor people and one billion as scholarships and loans to 70,000 poor students. We released that, together, half a billion loans to replace the engines of public vehicles with more fuel-efficient LPG, CNG or biofuel engines. And as I understand it, this forum is a follow-up to that.

With biofuels, upland farmers also stand to benefit from jatropha seedling propagation or planting. There are already 900 hectares in Tamlang Valley in Negros Oriental, 500 in Fort Magsaysay, 200 in Camarines Sur, one hundred in General Santos City — which I will visit on July 21st — 60 hectares in Narra, Palawan, 40 for TRICAP — the indigenous people in Cagayan de Oro, 14 hectares in Bohol, 5 hectares in Cadiz in Negros Occidental.

Later, half a billion will be launched to replace incandescent bulbs with more energy-efficient fluorescent bulbs for markets, schools, hospitals, government buildings, roads, homes and traffic lights. I will go there from here, Mayor Peewee Trinidad is already there because she is also a participant there.

From the next collection of VAT collected from April to June, there is an additional one billion for the payment of electricity for the poor and — I am using this opportunity to launch — half a billion in capital to be loaned to housewives and family members of jeepney and bus drivers and conductors.

To put more money in poor people’s pockets, our programs include more aggressive microfinance. Cumulative loan releases to low and middle income men and women who want to start or expand their own businesses have reached a102 billion pesos or 36 times more than the P2.8 billion we started with in 2001. Some of the institutions involved are the Land Bank with a loan portfolio of P69 billion; People’s Credit and Finance Corporation, P8 billion; National Livelihood Support Fund, P3 billion; DBP one billion and DSWD’s SEA-K, P800 million. And before big banking raises an eyebrow, let me say that the repayment rate is 98 percent. Kaya malakas ang loob nating magpahiram sa mga maybahay at kapamilya ng mga tsuper at konduktor.

So today, I take this opportunity to direct all government-owned-and-controlled financial institutions and corporations currently involved in grassroots microfinancing to craft a special, easily accessible, half a billion peso microfinancing program for the wives and the immediate family members of drivers and conductors of public utility vehicles such as PUJs, PUBs, taxis and FX, to be funded from additional VAT revenues resulting from the high price of oil.

I am also enjoining, thru Cerge Remonde who is in touch with them, private-run microfinancing institutions to carry out a similar microfinancing program with the wives and immediate family members of drivers and conductors of public utility vehicles as target beneficiaries.

We need to find different ways during times of trial. The microloan program for housewives and families of public transport workers offers a new and different response. We hope this will add to their family income and not rely solely on the single income of the driver or conductor in the family.

We also hope that this microfinance program will foster the entrepreneurial spirit that we are promoting for the growth of the national economy. Housewives and families of transport workers know the ebb and flow of street-level livelihood as consumers of products funded by outsiders and often sold on installment plans, in schemes defined by their own jargon — “two gives,” isn't that what it's called? Two gives or even more.

Two types of livelihood can benefit from the microloan: capital for selling products currently being purchased by indebted families, or capital for them to produce those things themselves.

The microloan program for beneficiary families will yield a great deal of economic activities and blessings. And hopefully, it will also reduce the repeated increase in fares every time the price of crude oil rises, which burdens our commuters.

In the coming days, we will also launch half a billion pesos to increase the capacity and equipment of small provincial hospitals, turning those primary care hospitals into secondary care hospitals so they can have delivery caesarians, simple surgery.

For calamities, we will allocate an appropriate amount for Panay and other islands hit by Typhoon Frank.

Balancing the budget this year would have been a nice target for our fiscal turnaround. But amid the call to review economic policies, we have in fact done our review months ago. Even then we said that we may need to forego the pleasure of a balanced budget in the present global environment. We announced our willingness to spend as much as 75 billion pesos if necessary on social welfare. But if things improve next year, we will return to our target.

In short, we hear the complaints and calls of the ordinary citizen, and we are responding, using the growing coffers of the nation.

The global crises did not catch us unprepared or without reserves. Thank God and thank to the Value-Added Tax.

We took hard decisions, hard on our people, unpopular with big business — but good for the country, as events have shown without doubt.

We raised new revenues from bold fiscal reforms: more money for more and better roads, ports and other infrastructures. With more money, we spent a lot on health and education. We spent a lot to train and retrain a growing workforce. And because we prepared for it, we have been able to shield our nation from the worst effects of the food and fuel crises worldwide.

Our 56 percent energy self-sufficiency is the highest in Philippine history. We are promoting, as we are doing here today, natural gas for transport; we are promoting geothermal steamfields, which are among the largest in the world; we are promoting windmills like those in Ilocos and Batanes; we are promoting solar power that lights up many communities in Mindanao even today.

The new Galoc oil field should produce 17,000 to 22,000 barrels per day, eight percent of our daily oil consumption.

The Renewable Energy Bill has passed the House. It is now up to the Senate.

And so therefore on this day, as we have this forum on alternative fuels, and as we launch the microfinance for the wives and immediate families of public utility drivers and conductors, let me assure our people of one thing: your government shall continue to harness all the resources at our command to help ordinary Filipino families pressured by cost and calamity, at the same time, we continue to build a better tomorrow.

Thank you very much to everyone who is helping our cause.

Thank you.

Source: Adamson University Library