Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During a State Banquet

[Delivered at the International Conference Center, Hanoi, Socialist Republic of Vietnam, November 6, 2002]

His Excellency President Tran Duc Luong; other officials of the Vietnamese government; ladies and gentlemen:

Thank you, your Excellency for your graciousness and for your generous hospitality accorded to our delegation. On this day, we raise to a higher plane with the ties of friendship and cooperation that will then fuse relations between our respective nations and peoples.

The Philippines prides itself in being one of the first to establish diplomatic relations with Vietnam in 1976. It is also a customer of Vietnam because Vietnam is a principal supplier of Filipinos rice imports. It is also an investment for Vietnam because 21 important businessmen in my country has put up factories here in Vietnam.

Your Excellency’s State Visit to the Philippines on this same month last year was a giant step forward in our friendship. It reaffirmed our close and traditional fronts that hopefully my visit will also make stronger.

Vietnam’s struggle for independence was a historical requiem of the post world war ii period. Today, Vietnam’s political consolidation and economic recovery makes us all admire you in greater measure. We are proud to be your allies in ASEAN and your partners in the larger realm of world peace, security and prosperity.

I am deeply impressed by the great strides achieved under your government’s ‘doing our way’ drive over the past 16 years. Your people have shown the will and capacity to maintain political stability, master and develop productive forces in the economy and improve living standards. We welcome these developments as a boon to more efficient trade and business activity which has made the way for Vietnam’s integration into the regional and global economy.

You have our best wishes for your sustained success. I am here in Vietnam on your invitation as part of the continuing journey that brought me to the APEC Leaders Meeting in Mexico last week and to the 8th ASEAN Summit in Phnom Penh which ended yesterday. Our agenda follows a common pledge to the economy and security of our region.

The Philippines and Vietnam are neighbors separated only by the sea, the South China Sea. Our two countries are firm in our commitments to work within ASEAN in pursuing a strategy to achieve competitiveness while attaining sustainable growth and development.

In the same day, our two countries are steadfast in our common abhorence of all forms of terrorism extremism. I would like to assure you that the Philippines is intensifying our efforts to crush the cause of terrorism within our territory and across our common seas in the region in cooperation with the other states.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity in behalf of the more than 500 Filipinos in Vietnam, in behalf of the Filipino investors in Vietnam, some of whom are here tonight, my gratitude to the Vietnamese government for its hospitality to our overseas workers and to our investors. I am proud to note that these Filipinos are contributing in their own way to Vietnam’s national development efforts.

May I invite all of you, excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen to a toast to the good health of President Tran Duc Luong, to the prosperity of the Vietnamese people, and to the lasting friendship and mutual cooperation within the Philippines and Vietnam.

Mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during a State Banquet. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210551/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8483&Itemid=38