Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the launch ceremony of the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB) of their Transportation Modernization Program: “Modern Vehicles for Health and the Environment”

Thank you very much, Secretary Mendoza for your introduction. And to you, Tom Lantion and all those working at the DOTC and also at the LTFRB, happy 21st anniversary!

You may all be seated.

Secretary Reyes; Secretary Limcaoco who is here; our congressmen who are present: Mikey, Congressman Roxas and Congressman San Luis and the father of the Biofuels Act, Migz Zubiri; our host here in Pasay City, Mayor Peewee Trinidad; our host here in this building, Mr. Hans Sy; various businessmen, investors, drivers, workers who are part of the very important transportation industry, to all of you also, happy 21st anniversary to the LTFRB. Because you are all stakeholders here. Oh! I should also greet the chairman of the Biofuels Corporation, Rene Velasco.

As Tom Lantion said, this anniversary of the LTFRB is being celebrated at a time, and according to Migz Zubiri, that we have built a strong Philippine economy, which helps us face the challenge of the global surge in food and oil prices. And this economy we have built is bearing fruit, in 2007 we reached the strongest growth of our economy in thirty years, because the peso is strong — and I saw it in the newspaper yesterday — investment doubled in the first three months of this year, and we are close to balancing the budget.

As a result of this economic revitalization, we are able to invest in your key sectors to cushion the blow of the rising cost of rice and crude oil on the poor. We allocated four billion pesos from the value-added tax on oil to fund various programs we call “Katas ng VAT.”

This energy, like food, is a global issue and a large part of what can be done is beyond the capacity of one government. Nevertheless, we are providing selective relief for crude oil and oil focused on those most in need. And you are those who drive and operate vehicles.

We are promoting strict measures to conserve energy and rely more on our own energy sources through investments such as natural gas, our own oil, biofuels — there’s the law of Migz Zubiri, the renewable energy that is about to become law of Migz Zubiri and my son Mikey, they both have the name Juan Miguel — renewable energy is what they are called.

Recently, we were fortunate to begin oil production, as well as oil from Galoc, right, Angie? In the sea, west of the country, which will increase the country's crude oil production to ten percent of our consumption. So that is also our luck or blessing.

But we also congratulate Migz and Congressman San Luis not only for the Biofuels Law but because they are with the members of the Laguna Biofuels Development Cooperatives — where are you? Ha, it doesn't seem like they came. Are they in the back, where are you? There! There! Okay — who will ensure that we will have additional biodiesel production from jatropha in the future.

We are pleased that the Laguna Biofuels Development Cooperative, together with U.P. Los Baños — are our people from U.P. here? They are there. Congratulations to you! — are actively preparing to expand jatropha. And a launching was recently held for the cooperative, U.P., Migz and Egay, and Congressman San Luis said he will put up farm-to-market roads so that the jatropha will be closer to the delivery points, so thank you very much Congressman San Luis.

As a fund from the VAT and the Vehicle Pollution Control Fund, we are launching today a one billion peso fund, a one billion peso loan to jeepney drivers and other public vehicle operators to switch engines to use LPG, compressed natural gas and other alternative vehicle fuels that are much cheaper than gasoline and diesel.

Your servant has tasked the Department of Energy together with the DOST, DTI, and DOTC to oversee the shift or conversion to alternative fuels from fossil fuels towards the implementation of Migz Zubiri’s Biofuels Act. That’s what we’re doing now. Because if… for example, the government vehicles, 20 percent — Angie, right? — of all government vehicles should be converted. And you drivers, you need to as well not only because of the order but also so you can still see because if you don’t convert, the price of oil is really too high.

Now, it costs up to two hundred thousand pesos to change engines, up to 70,000 pesos to buy a conversion kit, up to 550,000 pesos to buy a new jeepney that already uses alternative fuels, so the government will help you. Our target is to convert ten thousand jeepneys, as well as buses and taxis. That’s why I’m happy that the leaders of our transport industry are here, not just jeepneys, buses and taxis. And this fund will be loaned by the Development Bank of the Philippines. And I said, not just DBP, Larry, but the Postal Bank should also be allocated funds so you can choose, you can borrow from DBP, you can borrow from Postal Bank where it is closer, more convenient for you.

With the savings from LPG, CNG or biofuel, you can pay off the loan, and these banks may even lend to other drivers so they can also save. As Larry said, the payment is your boundary of 80 pesos per day that you will pay for the loan. So, that’s what we’re doing to make the payment easier. Where can you find a loan where the payment is only 80 pesos per day if you borrow 200,000? And not only that, it’s interest-free, so maybe you can pay it off little by little over two years. So, within two years, all of that is yours.

So we congratulate the jeepney and bus drivers, you are the first to receive these benefits. Congratulations to all of you! But not just congratulations, thank you, I read in the newspaper earlier about the statement that the request to increase fares will no longer be pursued. Thank you very much.

In addition to that, we have instructed Energy Secretary Angie Reyes to suppress the extortion and illegal collections, because I heard that up to four thousand pesos are being deducted from the driver's income each month by illegal collectors and extortionists. Imagine, if that were gone, it would be easier for you to pay off your debts.

In the past few weeks, we have also launched other VAT benefits. We started the first VAT benefit program with the launch of Pantawid Kuryente, which is a five hundred peso assistance for those who consume no more than 100 kilowatts per month. We expect four million families to benefit from the two billion pesos allocated to this program — VAT Benefit: Pantawid Kuryente. You have your own — VAT Benefit: Pantawid Pasahe.

We also allocated a VAT benefit for students amounting to one billion pesos — half a billion as scholarships for the poor, and half a billion as loans for small expenses. The scholarships are intended for those studying courses needed to boost food production such as agriculture and fisheries. Meanwhile, under the SAFE 4 SR (Student Assistance Fund for Education for a Strong Republic) program, students in their third, fourth or fifth year of study for a diploma can borrow eight thousand pesos per semester for their uniforms, their toga or whatever it is.

Therefore, we tirelessly strive to address the challenges brought about by the weakening of the world economy and the rise in oil and food prices. These global forces severely impact the poor.

So our message today, on the 21st anniversary of the LTFRB, is this: the government will do everything it can to continue the economic upliftment that we have begun.

To all of you, Mabuhay! And may your progress continue.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). PGMA’s Speech during the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB) Launching Ceremony of its Transport Modernization Program: “Modern Vehicles for Health and the Environment”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412121335/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1560&Itemid=38