Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Secretary Cabral.

Thank you very much, Chairperson Angping, Congresswoman Angping; Undersecretary Padilla; our industry leaders; our ‘Saver Generics,’ not just our mascot, but also the industries that produce generics. Congratulations! to all of you.

A healthy and happy day!

We are here to support the DOH program in promoting the use of generics, as part of our program for low-priced medicines that are often bought by the public. This Saver Generics, calls the public's attention to the benefits of generic medicines that are just as effective but much cheaper than branded medicines.

Since the year 2001 until now, we have achieved many successes in the health sector, especially when it comes to the price of medicines and health services. The Generics Drug Law has been a law for over twenty years, but in our administration, that's when generics really became popular in our country. There are now many pharmaceutical companies that manufacture generics, they are probably all here now. Congratulations to all of you!

So the generics industry has come a long way in our administration, like many things that the Philippines has achieved since January 2001. Thank goodness time has erased many memories of a very turbulent time, less than ten years ago, when the country was on the brink of extreme political turmoil and financial loss.

The economy was stuck in recession. There were no investors, very few jobs were created. The public sector debt was larger than our GDP. There was almost no dollar in the treasury.

For the people, a time of fewer jobs, lower income, and high price increases. Because the government's income is insufficient, there is insufficient investment to expand health care.

In this disheartening scene we entered. I did not pursue the Presidency in 2001; it fell from the sky. Rather than abandon the heavy work, we rolled up our sleeves, wholeheartedly to steer the Philippines anew.

We were focused like a laser beam on delivering real results to improve the lives of the ordinary Filipino. As an economist, I know that to recover from years of economic downturn, we need to impose fiscal discipline, grow the economy, and invest in physical and human infrastructure.

From the start, these actions would shape the return of 36 quarters of consecutive growth, eight million jobs, a stable national treasury, and the addition of more than fifty million people to health care coverage.

From less than thirty million Filipinos, more than 80 million have been given Philhealth coverage. In our population of 90 million, this can already be considered universal coverage. So congratulations to everyone who worked on this.

We expanded more than two hundred Barangay Health Stations, one hundred Rural Health Units, and almost two hundred small hospitals. Their capacity was expanded so that they can now provide more health services. Many Rural Health Units can now perform surgeries and deliver babies. In the year 2000, only 25 Rural Health Units could do this. Now, 1,300 can do this.

We also expanded 34 large public hospitals across the country, so that those living in remote provinces no longer need to go to Manila to see a specialist.

And even before the Cheaper Medicine Law passed in 2008, we lowered the price of commonly used medicines for the poor. We started by selling cheap medicines at half the price compared to 2001. As Undersecretary Padilla said, these are sold in Barangay Pharmacies and Bayan Pharmacies in various locations in the Philippines. And now there are more than 17,000 Barangay Pharmacies and Bayan Pharmacies established. But you no longer need to buy there, thanks to our generics industry, and other members of the industry, we can find half-priced medicines in ordinary pharmacies. Thank you very much.

We have made progress in many areas. Although we are proud of the accomplishments of our administration, what has been done in the past is only as good as the country's ability to continue to grow and develop.

I earnestly hope that the progress we have made will not stop, that the remaining tasks will be taken up by the next generation of leadership. As a nation, we must firmly define our vision for the future, to build on what is good and strive even harder to face the challenges of what still needs to be done.

We deeply desire to see a more prosperous future for the hardworking people of this country, and our generic medicine and wellness programs can greatly benefit the ordinary Filipino citizen.

Congratulations again to everyone!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the launching ceremony of Compliance to Medicine is Wellness Campaign featuring the DOH generic drugs promotion mascot “Saver Generics”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080345/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27734&Itemid=38