Thank you very much past President Buencamino for your introduction. Thank you very much President Beltran for your very, very kind words.

And I’d like to greet everybody here tonight. We have such distinguished guests like Justice Velasco and (applause) Justice Hermosisima and Senator Benitez. (applause) I’d like to greet the board of directors and members of the Philippine Columbian Association. Ladies and gentlemen. Please sit down.

And a happy 100th birthday to Philippine Columbian! (applause)

You know when I was invited to come tonight I had already accepted the invitation to go to a concert in San Beda College which is the alma mater of my brother Arthur. But Evelyn Kilayko was the one who was telling me but this is not just another anniversary, this is the 100th anniversary. So, indeed, we beat my schedule because it is important to be here exactly 100 years after the founding of your important institution. (applause)

As we can see from the attendance tonight, the members of Philippine Columbian are leaders and prime movers of various sectors of Philippine society. And therefore we can say that for 100 years now the members of Philippine Columbian have demonstrated your commitment to the nation’s peace, growth and pride in the Filipino.

I still remember when I was young, you had an old clubhouse. And I do remember when the new clubhouse was built and this complex has a marker that aptly conveys the legacy of Philippine Columbian as measured by Mr. Beltran, President Beltran as the “sanctuary of Filipino nationalism.”

And I’m very happy to hear about the history of Philippine Columbian. I’m sure that those who will listen to my speech, because it’s been covered by the media all the time, will therefore be gratified to remember that the club became the center for the campaign for Philippine independence during the leadership of Pesident Quezon. And that it served as the headquarters of congress for the Philippine independence in 1934. And although the world war ii forced the club to hibernate, because its building was razed to the ground in 1945, so typical of the important buildings in Manila during that time. The club rebounded to become now the Philippine Columbian that we know — robust, progressive and still committed to its advocacies.

Your members’ involvement and contributions have shown because many of your members are businessmen that business does not exist for and by itself, and that efficient enterprise does not only improve private profitability. It benefits the larger society.

For your sincere concern from 100 years ago up to today. For making our economy more efficient and our governance more responsive. Thank you very much from the people of the Philippines. (applause)

We look back 100 years.

We are here celebrating today.

We also look forward.

And, well, I’m sure Philippine Columbian has a vision for the future. But I do hope that you share our vision for the next 20 years because we envision that the Philippines will be ready for first-world status in 20 years. That means by that time, hopefully, we will have dramatically reduced poverty, we will have created a robust middle-class, we will have all the hallmarks of a modern society in strong, stable institutions. Because the strength of institutions is after all what the founders of Philippine Columbian fought for when they fought for independence.

And by the time I leave the presidency in 2010, I hope that with your support, we will have launched the Philippines well on its way to achieving that vision. But I’m glad to say already we have moved mountains with our macroeconomic conditions through fiscal discipline, towards a balanced budget, pre-paying our debts and investing billions in human and physical infrastructure. These fundamentals are paying off in huge increases in investment, in six million new jobs, in a strong peso and a strong stock market.

I must congratulate and thank you for the biggest single act that led to the surge in our economy — that’s the passage of our value-added tax. And you are our taxpayers. That value- added tax in one bold stroke raised enormous amounts of new revenue. It also sent an unmistakable signal that we are serious about moving our nation forward. But that isn’t all. It is also because of our complete focus on the economy, on fiscal discipline, on a balanced budget and the need for long overdue human and physical infrastructure. The focus on these helps round out our economic gains.

And as I said, our efforts are paying off. With the six million jobs we’ve created in the last six years, our unemployment rate is the lowest in a generation. Our poverty rate is the lowest as well. And to me, that is the most important statistic.

Because eradicating poverty is the central mission of this government and our society of which such prominent representatives are members of Philippine Columbian. And I am glad that we’re celebrating this centenary as we enter the holiday season because it is essential that we remember that every person of means and being leaders of society — people here are persons of means — should help those in need. The government is going to do everything in its power to be a catalyst for this process.

We’re making progress in alleviating poverty. Not only our poverty rate but our education and health services to the poor are vastly improved. Of course, we have a long way to go, but only through a strong economy can we improve the plight of the poor. And to that end, we have turned the corner of our economy. Of course, we face short-term challenges in meeting our projects, but revenues are up this year compared to 2006. The credit rating agencies recognized that the new revenue sources are here to stay and that our budget will be balanced. This allows us to invest in job creation, it allows us to invest in better health care, and it allows us to invest in more educational opportunities. These are the keys to lifting the poor up. And we’re doing that in magnitudes that are for the first time in a generation. So, we are optimistic.

So, as we move forward, we will increase investment in our country, in our people to improve our infrastructure to create an environment in which your businesses will feel confident to expand and employ more people, because more jobs means less poverty.

Investing in infrastructure also includes building up our environment. As was very much pointed out in the Bali Convention on Climate Change this past weekend, people need to breathe clean air and swim in clean water while we build manufacturing and bridges to span our waters.

We will continue to improve social services such as health insurance and anti-hunger programs.

Let me tell you about our anti-hunger programs. We continue to struggle with the challenge of hunger. The challenge is centered on affordable food, assistance for the hungry, employment on the streets and in the fields, family vegetable gardens, microfinance, and wage increases under the regional wage boards.

The NEDA hunger mitigation program framework is based on the recognition that hunger occurs; first, due to a lack of affordable food, and second, a lack of money to buy food. Therefore, we must increase the supply of affordable food – this is the supply side strategy. And we must grow the income and livelihoods of the masses – this is the demand side strategy.

On the supply side, part of the NEDA plan is number (1) to strengthen food production; number (2) to improve the food delivery system, or what is called the efficiency of logistics and food delivery.

The logistics and food delivery program in turn consists of barangay food terminals and Tindahan NJatins. The barangay food terminal is where we place drop-off points in various poor areas. For example, in Manila, Metro Manila. And our stores, they are like sari-sari stores but not sari-sari, we concentrate on affordable rice, affordable noodles, affordable LPG, and affordable medicine.

And then also ports, especially the roll on-roll off ports which makes transportation cheaper in bringing food from Mindanao to Luzon. Then, farm to market roads is also part of the logistic system and efficient local transport within the local government units.

And then to bring the food to the families of the very poor, we bring rice to them through the school feeding program. Instead of giving breakfast to the children which cost 20 pesos, we give them a kilo of rice each when they go to school which also cost 20 pesos, so that they can bring the rice home to their families and the entire family can benefit from that.

This is a very big program with so many schools, in so many areas that are poor. And so one of our measures to improve on this part of the supply side logistics is the creation of an NGO network to support feeding programs. I remember one time Evelyn Kilayko was telling me that many of the civic groups are looking for programs where they can tie up with the strategic needs of society. And I hope that on your centenary, one of your centennial programs will be that Philippine Columbian will join this NGO network which is under the responsibility of the DSWD to bring rice to the children of the poor when they go to school. (applause)

The good thing about the food-for-school programs is that not only does it help the families, it also entices the families to send their children to school because that’s the way that they will have their rice for the day.

We will boost educational support in our efforts to reduce poverty by investing in better school buildings, new textbooks and teaching materials, and training programs for teachers and school administrators.

We all know — because most of the people, all the people here are educated — that education is a core value of Philippine society and family life. The hardworking men and women of this nation put their family first. And the best gift a Filipino family feels it can give to a child, and any nation can give to its people is access to a good education.

We will also invest in cutting red tape and eliminating corruption from the system.

The people deserve an honest, hardworking government just as the Filipino people are honest and hardworking. We aim to stamp out corruption and set a new standard of governance for our nation. Corruption saps the lifeblood of our political system, it must be stamped out.

Our anti-corruption adviser, Tony Kwok, the former anti-corruption czar in Hong Kong who was a key player in efforts to clean up corruption there, believes that perceptions clout the reality of progress — our progress in reducing corruption and red tape. But the fact is that we are undertaking a strong and steady effort to curb graft through criminal justice, administrative controls and procedural reforms.

This effort is focused on the revenue agencies, that’s why they have improved their performance in recent years. It’s also focused on agencies that are in the frontline of day-to-day public services. And one of the things that Philippine Columbian can help us with is to give us feedback on the agencies that we interact with how are they behaving. We take this issue seriously. And we believe that perception will match reality in a few short years. However, this is a problem that has plagued the Philippines and other countries for generations. As experience has shown, it won’t be eliminated overnight but I assure you progress is being made.

Not even the empty political rumblings of an ambitious few can bring our hard-earned gains down. The actions of the few desperate men in Makati last week reveal just how out of touch they are with the hopes and dreams of the average Filipino. It’s not only the leaders of Philippine Columbian but the average Filipino that want political stability, a bright economic future and social justice. The actions of those misguided men undermine each and every one of the genuine aspirations of real Filipinos. Instead of working to bring the nation together by working within our democratic process, their actions merely are fuel for selfish motives for personal gain.

But thank god, in the end, the rule of law prevailed.

The transgressors will not hold this nation hostage with impunity. They will be punished to the full extent of the law. Justice shall be served and the interests of the nation upheld. (applause)

To the caretakers of nationalism, you can be assured that I lead with a steady hand to guide the nation to a new election, a new leadership in three years.

We will not falter in keeping our hand on the tiller of the ship of state. We will also continue strong, focused leadership in the international arena to advance the interests of our nation and our people. And I thank you for your appreciation of the efforts that we had to undertake so that we could save the life of one Filipina in Kuwait. (applause)

Actually, what happened there wasn't easy because when Emir told me about the crime – and it might also come out in the newspapers here – the way he killed his employer was very brutal. It wasn't just one stab and not just one knife, two knives, many stabs, his employer even ran, he chased him. And in the early stages, I don’t know how long or up to the end, the perpetrator seemed unrepentant. But… So… And they only made a commutation now, the first time in their history. So Emir’s action wasn’t popular, many people were angry at him. It was a headline when I was leaving, and that headline was controversial. But the foreign minister said that it was a sign of how much Kuwait considers the importance of the Philippines’ relationship. (applause)

And if we have reached the stage where our international relations can be concretely mobilized in order to benefit individual Filipinos concretely, it is because we have reached the stage of our institutions that was worked for by the founders of Philippine Columbian who fought for Philippine independence in the 1940s. (applause)

So, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you for a century of achievements and valuable contributions to national heritage and progress.

I thank you all and I ask you to continue to help the country as you have been helping the country for 100 years. To help the country now again, to ensure that we will indeed have an era of peace, reassurance and hope.

Long live the Philippine Columbian! (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA Speech at the 100th Anniversary of the Philippine Columbian Association. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135629/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2331&Itemid=38