Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the inaugural opening of Dell Philippines Customer Contact Center

[Delivered at the SM Cyberzone I, Mall of Asia Complex Bay Blvd., Pasay City, March 21, 2006]

Thank you.

Thank you, Peter for your introduction.

And I would like to greet the various Cabinet members who are here today who also helped bring about the business climate that brought Dell to the Philippines; Mr. Michael Dell chairman of Dell Corporation and all the officials of Dell; Mayor Peewee Trinidad and all of the young people from Pasay City and the teachers and principal for benefiting from the wonderful contribution of dell company; the 300 young people who will make Dell come true; representatives of the business community, ladies and gentlemen.

Let me begin by welcoming Mr. Michael Dell, one of the most admired entrepreneurs in the world.

Google alone has come up with almost 35,000 hits on Dell, the man and the company, and that’s plenty of information about the founder and chairman of the largest personal computer company. Indeed, as I said, one of the most admired entrepreneurs and icons in the world whose success story started, I understand from what I’ve seen in the web site, with one thousand dollars and a business idea launched from a dormitory room. And now, I am pleased to add another title to your long list of illustrious labels — Michael Dell, investor in the Philippine call center industry.

Thank you, Mr. Dell for choosing the Philippines for your newest contact center. This is a compelling expression of your company’s confidence in the knowledge, skills and abilities of our great Filipino worker especially the young workers.

When America calls, the Philippines answers. When the world complains, we listen. Technology which has shrunk the world has made this possible. Not all Americans have noticed it, but many of our distress calls are now answered by young people manning 24/7 help-desks, an ocean and 12 time zones away.

When a homemaker in Michigan dials a number to report a busted heater in the middle of the night, what greets her is the warm comforting voice of a young man or woman of a call center here in the Philippines. Of course, that homemaker in Michigan will not notice the difference, not in accent, but she will notice the difference in the clear, concise and caring voice by which all her worries are made to go away. The result is that when she puts down the phone, she now wears the same smile by which the unseen person on the other line first greeted her.

Many say that this is the Filipinos’ competitive edge in the business outsourcing business that we answer queries fast, with facts and with feelings. While giant strides in telephony may synthesized the human voice, create speaker-independent technology, or devise protocols that do away with direct dialogue, no one has and no one can ever replicate the warmth by which Filipinos attend to calls.

We have proven that fiber optics not only transmits data and voice, but also Filipino hospitality. Thus, because it’s not yet possible to download a handshake or e-mail a hug, the next best substitute is the Filipino call center employee. However, I like to think that it’s not just in the charm department that we’re tops, but most important, we possess the language and technological competencies to be the back office or the front desk of the world.

There were less than 2,000 business process outsourcing employees just five years ago. Now, there are 125,000 in a billion dollar industry and by 2010, we expect there will be two million business process outsourcing and call center employees in the Philippines.

The mushrooming of call centers and BPOs in the Philippines is the outgrowth of our being a nation of English speakers and engineers — engineers like Dado Banatao, our own contribution to Silicon Valley. Dado, another icon in ICT– and our policy of connectivity at competitive prices. And so that we will continue with the next batch of call center workers, our emphasis on English as a medium of instruction and computer linkage of all high schools in the country with the help of private sector benefactors like the Ayala group. And now in Pasay, the work has been done because of the contribution of Dell company. Thank you for contributing to the full computer linkage of high schools by 2010. Right now we have them linked at 73 percent and now Pasay east will be the next new link in that whole computer system.

The Filipinos especially the young ones are adept in both words and digits, a proficiency that can drive up the call value and call volume of those who would like to tap it. And again, I thank dell for tapping that talent for investing in the Philippines. We certainly hope to see more of dell, both the brand and the person in the Philippines.

Congratulations! Mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Inaugural Opening of Dell Philippines Customer Contact Center. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412214422/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2418&Itemid=38