Thank you.

Thank you very much, Secretary Angelo Reyes, secretary of DILG.

Congratulations! Governor Aumentado for your good presentation of “Kilos Asenso,” for your leadership, for ULAP and… Under your leadership, your support for me is always there, thank you; Mayor Lito Atienza, our host mayor and president of the Metro Manila Mayors League, thank you very much, and congratulations on the victory of Bobby Pacquiao. These Pacquiao brothers had their first training here in the City of Maynila so they are very close to Mayor Atienza; Mayor Ramon Guico and all the Municipal Mayors of the Philippines who are here today; Mayor Jerry Treñas and all the City Mayors who are here today; Vice Governor Julius Herrera and all the Vice Governors who are here today; Vice Mayor Jessie Cruz and all of the vice mayors who are here today; Councilor Carlo Fortuna and all the councilors who are here today; James Marty Lim and all of the barangay officials who are here today; board member Piccio –where is our Santa Claus? Where? — and all of the board members who are here today; our Cabinet members who are here aside from Secretary Reyes, we have Secretary Neri, Secretary Favila, Secretary Ampatuan I think, Acting Secretary Pangandaman. I don’t know who else are here but thank you to all of you; Mayor Sarmiento, Secretary General, thank you for emceeing this occasion; Mayor Oca Rodriguez; other officials and members of the ULAP and local governments; guests; ladies and gentlemen.

Long live local government!

First of all, long live local government! And as Angie Reyes described me, I am dead serious in taking the power from the center of governance, from Metro Manila to the countryside that feeds it. That’s why I don’t begrudge your IRA. I fully give it every year at the right time. I am even paying the debt to you from the previous administrations. And now, we will return to our LGUs through programmed monetization the unprogrammed funds that should have been part of your 2000 and 2001 IRA.

Congratulations! To the league of cities for what you presented today, your new partnership with the world bank for strategic planning, governance and resource mobilization. Keep the flame burning because the national government has a deficit, it is striving to reduce the debt, the local governments have a surplus so you should use the credit facilities available to the national government.

And above all, long live!! The LGUs in the development, launching of “Kilos Asenso: Building Prosperity from Community to Community.” Thank you for aligning your programs through “Kilos Asenso” with our Medium- Term Philippine Development plan highlighted by our 10-point program. Thank you for keeping faith with our common vision. And because we appreciate you so much, as Governor Aumentado acknowledged earlier, we have put our national counterpart in the national budget for 2006.

That’s what the media says is the pork barrel of the local government. That’s not pork, the problem is when you put in infrastructure and social services it’s called pork barrel. What do they want, just salaries in our budget? If our budget is only for salaries, will our country progress? We need programmed funds. And we thank the LGUs for activating “Kilos Asenso.” We thank you for your leadership.

Let’s use “Kilos Asenso” to implement investments to create ten million jobs. This includes microfinance. This year, almost one billion pesos of microfinance has been released to various regional and provincial conduits that will relend money to micro-entrepreneurs. Let’s also use “Kilos Asenso” to support this so that we can support three million small businesses and to reach two million hectares of agri-business. That’s what was put in the program, the farm-to-market roads, those things are so we can open two million hectares of land for agri-business.

I would also like to thank you not only for the support that you have expressed earlier, for example, thank you for your support for EO 464 — this is constitutional and it promotes the healthy separation and equality of powers among branches in government.

But not only that, even in the past, you have supported the national government. I remember in 2004 when I announced an austerity program to avert a fiscal meltdown you the local governments immediately responded with various proposals to cut your own spending and to raise your own revenues. I appreciate your spirit of sacrifice and volunteerism. Salamat sa inyo.

Thank you also for the laws that were passed, we avoided the financial crisis and we accomplished the first phase of our economic reform. This first phase is revenue build-up. And as we are implementing the revenue build-up, I ask you once more to be in the frontline to explain to the people the sacrifice we have to make in the short run with regard to paying more taxes. Please help me explain to them that the additional tax is what will provide schools, water, electricity in the barangay, loans for small businesses, infrastructure that will attract investors that will provide jobs. The additional tax is what makes it possible for us to put a national government counterpart in the budget for “Kilos Asenso.”

And now the world suffers from many things including high oil prices. There is a new round of oil price hikes. And we should be proud and thankful that so far our country has been one of the 26 countries, out of 200 countries in the world, with the lowest fuel price increases even if we import oil. Thus, it is important because we are heavily dependent on imported oil. It is important to realize that even if we’re one of the 26 lowest countries with an oil price increase more oil prices may come.

And you once again are at the vanguard of price stabilization and I acknowledge your contribution in managing the threshold of affordability at the level of mass consumers.

I ask you to help us not only in price stabilization but also in our initiatives to lessen dependence on imported fuel oil by helping us develop ethanol, biomass, wind power, hydro power, geothermal power and other alternative fuels, and to facilitate oil and gas exploration in your jurisdictions.

I also call on you and all sectors to strengthen our energy conservation against the backdrop of strict implementation of the Government EnerCon Program. You know in Malacañang, every time I enter a room and I feel cold, I say, I don’t think our air conditioning is 25 degrees. So everyone should be strict. And I call on the LGUs once again to take the leadership role there.

And as for our legislators, I reiterate our call to them to approve the indigenous fuel bill.

You local governments, you already have a special job to fight terrorism and watch over the threat of avian flu. In terrorism, when we developed a 14-point program to fight terrorism in the country and in the Asean region, that was way back in late 2001, you were among the frontliners. Indeed, in the avian flu, in the terrorism fight, in price stabilization, in the fiscal reforms, in everything, the LGU phenomenon is emerging as the saving grace of our burdened nation, and I thank you for that.

And that is why I reaffirm our commitment to reward LGUs with greater powers that are due to you via revolutionary constitutional change.

Thank you for being very active in our Consultative Constitutional Commission. And I expect that even though there are vested interests that are trying to prevent our systemic change from succeeding, because you are there, we will succeed.

Long live local government!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the 14th Anniversary of the Local Government Code Theme: “Kilos Lokal, Asenso Nasyonal”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092358/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5215&Itemid=38