Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines On Interfaith Cooperation for Peace, Development and Human Dignity

[Delivered at the Shangri-la Mactan Island Resort, Lapu-Lapu City, Cebu, March 14, 2006]

Interfaith dialogue is a historical truth among our diverse peoples and creeds. Faith is ingrained in the lives of our people, our nations and our world. It is the primordial seed of the human condition and offers hope, confidence, courage and commitment to make a better global neighborhood. Our individual faith provides the rock upon which we build our family, our society and civilization. But regrettably, the story of faith has too often been twisted and has become a source of despair and destruction sometimes amongst peoples and nations

Our challenge in promoting interfaith dialogue is to redeem the true meaning of our faith, if we are to truly bring peace and prosperity to the world. We must never accept terrorist violence cloak in religion by anyone at anytime. Terrorism is murder and no religion anywhere can abide by the faith of the faithless who kill and maim in the name of god. Neither should we allow an ideology that scoffs as religion as the opium of the people to be the reason to overthrow any government.

My own faith is built on the teachings of Jesus and the stewardship of the catholic. And I like to believe that my faith gives me the strength and wisdom to reach out and find common ground even with those who do not share my beliefs.

The Philippines is a nation that faces the test of individual faith and social tolerance everyday. And I’m happy to report to you, as previous speakers have already alluded to that today, the historic divide between our Christian and Muslim neighbors is narrowing dramatically in our country. This is in no small part due to our focus on interfaith dialogue and a willingness to accept the sincerity of those who differ with us in faith.

For at the end of the day, we are all united in our common humanity. I have reached out to lead interfaith dialogue here in the Philippines to bring peace and understanding to Mindanao, just as I have reached out to our friends and neighbors in Southeast Asia to conquer anything that divides us on ethnic or religious lines. And as Secretary Romulo said, just last year, I had the good fortune and honor to lead the U.N. Security Council Informal Summit on Interfaith Dialogue.

As a result of the progress we have made in Mindanao, I am confident that peace is within our grasp. And if peace in Mindanao is attained, it will be in large part due to interfaith dialogue and the inter- governmental cooperation of friends and neighbors like Malaysia, Indonesia, Brunei and our more distant global partners in peace, in the Middle East, North America, Europe and Oceana.

Faith is the great antidote to terrorism. Faith is the great antidote to godless ideologies. We must turn up the flame of faith and understanding as we help lower the sword of poverty and destruction.

What we are doing here today is every bit as important as building up mighty military forces to fight terrorism, destabilization and injustice here at home or across the globe. We must follow our faith and a faith in each other if we are to truly lift up the poor, transform war into peace, and stamp down the intolerance and violence brought by terrorism based on a false reading of the divine message or a misuse of a divine message that those who misuse it do not believe in the first place.

We are here today united by our faith and determined to bridge the valley that unnecessarily divides us whether we live across the street, across rivers or across oceans and continents.

And I ask everyone in this room and outside this room to support us in prayer for the next three days. Plead with god to guide us to use our diversity creatively and in unity to come up with sustainable plans of action towards long lasting peace and Godly transformation.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library