Thank you very much Roi, my National Security Adviser.

Senator Jun Magsaysay; Governor Dolfo del Rosario; Mayor Monching Gico; Secretary Bert Gonzalez; Commissioner Andrea Domingo and NBI Director Wycoco representing DOJ; Undersecretary Andanar Representing DILG; Undersecretary Brion representing DOLE; Undersecretary Cesar Garcia of NICA; Undersecretary Gacis Representing DND; Summit Participants; honored guests;Ladies and Gentlemen:

I always say that the Philippines is the home of the great Filipino worker. But this Filipino worker will only flourish in his greatness and productivity when there is peace in his homeland. And that peace, maintaining our peace, has a big impact on how good our intelligence community is.

And so, this is the reason why I asked Roi Golez to convene an Intelligence Summit.

In the field of security, the foremost enemy of any nation is surprise. It can happen anywhere — Sipadan, Dos Palmas, Cotabato, Manila. It can happen in Beirut or Paris, New York or Washington. The weapon involved could be a crude bomb or a car, or an entire plane. It could happen to the poorest country, or to the most powerful nation in the world.

Surprise is the advantage of small, clandestine cells operating beyond the primary focus of intelligence networks. Again and again, it has been proven that intelligence systems, no matter how elaborate and sophisticated, have loopholes somewhere. These loopholes are a result of either human or technical failure. They are somehow discovered by terrorist cells that gain an advantage, which enables them to strike at will, with deadly effect.

Intelligence simply means information — vital information that is collected, assessed and delivered in timely fashion. Timely is the key word, because a minute late could prove fatal.

Analysts who have looked into the September 11 attacks in the united states point out that the signs pointing to such an event were extant at the time. The possible use of aircraft was already being considered a long time before the event. This was borne out by intelligence gathered from terrorist cells right here in the Philippines. Deep intelligence from within Afghanistan also showed that something big was being hatched. Something ominous and foreboding was in the air, but no one could put a finger on it.

This only proves the point that pieces of intelligence are useless if they exist in isolation. Someone has to fit the pieces together, as in a jigsaw puzzle. Someone has to analyse the patterns to discover a definite form in them. Information has to be integrated to be useful at a strategic level.

The job of intelligence gathering is different from the job of integration. Gathering intelligence is like reaping the crop. Integrating it is like separating the chaff from the grain, and harvesting the nutrients from it. Both jobs require diligence, imagination, excellence and most of all, commitment to a high cause.

That is why we have some of the most dedicated and patriotic people in the intelligence services. We have eminent persons from the private sector like former DILG secretary Raffy Alunan. You, who are here are the people who work to put a face to the enemy, deny him the advantage of maneuver, pinpoint where he lies and lead our forces to defeat him.

Integration is the key. The purpose of this summit is to put our minds together so that we can think as one, plan as one and act as one against the common enemy.

Two months ago, when I announced that I wanted this summit to take place — this was at the graduation ceremonies of the PNP Academy in Silang, Cavite — I said the basic purpose of intelligence is to enhance national security not only by supporting police and military operations, but by informing policy makers of the challenges that are relevant to effective governance. At that point, I also enumerated the objectives of this summit: reorganization; rapid threat assessment; determination of information requirements vital to military, political, economic and social imperatives, cyber security and law enforcement; data base integration, human resource development, international cooperation and counter intelligence.

Let me, however, define the challenge in simpler terms. We all know that there is a lot of information of intelligence value out there. The government has the most elaborately spread network to gather it, stretching from the national, regional, provincial, municipal and barangay levels. Theoretically, we have eyes and ears in every nook and cranny of the land. There is no organization that can beat the depth and breadth of the government.

But sad to say, we are a seriously fragmented organization when it comes to information sharing and management. We have a multiplicity of data bases. Departments do not always communicate with each other effectively and efficiently. Work tends to be compartmentalized and canalized within each department and agency. Turf issues abound. the prevalent attitude is that i-have-my-job-to-do-and-i-don’t-care-how-you-do- yours.

Getting our act together. This is the basic problem we have to face, even before we go into the more esoteric issues. We have to unlearn the turf mentality and get into the team mode. This is the essence of the homeland strategy of the United States. Every agency of government, every sector of society, every state, every county, every citizen must lock into a single, overriding idea — the security of the country from terrorism.

We must build on the same concept, even if the challenges are different here. Every department and agency, every local government unit, every extension worker, every law enforcer or development officer, every group in civil society, every community, church and people’s organization — everybody must be focused and determined to surmount the two most formidable enemies of our republic today — one is poverty and the other is crime and terrorism.

In the modern world, almost all aspects of development and security are interrelated. Agricultural development has a security content because joblessness in the rural areas leads to increased dissidence. Agrarian reform is vital to security because social injustice invites revolutionary fervor. The lack of education leads to irrational violence. Where there is poverty, ignorance, injustice — there is conflict. And where conflict acquires an ideological dimension, we have a problem of national security.

And there are new challenges that arise in the midst of every growing democracy like ours. Political and economic destabilization is fomented by rumor, intrigue, disinformation. Political partisanship becomes an occasion for subverting institutions of governance. Clandestine designs creep into the armed services and the law enforcement agencies. There is a sense of constant fragility that cannot be easily overcome.

But democracy, as we have seen, has its own great defenses. The rule of law, good governance, moral leadership — these foundations continue to stand fast impervious to the insidious agents of destabilization.

And so I commend you, the participants for coming up with this integrative effort. I continue to bear a solid respect for our intelligence agencies. We have been able to prevent a number of near tragedies through timely action on crucial information. We have contributed significantly to the international security through accomplishments such as the pre-emption of the plan to assassinate the pope in 1995. The arrest of the would-be assassins led to the discovery of Oplan Bojinka and the eventual arrest of one of the principals in the world trade center bombing of 1993. And recently, the capture of Fathur Rohman Al-Ghozi continues to unearth leads to the malevolence of the Jemaah Islamiya.

The international dimension of intelligence must be given utmost weight. Our trilateral agreement with Indonesia and Malaysia, our defense alliance with America, our role in the international coalition against terrorism and the whole range of our bilateral and multilateral relations must be funneled into the grand design of our nation’s security and survival.

I am glad that participation in the summit is not limited to law enforcement and intelligence agencies, but expands to such sectors as the academe — i was very happy to see, for instance, Dr. Villacorta, Dr. Puno — the business sector — i saw Peter Wallace, I saw Bill Luz — NGOs engaged in national security-related issues such as environmental protection and policy research — I saw Vic here — infrastructure owners and security industry organizations. I am happy to see representatives of these sectors here.

There is a whole new environment within and outside our nation.We have to learn to deal with changes in relationships between and among states, between states and non-state actors and international organizations. Trends in global economics and technology continue to move in complex and dynamic ways. goods, services, capital, people and businesses are continually in flux; and even traditional concepts of the family, faith and governance are being challenged. To all these we must address our minds and energies.

I am aware that four inter-agency meetings have been held to discuss the format of this summit. The eight working panels set up pinpoint the corresponding responsibility of every sector or agency involved. May I acknowledge, with appreciation, the chairs, co-chairs and members of all these panels. Thank you very much for working so hard.

Every Filipino must understand that he is both beneficiary and stakeholder in what we are doing here. This should start off an earnest campaign to make our people pro-active and enthusiastic actors in the security and development process. I trust that such participation will be incorporated in the full spectrum of your concerns.

I am confident that the call of duty will enable you to come up with meaningful, relevant and integrated intelligence programs. and I expect your memorandum of outputs after mid-April when you meet again for the summit proper.

In the meantime, thank you for contributing to this great and important effort.

Thank you very much and good afternoon to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the National Intelligence Summit. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230355/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7634&Itemid=38