Thank you very much, Secretary Pingkoy Duque, Chairman of the National Nutrition Council and host of this event today. I’d like also to greet the members of the Diplomatic Corps and congratulate Secretary Artee Yap, also the officials of the National Nutrition Council and the agriculture department as well as the Landbank of the Philippines; our recipients of the different awards, congratulations to all of you! Warm greetings to those who received the Gawad Saka and Nutrition awards.

I requested that these two events, the Gawad Saka and nutrition awards, be combined because they are both important for the food of our nation.

And through the awards being given today, it is shown that there are many excellent Filipino officials, volunteers, farmers, nutrition workers who should be emulated in their willingness to help so that we can prevent hunger and strengthen our fight against poverty.

And also that activity earlier that was supposed to happen but something else was on TV is very important, maybe you are watching a video but something else is happening here now, I will also do that. I requested that another third event be included in our celebration—the 150 billionth loan of the Land Bank of the Philippines to our farmers and fishermen during our administration. So, now I would like to ask the Land Bank and to call on our recipient of the 150 billionth peso loaned out during our administration. So this is 50 million pesos for the Cooperative Rural Bank of Bulacan. You are receiving the 150 billion peso of loans from the Land Bank during our administration, congratulations!

Then, this 50 million that we loaned to the Cooperative Rural Bank of Bulacan will be loaned again to our farmers who borrow from the Rural Bank, here is the check for them. So congratulations to Land Bank, congratulations to the Cooperative Rural Bank of Bulacan and congratulations to the farmers who received the lending! 150 billion pesos, that’s how much the Land Bank has helped, during our administration and I am happy that the Land Bank has been able to help so much because the Land Bank is like my brother because it was created during the time of my father, the former President Diosdado Macapagal, who is the father of land reform.

My father, President Diosdado Macapagal, wrote in his memoirs his conviction that the basis for achieving equitable prosperity is: to release the impoverished tenant farmers from bondage. He fought an uphill battle against several landlords to push his land reform programs, eight special sessions he held because the program couldn't be passed, it was stopped… passed in Congress, stopped by the landlords in the Senate, but after eight special sessions, he also got Republic Act 3844 or the Agricultural Land Reform Code and that included the creation of the Land Bank, the primary conduit of agricultural loans for our farmer sector.

It’s been a long time since the land reform, 1964, maybe 1963, people are forgetting what the situation of the farmers was like before land reform. Before there was land reform, the prevailing system was share tenancy. The farmers were called 'kasama' – they share with the landlord in their harvest. The landlord had a large share of their harvest, a large percentage, that’s why they were called 'kasama'. And the landlord was also the source of loans with high interest, then it would be paid upon harvest, so when harvest time came, the farmers had almost nothing left except for their own subsistence. That’s why the 'kasama' had no incentive or ability to invest to increase his productivity.

But in Republic Act 3844, share tenancy was removed. In that way, there were two programs, one – the government would buy the farmlands to sell to the farmers on easy terms and conditions, or the share tenancy would become lease tenancy, they would just pay a fixed rent so that all the income would go to the farmers, not sharing every time productivity increases, the landlord always has a share. And so that they no longer need to rely on the landlord for loans, the Land Bank was established to lend to our farmers.

The ultimate goal of land reform is to fight poverty. By providing the incentive and the means for the farmers to be more productive, that also plays a big role in food security and hunger mitigation which we are importantly celebrating here. Those who were given awards, because that is the main job now, the special task of the Nutrition Council, is to fight poverty by fighting hunger.

And as I have said since teo years ago when we gave this task to the Nutrition Council we approached the problem of hunger and food security from to sides– demand and supply.

On the supply side, the farmers and land reform play a big role – increasing food production; reducing wastage and spoilage; like Artee Yap mentioned in his speech, we have given awards to barangay drop-off points and things like that to provide effective delivery systems for farm products to consumers, and also the RORO, our mayor of Roxas is here and the economy of Roxas has greatly improved because of our RORO. And also the driers… so that they are not laid out on the road for drying, and that is a big program that Artee is doing now for the rehabilitation of our farmers, the driers, because many products were soaked.

On the demand side, we aim to increase the ability to buy food by increasing incomes; by educating our people on proper nutrition, kaya trabaho ng Nutrition Council yun nuon pa including I want to remind Bernie information on breastfeeding; because up to six months breastfeeding is the best kind of nutrition, and including managing our population through natural family planning.

On the demand side and the supply side, it is important that the farmers are in a position to increase production, and if the farmer has a good income, they are also a consumer and will have more opportunities to buy snacks. Because it’s not always the same, we always study the ten poorest provinces and ten most food-poor provinces. For example, Kalinga is not poor, it is not part of the ten poorest provinces, yet it is still one of the exporters of rice to other provinces but is included in the ten most food-poor provinces. I don't understand why, because what is lacking there is food, not rice. So the farmer himself is really a consumer too and should have income in his hands to buy not only his own products but also other products that he needs to eat.

Land reform is important for productivity, and during our administration, I am very gratified that we have distributed almost a million hectares of privately owned land under the comprehensive agrarian reform program, over 800,000 hectares of public land for agricultural use, and almost 700,000 hectares of ancestral domain land. All in all 2.5 million hectares, more than any other administration. So we have distributed much more land with our record of over 2.5 million hectares of private, public and ancestral domain lands for agriculture. And we have really surpassed our target because I said in my SONA we will distribute 100,000 hectares of land reform per year, we were only here for eight years, that should have been 800,000 hectares, but we reached 2.5 million, so that is a SONA commitment that is over complied with.

What we want, I heard earlier, the term agribusiness, we want to turn our farmers into agribusinessmen. So the Land Bank is very important, but the proposed law that agricultural land should be used as collateral for loans is also very important. Because that way our farmers can join the formal credit mainstream and not rely on loan sharks or long for the days when they still had to count on their landlords even if they have to harvest to hock their harvest for them.

I remember, our friends from Bacolod Talisay, the land of my wife’s family, we reformed it early in our administration, a couple of years ago. During a visit to Bacolod, I saw them and I thought they were very happy that the land had been distributed to them… but the problem was they had no one to lend to them and they couldn’t borrow from the bank because their land couldn’t be used as collateral. So you see that is very important… a new land reform, we must allow land to be used as collateral.

This is part of our efforts in poverty reduction and also in hunger mitigation and I am very happy that these efforts are producing results. Earlier, when I came in, our beautiful ladies from the Nutrition Council, with their beautiful kimonos and patadyong, greeted me and I learned that during the recent typhoon, the Nutrition Council was flooded up to the waist. I said, I’m sorry to hear about that, but congratulations anyway because even though you were flooded, you lowered the incidents of hunger from 20 percent three months ago to 17.5% today, so congratulations to you!

But speaking of the typhoons, Artee already discussed that given the destruction of the two recent typhoons in the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle, many of us who received awards belong to the agribusiness North Quadrangle, there is the governor of Cagayan, there is the governor of Quirino, there is Governor of Ilocos Sur, they are all producing our food. So we have to guard against food shortage and an increase in hunger. That’s why it’s a big thing that the Nutrition Council is monitoring the supply side through the Department of Agriculture to ensure that there is immediate production because many were wasted but will replant in November, right? So I told Artee Yap to make sure that the seeds needed for replanting are in the hands of our farmers before All Saint’s Day.

Artee said that as long as the area isn't flooded, we will start distributing the seeds. So we will prioritize those areas that weren't flooded because, of course, if it's still flooded, why give seeds when they won't be used anyway? So that's the timing, that's the sequence Artee will use – prioritize those areas that experienced less flooding to be the first to receive seed assistance.

And I hope that with your support our outstanding farmers we will continue with our reduction in hunger. And I hope that with our outstanding nutrition workers and nutrition government officials we will be able to continue to make sure that on the demand side your constituents will know how to spend their hard earned money to buy the right products for their food and the good of their family.

So I am very happy about the awardees and their accomplishments we thank the hardwork of many of our government agencies and officials. We thank the hardwork of the many selfless individuals like today’s awardees who work hard—you are working hard not for yourselves but for others. You are working to give food to the people of the Philippines.

My late father said: unless the government acted decisively and speedily this is with regard to land reform– the goal of land for the landless would not become a reality.

We continue with our reforms, especially now that we pass thru a global crisis in 2008, a global economic crisis in between 2007 a global food crisis, 2009 a global climate change crisis. We must become more decisive and daring because we know that the world economy will recover and we hope it will be soon. We must be daring because we know that climate does not assure as of food supply that is sufficient every year. And we must be daring we know because as far as climate and weather is concerned, uncertainty is the rule and no longer the season that we can always rely on.

So we must combine the political will of the citizenry and the government and work on our goals together. Only then can we hope to realize our bigger goals of land for the landless, food security, and emancipation from poverty. And those who received awards today prove that Filipinos can unite in their communities to ensure sufficient food and increase the income of our farmers and all citizens. Congratulations to all of you!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the National Nutrition and Gawad Saka Awarding Ceremonies. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134111/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26503&Itemid=38