Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the opening ceremonies of the 35th Convention of the International Federation of Asian and Western Pacific Contractors Association

[Delivered at the Grand Plaza Ballroom, Hotel Philippine Plaza (Westin), Pasay City, March 15, 2006]

Thank you very much, Roger. And congratulations! On the 50th anniversary of your international association.

Trade and Industry Secretary Peter Favila and other officials of the Philippine government, Mr. Hoskins and the other fellow officials of Roger Murga in the IFAWPCA, George Consunji, president of the host Philippine Contractors Association, ladies and gentlemen.

First of all, a warm welcome to the Philippines for the first timers in your gathering. And for you who have been here before, I hope that you can see that you come at a time when the Philippines is on a roll.

For many years, we languished in sick bay; for many years, our efforts for growth were perennially stumped by systemic defects, including the fact that we could not do any infrastructure in government unless we borrowed for it. Because all our tax revenues were going to debt service, to the salaries of the workers, and to the local government share. Nonetheless, we were still coping. We seemed to live in two countries: one raring and eager to join our neighbors, but the other unable to rid itself of the stumbling blocks. But we’re determined to return to the international investment scene in construction and in other fields.

The Filipino people have stood for a strong economy and have shown that they can sacrifice to attain it. What sacrifices did the Filipino people have to do in the last couple of years? We took the bull by the horns when we cut down our debt service by plugging the financial leaks, clamping down on excessive public sector spending and raising our revenues through a series of privatization efforts and the flagship expanded value-added tax. Nobody likes taxes, so nobody likes to impose taxes. But we would never have been able to do critical infrastructure unless we raised our own means to finance them. And that’s why we took these measures.

Barely a year after these measures were implemented — in fact, the last implementation was last November and last February — the country has started to enjoy the first fruits of our economic reform. The peso is up, the strongest currency in the region. Inflation is manageable in spite of the fact that the doomsayer said that if we impose those new taxes that inflation would hit the ceiling. And as little chicken said, “the sky would fall,” but it did not fall. And portfolio investments have been increasing, the second fastest portfolio investment stockmarket increase index in the region.

Our international credit rating outlook has been upgraded. And because of our fiscal reforms, in January alone, we saved almost three billion in spending. Three billion pesos, we underspent by three billion pesos. Which means we have three billion pesos to carry over, to spend on important infrastructure. But it’s not only the three billion pesos that we will now spend on infrastructure. I have earmarked 35 billion pesos — enabled by our tax revenues, not by borrowings — for five major programs, including crucial infrastructure and housing; the others being education, food and health.

Just because we could finance our infrastructure in the recent past only by borrowing, you as contractors know that we hardly had any major infrastructure projects done in the past few years. But now, since my administration, we have been able to restart and finish major infrastructure projects.

The north expressway to Clark has been completed after so many groundbreaking ceremonies over several administrations. The Southern Tagalog highway to Batangas, the Clark-Subic highway, multi-billion infrastructure projects are underway among others. And as for housing, I am determined to narrow the four million-unit housing backlog. We’ve already released billions for housing just this year — and we’re only in the third month — and yesterday in the Cabinet meeting that U attended with Secretary Favila, I instructed another half-a-billion pesos to be released for the housing sector. So, because now we can finance our own infrastructure without having to resort to borrowings, we expect construction output to grow 13 percent this year. Thirteen percent, including the private and the public sector infrastructure spending. Private sector spending due to an improved investment climate and an increase in housing projects.

I would like to congratulate the Philippine Contractors Association, your convention host for this year, for being the government’s faithful partner for national growth. Construction is the mortar that holds together all fronts of development.

Now, that we have been able to do our fiscal reforms, the remaining economic reforms is catch up on the infrastructure that we have had to defer because we didn’t have the money. Now, we have the money and we hope you, the Philippine and the international constructors will participate in our infrastructure development.

And I am not talking only about the major expressways and ports here in what you call the urban beltway. I talked about Clark and I talked about the Batangas road because our urban beltways is… Starts from Clark-Subic in the north, through Metro Manila and all the way to Batangas port in the south — by the way, Batangas port was built by FF Cruz — and in that area the urban beltway, the great need is for expressways and ports, major ports. But we also are bringing in transport infrastructure to the rest of the country.

A few years ago, about three years ago, in 2003, we laid out what we call the nautical highway, bringing development closer to the provinces. You see, we are an archipelagic economy, the second biggest archipelago in the world, next to Indonesia. But while in Indonesia the islands are very far apart, in the Philippines they are not that far so that we can have roll-on/roll-off ferry service in between. So therefore, we are completing three nautical highways. Each nautical highway is a combination of roll-on/roll-off ferry routes and highways to connect from port-to-port to interconnect our islands. Again, another major source for infrastructure spending and investment.

I asked the Development Bank of the Philippines to work on this master plan and I have asked them also to dedicate their portfolio to lending money to the creditworthy investors who will invest in the nautical highway. And that will connect the market of Luzon to the production centers, the agricultural production centers of Mindanao. And speaking of Mindanao, for Mr. Consunji who has many investments, Mindanao offers a vast opportunity for rapid and sustainable growth now that enduring peace is on the horizon. There should be no doubt that you in the Asia-Pacific region will regain the glory of the 90s as the fastest growing part of the world.

Your organization was established 50 years ago in Manila, on a vision to enable the regions construction industry to rise up from the ashes of world war the second. In the meantime, in 1997, we had a great recession in the region but now we are bouncing back. So therefore, as the region has bounced back and the Philippines is back on a roll, may you build more in the Philippines in a new era of stability and prosperity.

Thank you.

Mabuhay! And welcome once again.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Ceremonies of the 35th Convention of the International Federation of Asian and Western Pacific Contractors Association. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412214443/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2421&Itemid=38