Thank you very much, Secretary Romulo.

Ambassador Chito Brillantes, the consuls general and consuls and honorary consuls to the U.S. And Canada, officials of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Tourism, the Filipino communities that’s represented here, guests, ladies and gentlemen.

To all of you, good morning and welcome! Thank you for visiting us. This is the second such visit organized by the DFA and the DOT, and it’s a good time for you to come and visit. We’re celebrating the 60th anniversary of our friendship with the United States as sovereign nations and we’re celebrating the 100th anniversary of the first immigration of Filipinos to the United States. In fact, I hope to go to Hawaii in September to be able to join the celebration.

It’s also a good time to visit us, because at this point in time, the Philippines is at a crossroads of political transformation and economic take off.

As Chito Brillantes was talking about the good news and the bad news,that you might have heard, Bert Romulo was whispering to me the latest good news is from the IMF and all the good things they’re saying about our economy.

In governance and politics, military service, business, sports, arts and literature, showbiz and culinary experience, Filipinos shine not only in the Philippines but especially in North America.

In the U.S., we’ve known for quite sometime that Filipino-Americans surpassed the U.S. national averages in educational levels, median household income and median home values. Congratulations!

And even as you’re doing so well in the United States, I appreciate your loyalty to the motherland. Yes, Chito says, many of you have taken American and Canadian citizenship but many of you have also applied and taken dual citizenship. Thank you very much for that.

Thank you for your faith in the Philippines and your love for democracy.

The Philippines has a strong, modern and confident relationship with the U.S. Based on our shared democratic values, the fight against terrorism and strengthening the economy to liberate the poor.

The Philippine relationship with the U.S., I believe, has matured and grown under our administration from the depths to which it plunged when the U.S. bases left the Philippines. We have a strong personal relationship with President Bush and the U.S. government, and we are a staunch ally in the war against terror. We believe fervently in democracy. We have sworn to uphold the rights and liberties of every Filipino. We bring these values and our own deep personal faith in God to our governance of the Philippines and to our relationships with the U.S., Canada and all nations.

And so it is with Canada, since the establishment of bilateral relations in 1949, Philippine-Canada ties have grown by leaps and bounds in tourism, trade and investment, and people-to-people exchanges.

The people… the Filipinos especially the balikbayans of Canada and the U.S. are number one in tourism visits to the Philippines followed very closely now, however, by the people from the People’s Republic… from Korea, from the Republic of Korea. We have 3.5 million Filipinos in the U.S., We have 500,000 Filipinos in Canada and they serve, you serve as a sturdy bridge across the pacific.

Now I have… was able to learn what your itinerary is — looks very exciting, very nice — and while in the Philippines, you will be able to rediscover personal and professional ties at all levels; you will also be able to discern, I hope, the real situation prevailing in our country.

The spirit of freedom and democracy thrives as robustly as when you left home the first time. I am advocating constitutional reforms to facilitate the legislative process and open up the economy to responsible investment.

I wish you could help us communicate the good news and the real issues to all our friends in North America. I hope you will see when you visit for instance the Makati business district tomorrow that our country is an incomparable shoppers’ paradise. And there are innumerable business and investment opportunities worth exploring. And when you go to your selected places in the provinces during your optional visits outside Manila, I hope you will see once again and remember that we have some of the most beautiful tourist spots in the world. And of course, yourselves included, the Filipinos are among the friendliest people in the world.

We believe that the Philippines can make first world status in twenty years through the force of Filipino industry and excellence here in the Philippines and Filipinos outside infusing our mega regions from North to South.

When I make my State of the Nation Address on Monday, the 24th, I will be explaining to the people that for purposes of putting public investments, we have divided the economy of the Philippines into four sub-economies or super regions, we might call them, divided in terms of their… in accordance with their competitive… natural competitive advantage. We have Northern Philippines and Mindanao, two super regions that have the natural competitive advantage in agri-business. We have Metro Luzon, the urban beltway around Metro Manila, from Clark-Subic to Batangas port and beyond, as the center for service and industry, the urban center that needs to compete with the rest of the metropolises in the world. And we have the center of the Philippines, the Visayas, Palawan , Romblon, Bicol and the Northern Islands of Mindanao, as our centers of tourism. And this is where we will be spending the new money that we are now receiving as part of our vat dividends which Congress has passed and which our Filipinos in America and the U.S. supported. And I thank you for your support for that difficult legislation.

In closing, let me share the pride once again of celebrating with you and all our people both the centennial of Filipino migration to the U.S. And the 60th anniversary of our friendship with the U.S. as sovereign nations.

Once again, welcome to the Philippines! Have a wonderful stay and bring beautiful memories when you go back to North America.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Call by the Delegates of the 2nd Ambassadors/Consuls General from North America Goodwill Tour of the Philippines and Tour Group of Filipino and Filipino-Canadians. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212718/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2829&Itemid=38