Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Special Plenary Session for the Centennial Celebration of the Philippine Congress

[Delivered at the Plenary Hall House of Representatives, Batasan Pambansa, Quezon City, June 7, 2007]

Happy Centennial Anniversary to the Philippine Congress.

One hundred years ago, I’d like to greet Justice Quisumbing representing the Supreme Court, one hundred years ago, the hope of a nation first took form from the roots of freedom, liberty and equality. One hundred years later it is racing to a horizon full of promise, the shaping of an environment that is conducive to wealth creation with the end goal of being first-world in twenty years.

For one hundred years the legislature in various forms was the collective voice of the Filipino people. The first cry for independence rang out in the Philippine assembly – colonial Asia’s first awakening to democracy.

We were a leader in Asia and we are proud of our history as a free nation. And today, the Philippines remains the most democratic country in the region.

Today, in addition to the philosophy of democracy, the prospect of greater trade and security forged in the goodwill of our global allies and combined with the blessings of the Almighty arrived with me in Manila.

Well, yes, we’ve just arrived from the airport. I’m very thankful to the governments of Sichuan Province, Chengdu City and Chongqing City because they adjusted their schedule to allow me to make it here in time for your session.

We are glad that the elections are over and most of the winners proclaimed. On this occasion of the centennial the Philippine Congress, we affirm the unity and forward course of the nation. The Filipino people have united behind democracy.

Once again, let me take this opportunity to extol the voters who trooped to the polls to cast their ballots. Once again, let me commend the Commission on Elections and its deputized agencies. And our commendation especially extend particularly to our teachers, some of whom gave up their lives. And even those who didn’t have to give up their lives, their dedication are renowned in times like this.

Let me thank also the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Philippine National Police, as well as all the institutions that helped the people safeguard the vote – the religious, the civic and the professional – they likewise deserve the gratitude of our nation.

We congratulate all the winners in the election, and all those who are still to be proclaimed. We thank all the candidates of whatever party or political persuasion who fought hard and well to win the vote. The campaign has had its contentious moments, but it’s time to be magnanimous, win or lose. The interest of the people dictates that we must close all chapters of strifes and recriminations. We close the chapter of electoral battles and open the chapter of national consolidation and solidarity. We call upon the nation to close the contest of the ballot and step up the contest of excellence in all fields all for one and one for all.

At a time when many places in the world are still aflame with struggles for freedom, we thank the lord for giving us the gift of democracy that has found sanctuary in our generations past and present for one hundred years, as we continue to count our blessings of economic growth and political stability.

In our trip, three times, in our audience with the Holy Father, during the canonization of Saint Marie Eugenie and before our Lady of Fatima, we immersed ourselves in communion of the Filipino people with the Almighty. And reflecting on our Filipino people, we find, we are reminded that we are a strong and resilient nation guided by the moral compass of our faith. We are reborn everyday in the fountain of spiritual renewal and ardent hopes for peace and prosperity. And our ardent hopes are being answered by the Almighty. The trend of our economy goes up and steadily as our faith deepens both in the Lord and in ourselves.

Across the continent, we flew to Central China, to Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan Province and to Chongqing City, the largest city in the world. They are two of the most promising trade capitals where Philippine scales and investment mixed with others in the region to push forward the frontiers of East Asia integration.

China and Europe seek to tie up with the hub of the Southeast Asian region in terms of trade, security, investments, tourism and people-to-people kinship. Portugal is entering the E.U. presidency next month while the Philippines is still the chair of ASEAN.

There is affinity between Europe and ASEAN that we must consolidate through our ongoing negotiations on the ASEAN-E.U. treaty of amity and cooperation in the interest of the economy, the environment, human rights and the fight against terror. And we come home straight to congress with the plan to consolidate the nation in the postelection period.

The overwhelming victory of our coalition in the House of Representatives and in the local governments is a continuing mandate of reform, unity, more work and less politics.

We all have a mandate to look forward and leave behind the contentious past. We look forward to the continuing support of Congress, and thank you for your prayers for our safe journey. It’s good to be home among allies resolved to work together to lift everyone up and make sure no one is left behind.

Our work must be a national enterprise where no one loses and everybody wins. The sun never sets from the work of a President nor of Congress in the modern world. We all must do our part in honing the competitiveness of the nation. We must make sure we maintain the momentum. We’re totally focused on the economy because only a strong economy will lift our people out of poverty and expand our middle-class.

The nation is moving in the right direction. The economy is strong and growing. We have a 26 consecutive quarters of growth. Our imports and exports are both up. Revenue collection is way up. But we dedicate the 6.9 percent growth of the first quarter to the Filipino people and to you, their elected representatives.

We thank the 13th Congress for passing the tough reforms to move this nation forward. That was the first phase of our turnaround plan to stabilize our budget and spending and then secure increased revenue through better tax and customs collection and through an increase in taxes especially the value-added tax which you accomplished. And I thank you for that.

You accomplished what a painful but necessary steps. And you achieved that goal. And therefore because of you, the budget is under control for the first time in a very long time. And the people took the cue. With all their might, energy and will, they are rewriting our recent history.

Investments are pouring in, not only foreign investments but investment in small, medium and micro-enterprises. And because of you, there is enough money in our budget to expand our investments in infrastructure and social welfare. Thus, because of you, we are poised to break the back of poverty.

The vision outlined in our State of the Nation Addresses is one that many of you in Congress share, and many of you want to see fulfilled. And I thank you because you found the resources to make these important investments possible.

The economic indicators underscore the success of your economic legislation. Not only is our growth at its best in almost two decades, our peso is at its strongest in years. Our stock market is the strongest ever. Job creation is on target for creating the six million jobs that we want to create before you and I leave office in 2010.

And for the first time in a long time, we are paying less in interest on our debt. We are even prepaying our debt. This allows us to pump that money into the long overdue investments I was talking about earlier. And that is what phase two has been all about also with your support.

Phase two was to take advantage of our improved economic picture to finally make the long overdue investments in infrastructure, education and health care, to name a few areas, and because of you, we are well into that phase. Because of you, the payback to the people continues at an earnest phase. In fact, because of you and the legislation you made on revenues which brought so much confidence in our economy, we were able to pose billions of sayings last year and we plowed the savings back to the villages and barangays in terms of more schools, health insurance, housing and loans for micro-enterprises.

We reinvested the savings in infrastructure projects to stretch economic opportunities farther across the archipelago. And because we have done the enabling environment in terms of infrastructure and direct services to the people, the Filipino masses are carving the way out of the social margins through the vision and will of patriotic political leaders such as the leaders in this great hall of Congress. And now, we welcome the 14th Congress during this deliberation. And as we do so, let us write another chapter of the proud history of Congress by writing away gridlock, by writing away terror, by writing away destitution.

After elections as a new Congress comes in, it is a season, it is a time of hope and unity. And we pray that this will be the advent of a new Filipino nation in the palm of the Lord. This 14th Congress looks like it will be the most powerful Philippine legislature in terms of number, talent, and with God’s grace, unity. We are confident that Congress will use the power bestowed upon you to take us a significant step forward everyday in the next three years embracing a future of peace, solidarity, stability and prosperity.

Let the ideas that this Congress has stood for in a century… Over a century – freedom, liberty and equality -like our path forward. Congress, the executive and even the judiciary, let us all be together in order to give a good future for our people.

Congratulations! On your 100th Anniversary, beloved members of Congress.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].