Thank you very much Secretary Camacho, the Secretary of Finance and he is also the Chairman of Landbank of the Philippines.

I also greet your president of Landbank of the Philippines — Garry Teves; as well as all the members of the Landbank Board who are here, seated. And those our brilliant selectors, the board of judges for these five we are awarding today, led by Senator Rodolfo Biazon — the Chairman.

Senator Biazon said, an admirable characteristic of the winners — is that they are clients of Landbank. Oh, Secretary Obet Pagdanganan is also here, our Secretary for Cooperatives. Senator Biazon said, a remarkable good thing to say about the winners even though they are all clients of Landbank, meaning they borrow from Landbank. Their relationship is without handouts, all self-supporting, self-sustaining.

I also greet my fellow provincial from Pangasinan, co-chairman of the jury board Congressman of the 3rd district so Generoso Tulagan. As well as the various members of the board of judges and with us here, seated in front of us is the son of the man of the masses — Jun Magsaysay. And the father of the cooperative — Butch Aquino. We should also congratulate again some of the winners today. My fellow Ilocanos, congratulations to all of you. And to our friends from the Cooperative Bank of Bohol, congratulations! The non-agri based, always wins all the awards in Marikina, Barangka Credit Cooperative, and the Outstanding Multi-Purpose Cooperative, that’s the agricultural one we consider the top prize winner of all, the Tayabas Community Multi-Purpose Cooperative.

I also thank you Garry Teves on behalf of Sergio Odesa — the Treasurer of the Philippines for your dividend of P250 million as well as the stock dividend. As I said to Lito Camacho, we should privatize the stock dividend to add to our coverage of the budget deficit. That law, it turns out, does not allow the privatization of even one share of Landbank. Perhaps our senators and congressmen here might find a way to bring Landbank into the 21st century. I think many of our multi-millionaire cooperatives here will invest in Landbank if that happens.

Our enthusiastic and hardworking colleagues in agriculture, wherever you are in the agricultural cooperatives sector, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, my beloved countrymen:

First of all, Happy anniversary to Land Bank of the Philippines! And of course congratulations to those we are honoring today, those cooperatives that are outstanding clients of Land Bank of the Philippines.

You know, every August 8th, I enjoy being with you. Not only because I really like to see our Landbank clients who are good at paying. As Gary said, Landbank is increasing its portfolio for cooperative and farm-based financing compared to the large commercial financing done in the past, because the unpaid debts inherited by Gary did not come from farmers, they came from large companies. So it is really only farmers who should be lent money by Landbank.

Because one reason why I really wanted to be with you on August 8th is that I enjoy it every August 8th — we remember my father, President Diosdado Macapagal, together. Because on this day, August 8th, my father said, was the happiest day of his life — August eighth, 1963, that was the happiest day of his life. Because that was the day he signed the land reform code which he also established the Landbank. This was the happiest day in his life because for him, his main goal in becoming president was to have land reform in our country.

My father was a revolutionary, although a peaceful one. He was born in a nipa hut in a rural barrio in Central Luzon, he was descended from a humble tenant who tilled three-fourths of a hectare of riceland na hindi sila ang may-ari. He suffered genuine hunger and privation as a child, but he fought his way out of poverty through the path of education, living beside an estero in Tondo as he worked his way through school. Mula sa maralitang taga-bukid noong nag-aral s’ya naging maralitang taga-lunsod. His eventual triumph as a bar topnotcher, a Doctor of Laws and Doctor of Economics, a congressman, a vice-president, and eventually a president did not diminish his revolutionary passion, because he was the man with truly peasant origins, anak ng tenant to rise to the position of president.

When he assumed the presidency, he took his inspiration from the revolution of a plebeian, Andres Bonifacio. Sabi ng tatay ko, “I regarded the task of the presidency as an unfinished and peaceful revolution. It was to be a continuation of the Filipino revolution of 1896. Since the revolution was launched by Bonifacio, a man of the masses, it can be assumed that he would have freed the people not only from foreign rule but also from exploitation by their own countrymen.”

Since today marks the happiest day in my father’s life, I will take some time to briefly outline his program of government because in many respects it is still as relevant in this new millennium as it was 40 year ago. And it is reflected in my own program of government.

Sabi ng tatay ko, “The task of the nation is to fight poverty, we must be concerned with the plight of the common man as an imperative of justice. We must help bridge the wide gap between the poor man and the man of wealth, not by pulling down the rich to his level, but by raising the poor towards the more abundant life.”

To achieve the goal of addressing poverty, his program like mine had four components.

The first component was the adoption of an economic philosophy of free enterprise by the private sector.

The second component was a concrete program of economic and social development for the guidance of the nation. The stress was on the word “social”.

And the third component separate from the first two –was land reform, whose ultimate purpose was to make possible, feasible agro-industrial growth and to make prosperity available for the greatest number.

My father believed from his own sad childhood experience, that to achieve prosperity shared by all, it was imperative to release the impoverished tenant from bondage.

He considered it an irony that the Philippines had the best agricultural school in Los Baños, kasi natayo yung IRRI noong panahon ng tatay ko. Yet other countries at that time were producing 100 cavans per hectare of rice, while the Philippines was only producing 27 cavans at that time.

And there were many possible explanations for this. But in his mind, the main reason was the lack of interest on the part of the tenants in advanced rice technology, simply because they did not benefit from any increase in productivity.

As the grandson and son of a tenant farmer, he recognized this indifference to be the main obstacle to the elusive goal of rice self-sufficiency, a futile quest of all our nation’s leaders since Manuel Quezon. He therefore felt that abolishing tenancy was imperative to land reform.

That is why he considered it, the happiest moments of his life when he signed, on August 8, 1963, 39 years ago, the Agricultural Land Reform Code. In signing the law, he said, “Let this signing be recorded in our annals as an act of emancipation of the toiling farmers from his slavery to debt, poverty, and misery, and of his dignification as a human being and as a citizen.”

Sadly, even as we celebrate the 39th Anniversary of the Land Reform Code, and therefore the anniversary of Landbank which was created by that code, land reform remains to be accomplished.

But I feel privileged and blessed that I can pick up from where he left and carry on his battles.

We have made big strides in land reform in this administration. Sayang wala si Nani Braganza ngayon, ngunit masasabi natin, the more than 100,000 hectares distributed by the DAR and the more than 150,000 hectares distributed by the Denr were higher than the targets we set in last year’s State of the Nation Address. And this is achieved under a budget inherited from the previous administration which could only cover 70,000 hectares of compensable lands.

How did Nani Braganza do it? With a very big help from the Landbank of the Philippines.

I congratulate the Landbank of the Philippines for making it possible to surpass our targets for land distribution even if the national budget for land reform was a pittance. And I congratulate the Land Bank for beginning to return to its original mandate as provided in the land reform code of 1963, that mandate of the Landbank in the Land Reform Code is –to finance land reform.

I also congratulate the Land Bank for having a new building. You will have a program tonight. And I am grateful that in your new building, the auditorium is named in memory of my father, who is also the father of the Land Bank because the Land Bank was created by his Land Reform Code, and he also created me, my sibling is the Landbank of the Philippines.

In the past 15 years, land reform has been very difficult. The level of workable lands for distribution under land reform has declined due to growing constraints. For instance, formidable issues involved in land acquisition and distribution characterized by strong resistance from landowners, and even issues among farmer beneficiaries not to mention limited government resources. For example, the Landbank, I was surprised that some of the Landbank's creditors were putting constraints on the loans that should not be used for land reform. But that wasn't related to the real reason why the Landbank was established. That has become a problem now in implementing land reform. So I told those in charge of future financing to fix it and return it to the Landbank's true purpose. I always say, since the Economic Summit of December last year — that the main purpose of the Land Bank should be to gather resources to fund land reform.

And with the invaluable support of the land bank, it is worthy to note that this year so far, no, no first last year, of the 250,000 hectares of land that we distributed 18,000 hectares was distributed under the compulsary acquisition since the start of land reform. And when you acquire compulsary, it means you are waiting for the landowner to sell the land, this is an affirmation of political will to distribute contentious lands under the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program of president Aquino. Landholdings covering this mode are generally contentious lands where landowner resistance is at its strongest. That's why compulsory is needed. But I told Gary — we should increase compulsory acquisition. Let's use the expropriation law and not just wait for voluntary offers of sale.

With Land bank devoting itself primarily to sourcing funds for land reform, I hope that within the decade, land reform can be accomplished (abolished) and therefore the battle against poverty can be won.

I understand that in the first half of this year, the Land Bank approved payment for total land transfer claims of more than 17,000 hectares. This translates to land transfer output amounting to p1.3 billion for the period. Maraming salamat sa Landbank at congratulations! And in congratulating you , I urge you and the Land Bank to go for again 100,00 hectares of land distribution in tandem with the 100,000 that the DENR has to do.

I also congratulate the Land Bank because as mentioned by Gary in his speech — your total credit and technical assistance for agricultural modernization reached more than P1 billion for the first six months of this year. And your total loan releases for small farmers and fisher folks was more than p6.4 billion during this period, channeled through more than a thousand cooperatives and almost 400 financial institutions, and benefiting more than 200,000 small farmers and fisherfolk, whom my father loved so much because he was one of them.

Now, going back to my father's program, the fourth and final component of his program –was to improve moral standards in government and in society.

In the end his revolution remained unfinished, poverty continues to be the national problem of the new millennium, and much still needs to be done to improve moral standards in government and in society.

The mission of my administration is to continue his work, to bring new life to the greatest number of our people under a strong Philippine republic.

Two essential features mark out a strong republic:

The first is independence from class and pectoral interests so that it stands for the interests of the people rather than of a powerful minority.

The second is the capacity, represented through strong institutions and a strong bureaucracy, to execute good policy and deliver essential services the things that only governments can do.

The Land Bank contributes to both essentials of a strong Philippine republic. By financing land reform, the Land Bank stands for the interests of the people, especially the masses of the small farmers, rather than of a powerful minority in the landlord class. And as I said to Gary, we should side with the poor and small rather than the powerful and large if we strengthen compulsory acquisition rather than just relying on voluntary offers of sale.

Secondly, the Landbank can represent the masses effectively only by staying as a strong institution with a strong bureaucracy.

This is why I feel sad, that at a time when the bank is riding high on its sterling achievements, it has been somewhat tainted by what i hope is a rare incident of grave misconduct and unlawful acts by a suspected few within the institution.

It is unfortunate mainly because such hopefully rare and isolated cases of misconduct and criminality tend to smear the name and of the majority of upright, professional and dedicated workers of the bank, as well as the good name and prestige of the institution as a whole.

We are determined to get at the root of this tax diversion case, which involves three related felonies: plunder — because so far what we have found is diverted tax payments of P200 million and still counting, conspiracy for tax evasion, and money laundering. By getting to the root of the cases as soon as possible, related but separate cases, I trust that the good name of the institution can be cleared so that the majority of the professionals in this institution — the Landbank can be unburdened of the weight upon collective reparation.

I assure you, there shall be justice and fair play.

So far a bank manager, a cashier, and a bank messenger have been charged.

Yesterday, I ordered the Director of the National Bureau of Investigation to determine once and for all whether Acsa Ramirez, one of the two cashiers in the Land Bank in Binangonan during whose terms 17 questionable transactions have been uncovered as not having been reported by certain officers required by law to report them, to determine once and for all whether she is culpable for violation of the anti-money laundering law.

If she is culpable, I ordered the NBI to file charges immediately. And if she’s innocent, I ordered the NBI to immediately clear her as well. Let us not have an extended run on this issue. We must move on with speedy and impartial justice. Because most of all, we must not lose sight of the lofty aim of the Landbank which is social amelioration, especially through financing land reform.

Our goal is clear: to eradicate poverty in the countryside in order to achieve a stable and strong republic. We all know that no one can do this alone. Therefore, I am very grateful for this recognition of the outstanding people and groups who have made a significant contribution to the advancement of our society.

So to our winners, congratulations to all of you. To the Landbank as an institution, congratulations to you too. And thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Awarding Ceremony of the Gawad sa Pinakatanging Kooperatiba (Gawad Pitak). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412224812/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8377&Itemid=38