Salamat, General Yano, ang first Armed Forces Chief of Staff from the island of Mindanao. Members of the Cabinet, Speaker Nograles, Governor Dimaporo, Congressman Dimaporo; Congressman Belmonte, Mayor Cruz, officials, men and women of the Armed Forces and the PNP, ladies and gentlemen.

At ease! Congratulations to the troops engaged in operations versus the lawless MILF groups under Kato, Bravo and Pangalian.

The Filipino people express gratitude to our soldiers in your pursuit of justice for the victims of the lawless MILF groups. The support of the different LGUs, LGAs, NGOs, GOs and POs is clearly manifested in the donation in various forms that continue to be given to our troops.

This indicates the gratitude of the entire Filipino nation to the AFP’s efforts. Continue to be relentless in the pursuit of justice for peace. Ensure that the criminal elements and lawless MILF groups are brought to justice. The communities affected by the armed conflict need your continual support and protection to ensure peace in their villages.

Your courage in pursuing the wicked elements in the MILF proves your desire to correct the violence committed by these groups against our civilians.

Let us work together to hold the groups responsible for these disturbances accountable.

Rest assured that the government will support you in your objective to bring peace not only to Northern Mindanao but to the whole of Mindanao.

Let me remind you, but I know you’re doing it that we must ensure that the rights of civilians are ensured and protected especially during the period of Ramadan.

In deference to Ramadan, I have directed the CSAFP to be deliberate and purposeful in the delivery of heavy firepower in order to avoid collateral damage.

Also, adjustments had been made on the ground to allow the faithful Muslims unimpeded religious practice during the Ramadan period. We are doing everything possible to bring lasting peace to Mindanao and end 40 years of fighting that has killed more than 120,000 people. It is in the interest of all Filipinos, Muslim and Christians, to end the violence that has held this part of our country back.

We remain committed to the peace process. But we will not negotiate with the gun pointed at our head.

Innocent civilians should not be terrorized for crass political gain. We can restart a dialogue when the area is secure and our people are safe through your efforts — our brave men and women of the armed forces and the police.

We have refocused all peace talks for one centered on dialogues with the rebels to one of authentic dialogue with the communities. And if everyone will support the essential elements to any lasting peace—Mindanao can be a bread basket for the country which we need very much at this time.

We all know, whether civilian or soldier, how the global economy has hit the Philippines. The onslaught of the global economy last year and this year has had an important and painful impact on all Filipinos through the increase in the price of food, oil and rice.

This led to undesirable inflation and a heavier burden on our poor, including the families of many soldiers of our country.

The more than 40 percent increase in the prices of crude oil and rice in the world market posed a huge challenge to our economic managers. Because of this, our entire economic team is now working to lower inflation, help those severely affected, and continue economic growth, which is the only source of jobs and tax collection to be invested in the future of the country.

Luckily, we had sufficient funds to prepare for this day through the difficult reforms made by our Congressmen and us, the Executive, in the past tax system.

Because of this, we have funds to allocate to programs focused on the poor as well as funds for the modernization of our Armed Forces and our Police. Examples of key projects and programs that are in place to alleviate the pain include: the increase in your salary which started last July on top of your combat incentive pay which was increased last year (applause), and for those whose income is 200,000 pesos a year or below. Thank you also to our Congressmen, that income is income-tax exempted (applause).

On this event with you, our great Filipino soldiers, not only are we giving out medals to some examples of the brave men and women who achieved tremendous great victories and also who underwent sacrifices, some at the cost of their lives. We are also here to expand the benefits and programs to help you through this difficult period.

Up there, while you are fighting, there’s cold weather and harsh conditions in your operating area. That is why to each of the 5,000 soldiers involved in the Lanao campaign, we are giving one sleeping bag each (applause).

I know that this is not part of the normal equipment of the soldier but you deserve it at the very least. Also as you are separated from your families and loved ones, your cellphones are your most convenient link to them. Therefore, for each of these 5,000 soldiers, I am giving you free cell card loads of 300 pesos each. (Applause)

Many more examples of our programs to alleviate the pain of the present global economic storm include “Pantawid Pag-aral” for loans and scholarships for college students. So, in addition to the funds I will provide for sleeping bags and cellphone cards, I will also provide a fund of one million pesos (P1M) to be used for loans or scholarship funds for the college students who are children of our outstanding soldiers in the Lanao campaign. (Applause)

Also part of the national government’s program is “Tulong Para kay Lolo at Lola” for the elderly who are not covered by SSS or GSIS. So, I will also provide now a one million peso fund to help the parents of our outstanding soldiers here in this battle.

Also included in the blessings that came from our tax reform is the upgrading of hospitals, and this includes military hospitals. (Applause)

I hope these projects will boost your morale as you pursue your mission against the lawless groups.

Bilang bahagi ng sariling kakayahan, we must now secure peace, order and stability in Mindanao and re-assure all the people that we can then move ahead with any broad-based discussion on the peace process. This includes bringing relief to affected refugees and victims and bringing to justice those purveyors of violence.

Great soldiers I reiterate the support of the Filipino people in your campaign for peace and justice. And I give this message as well to our great policemen. Continue performing your excellent job.

Long live our soldiers and police! Long live the people of Lanao and of all of Mindanao!

Congratulations, Team AFP! (Applause)

Thank you very much to all of you! (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the awarding ceremony for the officers and men of the AFP and PNP in recognition of their heroic acts during encounters with MILF. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135340/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1680&Itemid=38