SAFEGUARDING THE LEGACY OF FREEDOM

A meaningful anniversary of EDSA Dos for all of us.

Two years ago, I stood here at EDSA to assume the presidency. It was here that I had to pick up what had been thrown away by a reckless disregard of law and morals.

I took office focused on the causes of a radical political transition that cannot be good for a constitutional democracy to undergo repeatedly.

I took office to fight poverty. I had to be the champion of the poor in real life. I took office to raise those moral standards that allowed the unthinkable to happen in a serious government. And I could do this by the only credible method of government in a negative and cynical time. I had to govern by example even to the extreme of making an example of myself.

Last December 30, I announced a decision that I was after all prepared to make a long time ago. I gave up the advantage of the incumbent and announced that I would not seek the presidency in 2004.

I had to compromise on one thing because I could not compromise at all on the rest. I had to forego the chance of a full six-year term of my own, in order to realize as many of my goals, and as much of my vision for our country in the time remaining to me.

I gave up my ambition to stay in this office beyond the time that destiny gave me in this place so I would be unburdened of the need to play politics.

I realized that fighting poverty meant improving the economy through sweeping structural reforms. Not just the kind dictated from abroad but the harder kind that we must fashion and adapt to our special situation.

I realized that effective reform boiled down to fighting entrenched vested interests; interests that have stood in the way of national progress and prosperity; interests that continue to block the way to a better standard of living for the vast majority rather than just the same small elite.

This situation is unsustainable.

This way of doing things and not doing anything about them cannot go on. As I said, reform or perish.

Free of the burden of having to play politics, I’m liberated to champion the cause of the people and promote with greater energy and resolution the reforms that lift the old barriers to progress.

The microeconomic structural reforms that I have been rolling out since September last year pursue my core belief of fighting poverty.

My December 30 speech lives up to my core belief in a new politics of leadership by example.

Today, we launch an anti-corruption campaign to raise the moral standards in politics and the economy.

I came to the presidency in this place, in the midst of a national outcry against corruption.

I came to the presidency because of EDSA II. Many asked, what was EDSA II? And I can tell them, it was the most powerful answer of the weak to the corruption of the powerful.

To be faithful to the spirit of EDSA II requires a continuing commitment to the fight that was started here. And it’s all part and parcel of our war against poverty because corruption is the worst enemy of progress and social justice. And because it robs the state of the resources to prosecute the war against poverty.

The imperatives of the strategy call for another front to be opened in the war against poverty. This front is the fight against corruption. From this fight, there can be no exceptions whether made out of fear or favor, or because of family and business connections.

We must fight the enemy wherever he is found even in our lives, in our work, and our business.

The enemy has many faces. He is the corrupt official extracting money from a favored contractor or supplier. He is a contractor or supplier who comes and bribes a public official. He is the corrupt official who siphons off the taxes and duties due to the government. And he is found in all the three branches of government. He is the citizen who connives with the corrupt official, he is the tax evader who fools the government, as much as the businessman who fools the public and cheats his workers.

For this battle I have drawn a strategy. To this strategy, I will commit the resources to achieve victory.

Given the strength of the enemy and the extent of his reach, we need to mobilize the real victims of corruption – the general public. You, the general public, bear the brunt of corruption in the deterioration of the standard of living of the ordinary Filipino. The ordinary Filipino is thus in the best position to complain.

I am calling a national draft of all good men and women who want to make a difference in your lives and in our country.

I call on you to work with the government to expose those who would rather pay off the tax collector than pay his right taxes.

I call on lawyers to volunteer their services to the Ombudsman and the Department of Justice to fight graft and not to protect it, to prosecute corruption and not to defend it, to expose fraud and not to disguise it.

I call on the idealistic youth as well, as well as the silent majority to be our eyes and ears in the fight against corruption. Tell us about the cases of corruption you know of, give us specifics. I am instructing the Presidential Anti-Graft Commission to receive these reports and follow them through.

I call on Congress to pass the bill allowing the Ombudsman to engage the help of private lawyers for free if possible, for a fee if there are no takers.

Even as we call on the people to mobilize in the war against corruption, I will mobilize the necessary funds to increase the troop complement in our war against corruption and to acquire state-of-the-art weaponry. I hereby direct the Secretary of Budget to provide 35 million pesos for the Ombudsman to recruit 50 lawyers for its investigation and prosecution work, and for it to acquire information technology systems.

In turn, I ask the Ombudsman to make available to the public the statements of assets and liabilities of all public officials, government nominees in private corporations, and anyone else with any kind of government appointment, be it remunerative or honorary, including presidential advisers.

I also ask the Ombudsman to carry out a new task: proactively observe government procurement involving large amounts.

I am directing the Secretary of Budget to provide 700 million pesos to the Bureau of Internal Revenue for its Information and Communications Technology Department. Unknown to the public, but well known now in the circles of big tax evaders is the fact that the BIR has been able to track down tax evaders through the power of information technology.

In my first State of the Nation Address, indeed, I said, I would make the Bureau of Internal Revenue and the Bureau of Customs showcases in the fight against corruption. They have been quietly working up to that challenge. They have been conducting intensive investigations on probable big time tax evaders and smugglers.

We’ve seen some results in the past several months, of major companies agreeing to pay more than three billion pesos after a tax investigation, of a customs official being arrested, of illegal shipments valued at nearly half a billion pesos being intercepted.

In due time you will see more results.

I am doubling the budget of the Presidential Anti-Graft Commission to create an investigative unit to undertake intensive lifestyle checks on public officials. This unit will become the link between the government’s anti-corruption drive and the citizens devoted to fighting graft.

I’ve also created a special anti-smuggling task force to link our law enforcement agencies with the private sector. I expect this group to bring more results to our anti-smuggling campaign.

I’ve instructed a crackdown on the Customs Bonded Warehouse System, which has become notorious for smuggling. I’m ordering the closure of more than 300 customs bonded warehouses. I’m ordering the Bureau of Customs to abolish the Bonded Trading Warehouse System, and while phasing this out, I’ve ordered Customs to ban the entry of finished goods into these warehouses.

I am now ordering the BIR and Customs chiefs to speed up the cases against big fish and spread their net wider, and mobilize resources for this urgent task.

I now order the BIR chief to terminate the existing 45,000 Letters of Authority issued in the past. From now on, only the BIR chief can issue such letters and these letters will be issue-specific and in force for not more than 90 days.

I call on Congress to create the National Authority for Revenue Administration, changing the BIR from a populous and ponderous bureaucracy to a lean and mean corruption-fighting machine.

But we must also ensure the election of the people’s real choices. We must protect the votes of those who run on the strength of their public service rather than on the force of their private wealth. I’m hereby announcing the availability of 2.5 billion pesos to computerize the quick and accurate counting and tabulation of votes. I count you all to be in this drive so that we can have this computerized counting and tabulation of votes in 2004. That way, we will not only spare our teachers from tedious manual counting and the pressures of partisan politics, we will also make sure that your vote will be counted correctly. High-tech boto , ito ang susi sa pagbabago .

And this I intend to leave as my legacy to the nation, the certainty that every Filipino will see his vote counted.

It’s true I’m going. But I am not a goner, far from it.

A president without the baggage of reelection can move faster, hit harder and work to greater effect.

My interest in the 2004 elections is to promise that it will take place. And furthermore, that it will be utterly clean.

Some of my critics remain unconvinced. I leave them to their self-imposed and self-serving ignorance. They can go on sounding the retreat back to the vested interests that pay their way, back to the corruption that is for many of them the only way.

For my part, I have made the sacrifice. I have sounded the advance and there shall be no retreat.

I was installed as president during a time of many challenges for the country and even the whole world. But I was not afraid because I know that you, my allies in EDSA Dos and other Filipinos throughout the country, are ready to support and help for our progress.

I know that the time will come when every Filipino will know that he has his own power to shape his future so that the country will become strong.

I have already laid out our direction. Let us trust the ability of the people and further strengthen our unity. Let us do everything that is right now to facilitate the establishment of our republic. Let us not wait any longer to be left behind by the world again. Our time is running out.

Stay with me. Happy Anniversary EDSA II participants! Happy Anniversary Filipino people! Thank you very much.

Source : Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].