Damo gid nga salamat Governor Sally Perez.

Please sit down.

Sally is the daughter of Justice Perez, who was the Executive Secretary of my father, the late Diosdado Macapagal.

I’m also happy to be here with Congressman Ex Javier, he was a classmate of my husband, and Mayor Fernando Corvera who was my Coordinator here for a long time; and from our Cabinet who are here, Secretary Raul Roco; the one who arranged the funds to finance your Airport, Secretary Emy Boncodin; Presidential Assistant Rene Villa; Special greetings to our members of the Veterans Federation of the Philippines, Antique chapter; and to the friends of Gloria, to GMA; All of our Government Officials; my beloved Antiqueños:

Good morning to all of you.

May I also greet Vivian Javier and the other members of the Javier family because today we commemorate today the 16th Death Anniversary of one of our country’s heroes, one of our country’s most courageous and inspiring political leaders, the late Governor Evelio Javier.

Today’s commemoration is part of our 40-day celebration of People Power 1 and People Power 2. People Power 2 started on January 16, while People Power 1 culminated in February 25th. Between January 16 and February 25 is a period of 40 days, a period recognized in our culture and religion as a traditional period for prayer, much like a 9-day novena. Through this providential reckoning of time, I believe the Lord, the divine leader of both People Power 1 and People Power 2, is sending us a message that the two events of People Power are part of one and the same continuum, and should be commemorated together, including the significant events during this period that led to the climax of People Power. Whether People Power 1 or People Power 2. One of the great events was the assassination of Evelio Javier.

Thus, in our celebration of People Power, it is fitting that we commemorate January 16, 2001, the day of the spontaneous outpouring of outrage against plunder and its cover-up; January 19, the day that signalled the collapse of the discredited government; January 20, the beginning of a new People Power government; February 22, 1986, the day Cardinal Sin called on the people to protect Fidel Ramos and the other defectors against dictatorship; and February 25th, the day Cory Aquino began to lead a restored democracy, together with all these important dates of People Power 1 and People 2 There is February 11, 1986, the day Evelio Javier gave up his life for the sanctity of the ballot.

Today we commemorate how an assassin’s bullets felled Evelio Javier on the morning of February 11, 1986 right here walking distance from where we are near the provincial capitol where the Provincial Board of Canvassers was completing the tally of Antique’s 18 municipalities. It was a moment of crisis as an air of indignation was sweeping the land.

At that time I was a foot soldier in the anti-fascist united front. I was writing for the underground press, speaking in various symposia, helping organize mass actions. People Power was gaining momentum, to reach its peak on the four days starting February 22nd.

The treacherous killing of Evelio Javier, together with the walkout of the canvassers in the National Canvass in PICC, where major elements in the build-up of outrage that led to the gathering of two million people in Luneta a few days later for the Tagumpay ng Bayan and to the unity between the civilian and the military that began on the 22nd of February. Thus, the killing of Evelio Javier strengthened the resolve to fight for freedom, and further inflamed the spirit of EDSA 1 that ultimately returned democracy to the Philippines.

We are of course sad, however, that final justice still evades Evelio Javier, because the perpetrators continue to elude the final consequences of their terrible act. The extradition of the mastermind, I would like to report, was one of the things that I went to Canada about. It was one of the main items in my agenda during my official visit to Canada. I asked the Prime Minister of Canada to find out why the mastermind is not being extradited up to now to the Philippines. And the information shared by the premier is that the mastermind is hiding behind the cloak of political asylum, and therefore Canada being like the Philippines — a country of due process — the claim of the mastermind for political asylum is still in the Canadian courts undergoing hearing. And so as a result of the information that I found out from the highest levels of the Canadian government back here in the Philippines I am directing the justice department to mobilize fully its experts in international law to put an end to this notorious case wherever the legal battleground may be.

Governor Javier’s successor, Governor Enrique Zaldivar, Sally’s brother, described the political life of Evelio Javier in the following beautiful words, and I quote:

“Evelio Javier’s life was built upon a dream — let freedom ring — a dream fondly shared by Antiqueños. With daring faith and vigor, he pursued that dream in the sleepy hinterlands of antique, in every mountainside and every Hamlet. He was not daunted by the poverty of the place where we was sprung nor by the Antiquenos’ resignation to their tyrannized lot. Where there Was sloth, he gave labor; where there was silence, he gave speech; where there was timidity, he gave courage. And finally, where there was death, he gave his life.”

Eloquent words about Evelio Javier, from Ike Zaldivar. And today, as I come to Antique, a province whose every town I have visited but where I am returning this time for the first time as President of the Philippines, I see Evelio’s brother once again in the halls of Congress. I thank him for his support speaking for the people of Antique especially for our Balikatan, and I see Ike Zaldivar’s sister in the provincial capitol.

I congratulate them and I congratulate you, all of you here for keeping Evelio’s dreams alive.

Congratulations that your capital town, San Jose, is one of the outstanding Galing Pook awardees on programs and project implementation. Your work here in San Jose has brought progress which has brought more banks, and improved communication facilities much more than when I was a Senator of the Philippines, improved the colleges and trade schools, and sea ports. These are growth indicators that demonstrate a will to move up in the ladder of enterprise and stability.

And I congratulate you for balancing all these by aggressive and far reaching social amelioration programs. I congratulate you for improving the lot of the great Antiqueño worker — for his is known for his greatness combined with his humility as far as the sugarlands of Negros during planting and harvesting season and now to the urban services here in San Jose meant to improve the daily lives of the average citizen.

I support your efforts. That is why today I just want to let you know as a matter of, number one, information that from the typhoon Nanang we have released, Emy Boncodin has released, one million pesos to help in the relief and rehabilitation for the people of Antique. But I believe more important, more far reaching and more strategic, I just released a check of 40 million pesos from the office of the President to the Department of Transportation and Communication in order to immediately begin the upgrading of the Antique Airport, which, on this day, I am hereby renaming the Evelio Javier airport.

Governor Saldivar informed me that he has entered into a Memorandum of Agreement with the province of Aklan which, as we know, is world famous for Boracay, to have an eco-tourism partnership. And in our national government policy the Department of Tourism and the Cabinet have adapted for the year 2002 as the major thrust for our tourism development eco-tourism and beach tourism. And certainly the airport will go a long way.

General Adelberto Yap, who is here to receive the check in behalf of DOTC in order to begin immediately the upgrading of the airport now that the money is available, also wishes me to announce to you that Air Transportation Office is opening the airport for commercial flights and Asian Spirit and Sea Air are ready to come to San Jose with our tourists.

Evelio Javier may no longer be around to help us, but his idealism unto death must continue to inspire us in our work, particularly in the support of good governance for good governance was what he died for. Good governance essentially means sacrifice — the sacrifice of time, energy, honor and even life — so that others may find a life of dignity, freedom, peace and prosperity. Good governance is not the gung-ho type of public drama and propaganda because certainly there was enough, too much of drama in the killing of Evelio Javier. We would have preferred that he be alive today rather than go through that drama of his assassination. But nonetheless, that was the way destiny and history meant for Evelio Javier to contribute to democracy in the Philippines. Outside of great heroic acts like his though, good governance is the quite, day-to-day focus on a clear cut plan to build communities and empower people.

Governor Javier said in one of his valedictories, and I quote:

“For the past eight years, I have seen the fulfillment of my dreams, I have seen that there are more dreams to work for, and even to fight for. So if you ask me, what will you do now when you are not longer governor? Answer: I will continue to tilt against windmills, I will continue to reach the impossible dream even against unbeatable foes.”

Great words from Evelio Javier. And we were contemplating his beautiful statue earlier today the band was playing the “Impossible Dream” and through that band Evelio Javier was telling us once again these words in his valedictory speech.

Let us continue Evelio Javier’s dreams. Let us continue to tilt against windmills especially the windmills of poverty as we tilted windmills in Power 1 and 2. Let us continue to reach out even for dreams that seem impossible. They say the fight against poverty is impossible to be won because it’s been here for centuries, let us be bold in our ambition and seek to win that fight within the decade.

And let us continue to work for justice not only against the assassins of Governor Javier, but against all enemies of freedom and decency. And that is why I thank Ex Javier for expressing the support of the people of Antique for our looking for every way possible to fight against those who want to kill our freedom and our way of life in the jungles of Basilan. Let us not relent until our society is secure, until Basilan is secure, until Panay Island is secure, until good government is secure — in the hands of brave, upright, and decent leaders. Let us fight for peace, law And order and justice wherever the challenge takes us.

On this day, we bow our heads in memory of a great man. A hero of the Philippine peaceful People Power revolution.

At the same time, we acknowledge god’s sovereignty over life and death, his sovereignty over our lives.

Let us pray for the same courage and conviction to help us in carrying on Evelio Javier’s work. As we reflect on the contributions that evelio Javier made to community and country, let us inspire them to do our part in Seeing his noble ideals become reality.

We cannot say long live Evelio Javier because he is no longer with us. But long live the memory that Evelio Javier left us — the spirit of heroism, the spirit of good governance of a province, governance of a country.

Maraming salamat. And peaceful commemoration to all of us.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 16th Death Anniversary of the late Governor Evelio B. Javier. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230723/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7616&Itemid=38