Thank you very much.

Thank you very much to Tessie Ang-See, the Symbol of the Fight Against Crime. Thank you Tessie for everything you do.

Dante Ang, the Chairman of the Dr. Jose Rizal Awards for Excellence; Associate Justice Bernardo Pardo; the Mayor of Quezon City, Sonny Belmonte, son-in-law of the Filipino-Chinese community; Dante Liban, our incoming Director-General of TESDA; Rony Diaz, the publisher of Manila Times; Ms. Rosa Rosal, our beloved of the poor; I think the Mayor of Naga City, Jessie Robredo, is here; those who will receive the Dr. Jose Rizal Award for Excellence, as well as the Top Ten Outstanding Filipino-Chinese Awardees; Former Prime Minister Cesar Virata is also here, I think; and I saw Former Central Bank Governor Gabby Singson.

If I may greet the honorees who are here tonight, John Ng, President of the Federation; Lyonel Ty, President of KAISA; Lucio Tan, Chairman of Allied Bank; Henry Sy of SM; Mr. John Gokongwei of JG; Mr. George Ty of Metrobank; Mr. Pao Shih Tien of Chiang Kai Shek; James Dy of the Philippine-Chinese Charitable Association, I didn't see him; David Chua, the son of Ben Chua; Jocelyn Ong, the sister of Lawrence Ong, volunteer worker; I think it’s Elton who’s here, and Mrs. Tan Yu; Ricky Lee of Arts and Culture, I didn't see him; John Lu Kwa, business and entrepreneurship; Jose Tan, community service; Kin Ali Chua, education; Julie Yap Daza, journalism; Josiah Go, management and finance; Dibon Yok, medicine; and Perry Ong, science and technology.

Distinguished members of the Filipino-Chinese community; ladies and gentlemen:

Thank you for this opportunity to be once again with the leaders and members of the Chinese-Filipino community. I’ve been with this community three times this month before tonight, but here I am again, because the Chinese community is such an important part of our economy, and Dante Ang, who urged me to attend this affair, does so much work for me that my presence is all I can do to repay his dedication.

Congratulations to the Manila Times and its sister publication, Kabayan, for having thought of this search for excellence. I also congratulate the co-sponsors of this undertaking, the Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce and Industry, KAISA, Philippine-Chinese Charitable Association, and the Chinese-Filipino Business Club.

But most of all, congratulations to the distinguished company of Chinese-Filipinos being honored tonight for helping advance the interests of the Tsinoy constituency and for helping build the nation through their personal vocations.

Tonight’s awards break the national stereotype that the typical tsinoy makes his mark in society only through business and entrepreneurship.

The modern, enterprising tsinoy has broken out of that mold. Tonight, Ten Outstanding Chinese-Filipinos will be cited for their exceptional accomplishments, as mentioned by Eddie Mercado, in the fields of art and culture, business and entrepreneurship, community service, education, journalism, management and finance, medicine, public service, science and technology, and sports.

And no awards night for Chinese-Filipinos, of course, will be complete without recognizing the lifetime achievements of the giant Taipans of the Philippines. What a significant night it is when we have here Lucio Tan, Henry Sy, John Hokongwei, Heorge Ty, Angelo King, representatives of Alfonso Yuchengco, and Pao Shih Tien who has educated so many of the others who are here tonight.

I share the vision of the sponsors in awarding the Rizal posthumous awards to Mrs. Betty Go-Belmonte — and that’s why it’s not only Sonny who is here but my daughter’s dear friend, Joy Belmonte — and of course our beloved Ben Chua, as well as Lawrence Ong and Tan Yu.

Our national hero, Jose Rzal, is the classic Chinese-Filipino whose life and work helped found a nation and brought Filipinos closer together.

Rizal was deeply concerned with the ascendancy of a united Filipino nation. An eminent Filipino historian described him as one who “formulated the Revolutionary concept of the Filipino nation as including Christians and Muslims and all other peoples of the archipelago, in one all-embracing fraternal union.” Rizal wanted his countrymen to create a new nation committed to a shared destiny.

Dr. Jose Rizal was a hero then and remains a hero because he resides in the hearts and minds of those we are honoring tonight. He lives out his teachings and legacies, and the life and principles of Jose Rizal are an inspiration to the Chinese-Filipinos.

Dr. Jose Rizal was a hero then and remains a hero because he shares the intelligence and strength of our Filipino-Chinese awardees with others, they dedicate time to help those in greater need, and they are ready to act to the best of their ability to lift our countrymen out of poverty.

Dr. Jose Rizal was a hero then and remains a hero because the minds and hearts of our Filipino-Chinese awardees remain open like his to the changes brought about by the passage of time, and they are ready to accept the challenge of progress and face it intelligently.

The Dr. Jose P. Rizal awards for excellence, named after the pride of the Malay race, honor outstanding Chinese-Filipino individuals who have demonstrated excellence in their chosen fields and have contributed to the growth of the nation.

I am proud to have worked closely with the leaders of the Chinese-Filipino community and to have been with you in the numerous causes and programs of the tsinoy constituency. Indeed, under my administration, the government and the tsinoys have built new bridges of friendship and understanding.

I recall that one of my acts as new president last year was to visit chinatown in Binondo and have a dialogue with the leaders of the tsinoy constituency.

In my meetings, I asked the Chinese-Filipinos to help the government, the new government, carry out and complete its program of change and reform.

Now I am again asking for your support. These are difficult times for our country; and they are difficult times for me as a leader.

I am very sad that public satisfaction with my administration is much lower today than two months ago, apparently due to public dismay over electricity rates.

This is reminiscent of the mid-1995 rice crisis during the Ramos administration. At that time, President Ramos’ net ratings declined even more sharply than mine have declined, notwithstanding the small effect of one commodity, rice, on the overall inflation rate in 1995.

It is now clear that the price of electricity is also very socially sensitive.

Learning from President Ramos’ experience, I have kept the price of rice down. It has not risen since I became president. But then, there’s another commodity that has replaced rice as the political commodity.

My consolation is that when President Ramos was able to solve the problem from — his very low satisfaction rating in the middle of the rice crisis, to the short period up to the APEC summit — he recovered quite comfortably.

Although half of the public believe that I have no power to restrain the price of electricity, a significant one-third see me as having partial power, and one-sixth see me with full power over this price.

Though the price of electricity is not a problem of my making, I am doing my best within my power to alleviate the situation. Last may, I instructed, last month, I instructed the National Power Corporation to reduce its purchased power cost adjustment to 40 centavos. Because of this, from being the second most expensive cost of electricity in the region, we will go down to number six after your PPCA reduction takes effect in your July billing. Until then, and even afterwards, I ask for your patience and understanding.

In turn, I assure the tsinoys once again that my administration will help you realize your programs and projects, as i have been doing during the past year-and-a-half of my administration.

For instance, at your request, I pushed into law a naturalization measure designed to speed up the legalization of stay of qualified foreigners, including undocumented Chinese. Now please help me get the Chinese community to avail of this law because if the Chinese we expected to avail will avail it will greatly achieve our budget deficit ceiling target, which is so important for macroeconomic stability, which in turn is so important for the low interest rates, the low inflation rate, and the stable exchange rate that the business community is enjoying today.

Part of what I promised you was the observance of a National Filipino-Chinese Friendship Day. And I have delivered on that promise that’s why I’ve been with you three times this past month because on June 7, we celebrated the first Filipino-Chinese Friendship Day.

My greatest wish is to see the tsinoy community living in peace.

I believe, as you do, that progress is not possible without peace, just as Peace is not sustainable without progress.

I realize that our effort to create jobs in order to fight poverty will not succeed as long as terrorism and criminality threaten the well-being of our citizens. I need your help and assistance in bringing to an end the terroristic and criminal activities that our country has been suffering.

Next month as you know, we will have a new chief of the Philippine National Police. Actually he was your choice from the beginning of my administration. I told him, I told Jun Ebdane, that since he has the support of the Chinese community, his main challenge is to eliminate kidnapping in one year. He feels he can do it because he is counting on your support to be able to do it. I know that the tsinoy community has been working closely with the government on this, and I’m quite sure that it will work even more closely when General Ebdane becomes the chief PNP. Because I have given Jun Ebdane a challenge, and I know you will support him, I will give him the full authority, and also the full accountability for eliminating kidnapping. Thus when he becomes the chief PNP, I will abolish the National Anti-Crime Commission so you talk only to one person in fighting kidnapping. With your help, this administration will meet the problem of kidnapping with more focus and counterforce.

On a more institutional level, we will improve the on-the-ground capability of PNP, and we will have a more disciplined processing of intelligence. upon the suggestion of the Chinese community last year, the Scotland yard of Great Britain is helping the PNP build up its skills and capacity to fight kidnapping and other organized crimes. This was the result of an I had with Prime Minister Tony Blair in my visit to London last January. We are now working on a similar arrangement with the Hong Kong police.

Despite the kidnapping incidents and despite the price of electricity, our economy pulled through in the last one year-and-a-half; and we did this while the economies of many of our neighbors and trading partners suffered declines. In fact, during this past one year-and-a-half, the Philippines what the third best performing country in this region, next only to China and to Vietnam.

The Chinese constituency is one of the prime movers of the economy. And as we are witnessing tonight, and as we can witness everyday, Chinatown is a spawning ground of talent, genius, achievement, and excellence.

To enable that resource to thrive and flourish, my administration is committed to work doubly hard to ensure that order, discipline and civility shall exist in Binondo and other Binondos in the country.

I encourage young tsinoys to join the Philippine National Police and the Armed Forces of the Philippines and consider making police work a lifetime career.

I ask our young tsinoys to join us in our training sessions so that they would gain the expertise needed to detect and stop kidnappings.

In my State of the Nation Address last year, I said that I want the bulk of the kidnapping syndicates behind bars. Well with your choice at the helm of the PNP, let us work to eradicate the kidnap gangs, and arrest, prosecute and jail the kidnap bosses.

I ask you to be with me in this endeavor because if we are together there is much that we can do. Kailangan ko kayo.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Awarding Ceremonies of Dr. Jose P. Rizal Awards for Excellence. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225053/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8321&Itemid=38