Thank you very much.

Thank you very much Secretary Manolet Dayrit, whom, I must say, is one of the best products coming from my search committee. Congratulations, Manolet.

Secretary Mar Roxas, whom, I must say, is one of the best examples of the time when I changed the recommendation of my search committee and made my own choice. Butch Campos, chairman of UNILAB, a great example of a new type of businessman, modern and socially oriented; I would like to say the same thing of our host today in this mall, Tessie Sy-Coson; Mr. Ejercito, President of UNILAB; Mr. KC, Managing Director of Watsons, and I would like to thank Watsons because in this past year of my administration they have put up 63 of these Watsons and will be putting up 250 more in the years to come; Jerry Esquievel, Manager of Rite Med, General Manager; William Torres, head of the Bureau of Food and Drugs; Officers and Personnel of the United Laboratories and Watsons Drugstore; distinguished guests; shoppers in the mall; my fellow countrymen:

Good noon to all of you.

First of all, I want to congratulate United Laboratories on the successful launch of RiteMed Philippines. What does RiteMed mean? Right medicine, right price. So congratulations to Unilab; and congratulations to the consumers, the citizens who will benefit from affordable medicine.

You know, earlier when I was going up, I was shaking hands with some of you there, I said “what is…” or there, someone was coughing, I saw the tall man coughing… “are you coughing because of our typhoon?” There are some, because I am coughing, I have a sore throat because I was in the floods for several days. But just right for those who are coughing, go to the store after here because cough medicine is half price. Last year in my State of the Nation Address I said the price of medicine would also go down, within a year we will halve the price of medicine that the public frequently buys. This is being fulfilled in the pharmacies of government hospitals thanks to the efforts of Mar Roxas who first pioneered this because of the DTI he did it for his province in Capiz. I said, “This is a great program Mar, let's make it for the whole Philippines.” And of course because of that, the DOH needed to be the branch in the distribution of these medicines.

Today, many more people will be able to reach the halved price of medicine because usually who goes to government pharmacies? The very poor, those who are used to going to government hospitals. But the ordinary Filipino citizens who don't go to government hospitals, you don't go to government hospital pharmacies. But now because of the entry of the private sector, because of the entry of RiteMed, because of the entry of Unilab which organized RiteMed, because of the entry of Watsons into this program, even you who are shopping there and going to your own doctor, you will also be able to reach half-priced medicine. That is important today.

So Unilab, thank you for helping me fulfill what I say. In other words, what I said in the SONA last year is what we are doing.

So I am saddened when I read that, perhaps among you in the audience, if I count to five, there is one who wants to go abroad because they no longer want to be in the Philippines and they don't want democracy. So we are doing this ceremony to remind you all not to lose hope because what the government says is done, it is done like this.

And what I say the government will do — I’m sure Butch Campos, Tessie Coson also desire this on behalf of the Filipino-Chinese business community — peace, we will suppress those who kidnap our businessmen and their families. Because if that happens, they will no longer invest, if that happens many of you will lose your jobs, or those who don't have jobs will not be able to find new jobs. So now, seeing that we are succeeding in the economic measures we are taking, such as half-priced medicine, what we will do now and are doing now is address the problem of peace, the problem of kidnapping.

Just right, God is really kind, God timed this ceremony to be today and here at Watsons, here in their mall of Tessie because it turns out God planned that I need to go there near Camp Crame because they have it now and when I accepted this several weeks ago there was no schedule for that, but two days ago there was an Anti-Kidnapping Summit, and I read two days later there will be an Order of Battle Workshop. So it's just right there. I went here, I will go back there so, I don't have a hard time. If God is good at timing, I think He also knows the timing when we will suppress the problem of kidnapping and peace.

Earlier we talked about kidnapping syndicates. Order of Battle: 21 syndicates, three are the most active. So I said what we will do there is not solve crime by crime. To begin with, they have previous crimes, there are warrants of arrest for them. It's like what you say, a military operation to say okay we will get Abu Sabaya's group in Siraway, or we will get the group of whoever that was during that time, or they said we will get the MILF here in this area. In other words, our operation is like a military one: we will suppress the kidnappers and not the solution of the crime — we neutralize the kidnapping syndicate itself, they are the target so there will be no crime coming in the future.

Okay there is a group that will still make crime solutions and all that but the important thing is it will be a battle military-style. After all, many of our police officers also studied at the Philippine Military Academy, not the police academy they studied so they know the military operation. That's what we will do.

So we made an order of battle earlier — identified who the syndicates are, identified where they operate, identified the probable headquarters or safehouses and that's what we will do. So they have been identified, there is a manhunt.

I said to General Ebdane, “now that we have identified the order of battle what's next?” He said, “now I have to form the Anti-kidnapping task unit.” “when can you do that?” “I have it already upon your approval.” I said, “it is approved.” So we now have an anti-kidnapping task force reconstituted for new blood — they took the good ones from before, removed the bad ones from before. He calls new blood PACER — Police Anti-Crime Emergency Response — but it will focus on kidnapping, number one, drugs, number two and then number three hold-up and robbery.

So, he said… And now that we have a list, the order of battle was made yesterday and earlier, the next step is the manhunt. I said, “Jun, what will you do to speed up the manhunt?” Because it took a year to find Ronald Lumbao before he was arrested, but the really effective manhunt was for two weeks. So I said, “Jun, how do we do away with 11 months of groping and go to the two weeks of being focused and successful.” Well, he said, “We’ll have an executive session about that.” So I said, “Okay, have your executive session first, I’ll go to Watsons in SM to launch affordable medicine and then I’ll come back.” And when I returned, there was another good catch – a kidnapping syndicate from Mindoro was arrested and will be presented to me later. So that’s a good catch for the kidnapping syndicate.

So what we are doing now is a combination of two things: for livelihood and for peace. Affordable medicine, but life is not cheap, life is valuable, the human body and its safety are valuable to all of us.

So to all of you, Watsons congratulations and thank you; Unilab and Ritemed thank you very much; Tessie, looking forward to more investments from SM. To Mar and Manolet, thank you for carrying out my instructions in the Cabinet to make sure that we as a government comply with our commitments.

And to all of you, my friends, do not lose hope because your government is fulfilling its promises.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Launching Ceremony of United Laboratories, Inc.’s RiteMed Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412224848/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8351&Itemid=38