Thank you.

Thank you very much, Secretary Chua, for your introduction.

To our esteemed Executive Minister of the Iglesia ni Cristo, Brother Eduardo Manalo, all those assisting him here in the Iglesia ni Cristo, Senate President Enrile, Speaker Nograles, Senator Santiago, Secretary and Mrs. Romulo, Justice Velasco, Congresswoman Pizaro, Mayor Belmonte, Vice Mayor Bautista, our officials here, Postmaster General Villanueva, brothers and sisters, good morning to all of you.

I am happy that we are together again commemorating the exceptional life of the late Executive Minister of the Iglesia ni Cristo, the Honorable and beloved Eraño Manalo. Through this new stamp, and in celebrating the anniversary of his initial service as the general administrator of the Iglesia ni Cristo, the memory of Ka Erdie will remain fresh and alive, not only within the brotherhood of the Iglesia ni Cristo, but also with all Filipinos.

Throughout the ninety-six-year history of the Iglesia ni Cristo, Brother Erdie led it as Executive Minister for forty-six years, from April of 1963, during the time of my father, Diosdado Macapagal, as President of the Philippines. A big memory that my father always told me about was the very beautiful housing project built by the Iglesia ni Cristo in Laur, Nueva Ecija during his time. This project was a picture of the Iglesia ni Cristo's care for farmers who had lost their land. It was also a pioneering project that was followed by many more housing projects in various parts of the country.

Like my father, I also had the honor of witnessing the important housing built by the Iglesia ni Cristo, this time in Rodriguez, Rizal.

During my father's time, in 1965, Brother Erdie inaugurated the Felix Y. Manalo Memorial Puericulture Center and Maternity Clinic in 1965. That clinic grew and grew, so now the Iglesia ni Cristo has a world-class New Era General Hospital. I also had the honor of visiting Brother Erdie at that hospital when he was confined. I remember during one of my visits to him, he was still able to give me important advice about the MNLF which I followed. That is why we still have peace in Mindanao even though our peace talks are not yet finished.

When Brother Erdie was called home by our Lord, it happened on the very day of the Philippine Heroes' Day, August thirty-first. Perhaps this is an indication that Brother Erdie Manalo should be honored by us, not only as an exemplary leader of the Iglesia ni Cristo, but also as a unique Filipino who can stand alongside the heroes of our race.

And now, like my father, it is a great honor for your servant that during my time as president, the new executive minister of the Church of Christ, Brother Eduardo Manalo, took office.

I value the advice and support of Brother Eduardo just as I valued the good advice and support of Brother Erdie for me. I cannot forget my great happiness; I remember in 1995, I was campaigning as a senator, I was in Laguna, the election was approaching, then the mayor of the town I visited showed me the sample ballot of the Church of Christ. I was very happy, I think I even jumped and shouted, because I was number one on the list of senators, so thank you very much.

I always feel gratitude for the steadfast support of the Church for me as a senator, as vice president, as president. And I always carry with me the lessons that Brother Erdie shared with me, until I became president. And now, that is how I have confidence in the advice and support of Brother Eduardo.

Therefore, it is a great honor for me to be a guest here at what we are doing now. Let us celebrate the release of this new stamp that reminds us of the greatness of Brother Erdie Manalo, a great Filipino.

Let us once again greet Ka Eduardo, who is certainly dependable for the country as an exemplary administrator and an exemplary Filipino citizen.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the launching ceremony of the Commemorative Stamp for brother Eraño G. Manalo. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080109/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27876&Itemid=38