Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the ceremonial signing into law of the Act Rationalizing the Excise Tax on Automobiles and the Philippine Citizenship Retention and Reacquisition Act of 2003

[Delivered at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang, August 29, 2003]

Thank you, Secretary Claudio.

Senate President Drilon, Principal author and pusher of the Dual Citizenship Law; Speaker De Venecia, main pusher of the Overseas Voting Law; Senator Recto; Senator Pimentel; Senator Sotto; members of the House of Representatives: Congressman Ledesma, Congressman Libanan, Congressman Escudero, Congressman Lozada, Congressman Rodriguez, Congressman Locsin, Congressman Defensor, Congressman Bueser, Congressman Garcia, Congressman Umali, Congressman Villareal, Congressman Uy, Congressman Syjuco, Congressman Javier, Congressman Puentevella, Congresswoman Rosales, Congressman Espina, Congressman Pilando, Congressman Ablan; Solicitor General Benipayo; Immigration Commissioner Domingo; Secretary Camacho; Secretary Bunye; Secretary Alvarez; Congresswoman Castillo — ay, sorry. You are in the middle of the second row. Sorry about that — distinguished guests; Overseas Filipinos; members of the automotive industry; ladies and gentlemen:

I thank both the leaders and members of Congress, especially Senate President Drilon and Speaker de Venecia, for your excellent work in passing two landmark legislation pieces.

These two laws are a silver lining in the horizon, coming after the solid although subdued growth figures announced yesterday. Figures that were better than many of our neighboring countries and trading partners figures. I think that with the figures announced yesterday and the laws signed today, we are ready for that good road to normalcy after weeks of controversy.

The call for a Snap Election is desperate and absurd. The people are tired of poison politics. We put a halt to the Oakwood mutiny in one day and consolidated the armed forces in less than a month. The economy is humming comparatively well when compared to other countries in the region, other economies in the region and our trading partners. The government’s satisfaction ratings are good and steady. We have firm political stability driven by working criminal justice despite the machinations of a few disgruntled leaders who have become increasingly disloyal to democracy. What the people want is a stop to politicking, especially poison politicking and destabilization, not a snap election.

What the people want from the executive is the enforcement of law; what the people want from Congress is legislation. And I am thankful therefore to congress for producing these two vital pieces of legislation.

The Dual Citizenship Act is the twin of the Absentee Voting Law — that’s why I mentioned Joe as the pusher of the Absentee Voting Law. It is also a lynchpin, therefore, as a twin act of our electoral reforms. We will also work on these electoral reforms domestically by pushing the gains we have made in the computerization of the 2004 elections, which is already pressing forward in good pace.

The passage of the bill is also a response to globalization as much as it is a response to the strong homing instinct of every Filipino after a long sojourn in a foreign land.

This law will foster unity among Filipinos here and abroad.

The international trend is clearly towards increasing the number of dual citizens. And we know that the majority of the Filipinos who migrated abroad did so for better opportunities, but they continue their allegiance to the Philippines. This continued allegiance is demonstrated by their maintaining contacts and interests in their homeland, and by their intention to retire, own properties and invest their hard-earned money in the country.

Our overseas workers have become a powerful force, not only in the economies in which they work and live, but in our economy. In fact, it is to them once again that we call on. We call on the families of our overseas workers to exchange their dollars in the banks so that we can all help to strengthen the peso.

Strengthening the peso is part of strengthening the economy. So is the Automobile Excise Tax. The Automobile Excise Tax Reform measure symbolizes our political will in making the tax system work. Now, there will be no more circumvention of rules as in the past.

We have a law that is a disincentive to tax evasion and smuggling. This will improve the prospects of global automotive manufacturers to invest and set up operations in the country.

Earlier, I failed to recognize the presence of Tony Bernardo – because his boss is already here — but I think he is here because he is a most happy man because of the excise tax law.

On the part of the government, therefore, we see a revenue increase.

These two pieces of legislation — the excise tax on motor vehicles and the Dual Citizenship Law — are consistent with our national goals of creating a more favorable environment for business and accelerating our country’s development.

I would like the prophets of gloom and doom to take notice of this day, as Congress joins us in a testament to our bright future.

This is a day to celebrate. Not only to celebrate two new laws, it is a day to celebrate the unity and hope of Filipinos all over the world. It is a day to celebrate the unity and hope of Filipinos also right here in the Philippines.

Thank you and congratulations!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Ceremonial Signing into Law of the Act Rationalizing the Excise Tax on Automobiles and the Philippine Citizenship Retention and Reacquisition Act of 2003. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194553/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6505&Itemid=38