Thank you very much.

Thank you very much to all of you. Your welcome of your servant and our delegation is beautiful.

Thank you also to Secretary Art Brion for your introduction of me and this also recognizes you as our new secretary of labor of the Philippines.

Let me greet the various members of our delegation, but later. Let me first greet all of you, my beloved countrymen, good evening to all of you; as our Cabalen from Capampangan would say, maayap a bengi kekongan; if there are relatives of my mother’s side, good evening to all of you; to our brothers and sisters from Mindanao and the Visayas, maayong gabii kaninyong tanan and wassalamu alaikum to our brother Muslims; to the townsfolk of my husband who are Ilonggo, maayong gab-i sa inyo nga tanan; and to the people of Bicol, marhay nga banggi sa indo gabos.

I am very happy to be with you tonight. And it is a wonderful opportunity that we are all together because as said by your president of the Philippine community, we are celebrating thirty years, three decades, the 30th anniversary of the friendship between the Philippines and Libya in so many things. Thirty years that there have been OFWs in Libya. Thirty years also that our country has benefited from the support of Libya in the peace process in Mindanao.

Thirty years ago, the leader of Libya, the great leader, intervened in the creation of the 1976 Tripoli Agreement. Perhaps many of you know that this 1976 Tripoli Agreement started our peace talks with the MNLF. Now, the MNLF are no longer rebels, instead they are an important part of the government in the Philippines. Exhibit A of that, as I said, one of the former commanders of the MNLF is now the deputy speaker of our Congress, Deputy Speaker Gerry Salapuddin. I don’t think he’s here but I’ll mention him anyway. Another MNLF commander, is now the city mayor of Marawi, Omar Ali who is with me in the delegation although he is not in his seat. Is he there? Oh well! Just in time, there he is! Entering the hall with dignity, former MNLF commander, now mayor of the Islamic City of Marawi. Come! Omar, here in your seat. That one—he’s not here either but maybe he’ll come in when I mention his name—the other one, his brother was the MNLF commander, now he is the governor of the province of Sulu, Ben Loong. There he is! Okay. Here also is our Muslim congresswoman, Faysah Dumarpa and the Muslim governor of a Christian province, Governor Datu Pax Mangudadatu of Sultan Kudarat.

So thank you to those who started with the 1976 Tripoli agreement. They are no longer rebels now, they are an important part of our government. On top of thanking for the past thirty years, I also expressed my deepest gratitude to the leader of Libya, I met him twice last night at his state dinner, I met him again this morning in his tent to say goodbye and thank him, twice, for his support in our fight against terrorism since May 2001, before the attack on the World Trade Center on 9/11.

Despite our gratitude to Libya, the Philippines also joins the international community in seeking a peaceful end to the war between Israel and Lebanon, while we invite the entire nation, including our Filipino community here in Libya, to pray for the safety of thousands of Filipino workers not only in the danger zones of Lebanon but also in other affected areas. The unstable situation in the Middle East is not new to us and we expect the competence and experience of our officials in handling the crisis.

Our Lebanon team is now in place and we assure the families of the OFWs in the affected areas that we will employ all available means to keep their workers, their breadwinners out of harm’s way.

We also need to emphasize once again the call to Filipinos seeking employment to avoid areas that might experience conflict in the region and to heed the advice of the government and the warnings for the safety of our citizens. Perhaps I can tell them that if they are going to leave the Philippines anyway, perhaps they should just stay here in Libya with the very capable Philippine community.

I am pleased to learn that recently, Ambassador Mangibin, passed a law here in Libya where health sector workers were given a three percent increase in benefits compared to 2002. Huh? Oh, let's see if there are still implementation processes.

Libya is prosperous and peaceful, especially now that Libya and America and other countries have reconciled. That is why we now recognize, especially the great economic potential that exists here in Libya due to the good changes happening between Libya and other countries.

On this trip, as you have seen, I am with the Secretary of Labor, Secretary Art Brion; with us, of course, always with us on official or state trips is our Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Bert Romulo; with us also, but he has an assignment for me, I think, is Press Secretary Toting Bunye. There! Okay. Your name is there because Toting is on the other side; and also the Secretary of Energy, Popo Lotilla; my advisor on peace, Secretary Jess Dureza.

Let's go back to Secretary Brion. About 30 minutes ago, he signed with the Minister of Labor of Libya an agreement regarding the importation of health and construction workers, as well as the training of Libyans. We will know in August how many they need, but today we already know from the Bank of Libya in a conversation with our Philippine Chambers of Commerce and Industry — the president is there, President Donald Dee, Ambassador Donald Dee — their construction financing is worth 40 billion pesos, and their first choice is Filipino workers. They are really eager to speed up the entry of Filipino workers here in Libya, so the Department of Labor will set up a Libya desk in Manila to handle recruitment for Libya. That's government-to-government.

Libya will also send a labor attache to Manila within this month.

We also expect, and there will be — according to the agreement signed by Art Brion and the Minister of Labor of Libya — they will also have joint efforts, Philippine-Libya to protect Overseas Filipino Workers. I am not surprised that Art Brion included this in his agreement. Do you know that Art Brion was number one bar topnotcher in the Philippines when…? We also expect Libya to recycle its petrodollars and large profits from oil trade through investments in the Philippines.

It is a good time to invest in the Philippines now. We have had three consecutive months of budget surplus, so we can balance the budget in 2008, as our economic managers want.

The IMF also praised our tax reforms and our debt reduction. The BIR exceeded its target last month. The increase in the price of goods is moderate despite the high price of oil worldwide. Germany has just set aside half a billion pesos for our reforestation program. And the steady increase in OFW remittances, including those from Libya, has reached over one billion dollars in just one month of May, boosting our dollar reserves.

You know, before, we said we always need 16 billion dollars in reserves to ensure the stability of our peso. Now, because of you, Filipino workers, our reserves are 21 billion dollars. So thank you very much, OFWs. Thank you very much for your unity, the unity of the different Muslim tribes. Thank you for your expression of support for me earlier. Thank you to the foster parents of the students there in the Philippines.

The care for OFWs is an important part of our foreign policy because the recognition of Filipinos abroad continues to play a very important role in the stability of our country's economy and society. In recognition of the value of our OFWs, in my travels to different countries and in talking to the leaders of these countries, your welfare is always at the top of my priorities.

Libya has long provided Filipinos with good jobs here, for three decades, that is what we are celebrating. And as you said earlier, the jobs you have given them are good and efficient. You also have a big contribution to their progress in their economy.

So thank you also for showing the good face of the Philippines in Libya. That is why Libya continues to love the Philippines because it loves the Filipino worker. And if you said that you are happy that after a long time Filipino workers here in Libya saw the President of the Philippines, I also feel the same way. For me, it is a great honor to be with you tonight.

As Ambassador Mangibin said, here in Tripoli, there are three thousand Filipino workers and seven hundred are here. A very large percentage came today with short notice.

So thank you for the opportunity and long live the great Filipino worker!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during a meeting with the Filipino Community in Libya. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212620/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2823&Itemid=38