We thank the Girl Scouts for choosing ecology, livelihood, cultural heritage, and health as the basis for these awards. And this is truly also what our country focuses on. Livelihood for all the people so that we can kick poverty. Ecology so that we can take care of the future especially for you, our young women. Cultural heritage so that we are proud of our past. And of course health so that as persons we can be fit to do what we have to do to serve our people. Livelihood covers all these things. If we have a comfortable living, we can take care of our environment, we can take care of learning to remember our past, we can take care of our health. Livelihood and economy are synonymous with each other.

We are focused on growing our economy because this is the only way to win the fight against poverty. And with the help of the Filipino people, we are implementing economic reforms. The economy is growing, our currency is strengthening, more investors are coming in creating new jobs. And because of our reforms, we have saved on interest payments on the country's debts. And what we saved, we put into various needs for the education of the Girl Scouts and other youth, and we also spend it on the health of Filipinos.

Girl Scouts are always prepared, always ready, self-reliant and helpful to one another and to the nation. So should a nation be in a world of global warming and increasing disasters. That’s why I am happy with your care for our environment because if disasters around the world are increasing now, it is because of what they call global warming, according to scientists. And it is important for us as a nation to realize this. And it’s good that we’re having this at this time, this affair at this time when we are about to have another super typhoon.

Multi-level Disaster Management Plans from the national government down to local government units have already been activated to ensure timely and well-coordinated response in areas that could be severely hit by ‘Reming.’ the warnings made by PAGASA and NDCC should place the public in a state of proactive vigilance. A state of proactive vigilance in order to contain if not fully prevent the potential damage of this typhoon. Of course, we do not expect our youth to go out before or during the typhoon. But after the typhoon, you can do a lot in terms of service.

In the meantime in preparation for the typhoon that’s coming, the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Philippine National Police – I’ve talked to General Esperon and General Calderon this morning — as well as the DSWD and the DOH. I also talked to Secretary Cabral and Secretary Duque this morning, they’re already in touch with vulnerable communities for possible evacuation and relief operations. TRANSCO and NAPOCOR — I also talked to Art Aguilar of TRANSCO and Popo Lotilla his boss in the Department of Energy — are keeping watch over the power system while the DPWH and the MMDA — I also talked to Secretary Ebdane and Chairman Bayani Fernando — are checking giant billboards that may pose a danger to the public. The DTI — I also talked to Secretary Favilla this morning — the DTI shall spearhead a comprehensive monitoring of the prices to check unscrupulous traders who could be out to take advantage of the situation. We have seen the wrath of such disasters, although praise God we were spared by the very deadly tsunami and earthquakes that have visited our neighbors. Nonetheless, we have had our own share and we call on all sectors to team up and exercise our collective responsibility in these times. And our Girl Scouts will have plenty to do during the relief and rehabilitation and restoration operations.

Disaster management is not only a Philippine concern. Livelihood is not only a Philippine concern. Health is not only a Philippine concern. And the ecology certainly is not only a Philippine concern. In fact, these four subject matters are going to be important subject matters in our upcoming ASEAN and East Asia Summit.

Sa Disyembre a-diyes hanggang a-trese ay idadaos sa Cebu ang ASEAN Summit at East Asian Summit. Everybody knows I think when they read the papers about the ASEAN 10, but this is not ASEAN 10 only. This is ASEAN plus 6, that’s the East Asian Summit. So we will have in fact 17 not 16 heads of government coming. Aside from the ASEAN 10, East Asia is also composed of Japan, Korea, China, Australia, New Zealand and India. And East Timor will be coming to sign a Memorandum of an Agreement with ASEAN in the hope that eventually they will also become a member of ASEAN.

So we will have 17 heads of government coming to Cebu to discuss among other things, but very, very prominently cultural heritage because we want ASEAN to be one socio-cultural community. To talk about health because we have been having problems — not so much the Philippines of HIV/AIDS — but our neighbors. And also the pandemic of the bird flu — not so much the Philippines, thank God! — but we have to be concerned not only about ourselves but the other neighbors as well. And we will be discussing the ecology, and of course part of the problems of the devastation of the ecology in the previous years that the disasters that had been visiting our region. So we will be discussing disaster management. We will be discussing the environment including energy independence and clean energy. And of course, we will be discussing livelihood and how we can all work together to make our economies all better.

That’s why this ASEAN Summit to be held here in Cebu, ASEAN and East Asian Summit, is important because of the things we will discuss. The Girl Scout knows how important these discussions are. This is important not only for the barangays of your school, but important for the entire region. And it is also good and a great honor that this will be held in the Philippines now because we will make this an opportunity to show other ASEAN and East Asian countries that the Philippines is ready to compete with them to achieve development and prosperity.

So children, our young women, you are helping in your barangays, in your communities, in your schools. Do you want to increase your help to your President who will be the host of the ASEAN and East Asian Summit now? I expect you Girl Scouts here to help explain the importance of ASEAN and East Asia to your parents, siblings, friends. Tell them that ASEAN and East Asia are important organizations to unite and help neighboring countries to develop together, to remember our socio-cultural community together, to take care of the livelihood of the people of our countries together, to take care of the health of our citizens and ourselves together, and to take care of our environment together.

You know, when we had the ASEAN year, ASEAN anniversary a few months ago, it was dedicated to the youth. And I’m very happy that you are here today on the eve of our ASEAN Summit, so that you can… We can motivate you to be more aware what is ASEAN all about, what is án international engagement all about. And during the state dinner that I shall be giving for the 17 heads of government, we have reserved a few seats for some of our youth. And I would like to give one of… You know, it’s the… I would like to be able to invite one of our chief Girl Scout awardees.

I was asking Tessie Choa, is there among our chief girl scout one most outstanding chief Girl Scout? She said, none because they are all equal. So I will really have to leave it up to the Girl Scout organization how to choose whether by raffle or whether by an essay contest on what ASEAN is all about? So I hope to see our Girl Scout representative among our youth invitees to the gala dinner celebrating ASEAN and East Asia in December 11.

So, to all of you, thank you for what you are doing as young people. And I look forward to your doing even more when you become adults in the next generation.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Chief Girl Scout Medal Presentation Ceremonies. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615141920/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3026&Itemid=38