Dios ti agngina unay, Apo Congressman Domogan, thank you so much for your very kind and very encouraging introduction. Thank you also for your good work as congressman and former mayor of the City of Baguio.

Mayor Rey Bautista and the other elected officials of Baguio City; the Baguio Centennial Commission headed by Chairman Bautista; our Builders of Baguio Awardees; our various leaders and representatives of the different communities of Baguio City, Happy Centennial Anniversary!

Congressman Domogan said that I’m always here in your important occasions. I’m also always here even in unimportant occasions, because we vacation here about two or three times a year every year since I was a young married woman.

Baguio is one of the most unique places in the country. You have your own climate and vegetation that is hardly found anywhere else in the country but now being imitated. And these were what attracted the Americans to Baguio.

When Baguio became a chartered city in 1909, a hundred years ago which is what we are celebrating, Baguio became a major tourist destination. It became the country’s summer retreat from escape from the sweltering heat of the lowlands. It became the summer capital of the country. Even the Supreme Court chose to hold its sessions here during the hot season, and that practice continues to this day.

It became fashionable to vacation in Baguio during the hot months. My mother, Dra. Evangelina Macaraeg Macapagal, who hails from a town just an hour and a half drive away of Binalonan had so many stories of her high school vacations in Baguio in the early 1930s during the American period. She would come up every summer vacation and live in Engineer’s Hill because her father was a District Engineer of the American administration. Everyday she would be fetched by a car of the Madrigal family to join her classmate and best friend, Macaria Madrigal who became Mrs. Macaria Madrigal de Leon, and they would go to Burnham Park and other places — remember they were teenagers — and they would watch popular young men like Carling Sevilla and Raul Manglapus who were very very popular on the dance floor — great memories of my mother.

And, even then, Burnham Park was the fashionable destination for the young people. The American architect Daniel Burnham, after whom Burnham Park was named, is remembered by outsiders as of now after whom Burnham Park was named but of course for oldtimers of Baguio and for us, for everybody else celebrating 100 years of Baguio one of the learnings is how the great Architect Daniel Burnham, architect and city planner, architect of the City of Chicago also became the architect of the City of Baguio and designed the city so magnificently, complementing not altering the natural contour of the land, and leaving Baguio with the distinct feel of an American city of the early 20th century.

And so I was telling Mayor Rey Bautista, Baguio and Chicago are both products of Burnham, both children of Burnham, how natural for Baguio and Chicago to become sister cities. (applause) But while that is being worked out in his honor and in honor of the Baguio Centennial as Mayor Bautista has said we have devolved Burnham Park to the city of government here in Baguio on the occasion of the start of your centennial celebrations last January 2009.

As part of your centennial celebrations also we… the Philippine Tourism Authority are contributing to the development of the Baguio Centennial Park where this beautiful statue is going to be unveiled on September 1, and that is also something that has been given even earlier by President Ramos to the City of Baguio. And indeed, I hope that with Baguio City owning these properties you can use your good income to develop and continue to sustain this beautiful attractions of Baguio City.

While Baguio is 100 years old as a chartered city, as Father Cosalan reminds us in his prayer, is really much older than that as a community. As we celebrate the centenary of Baguio City we’re also made aware of its history of the 12 Ibaloi families, the Ilokano migrants, the German expatriate who founded Baguio. We are told that they were followed soon by the Spaniards. Then came the American colonizers who came here starting with Baguio as a hill station then getting bigger ang bigger as a summer capital. And then the Japanese and other nationalities who helped build Kennon Road in 1905. One of the Japanese descendants is Mrs. Cecille Hamada Afable, and her son Yongyong became a member of my Cabinet.

The Baguio Centennial Commission as we saw earlier today is honoring the Builders of Baguio, pioneer families, and I congratulate Pauling Molintas for being a member of the Suello family; outstanding men including former Mayor Paraan; and outstanding institutions. One of the things we learn by celebrating the Centennial of Baguio is that Baguio Central School was the very first public school in the entire Philippines.

Mayor Rey Bautista tells us the story of his grandfather who was a teacher in Manila and then was recruited to teach in the new Baguio Central School at three times the salary of what the teachers in Manila were receiving, very attractive indeed, so he uprooted himself, started teaching in Baguio, and he’s another third generation member resident of the City of Baguio. And the council as I look at you I also recognize other old families of Baguio City, so this is in honor of all of you as well and all your families.

One of the honorees is Eusebius Halsema. We outside know him as the man after whom was named the Halsema Highway which my father built as the major route to the northern towns of the Cordilleras. Now in this centennial celebration we learn more about Halsema as the mayor and architect of Baguio’s transformation from 1920 to 1927. No wonder when my mother started to come here from 1928 to 1934 it was already such a destination for young people as it continues to be even today.

But speaking of Halsema, it is my honor as mentioned by Congressman Domogan to rehabilitate the Halsema Highway. I do it not only to honor the memory of my father Diosdado Macapagal who built it as a highway but also we hope it can be completed during this Baguio centenary as a tribute to Baguio as the center of the Cordilleras. In fact, the way to Baguio from the Halsema Highway is Magsaysay Avenue. And remember a few years ago, when Magsaysay Avenue was destroyed by a calamity, we immediately rebuilt it because it is a major artery not only for Baguio City but for the entire Cordilleras.

Also in furtherance of Baguio as a center of the Cordilleras, earlier this year, on your centenary, we inaugurated the Baguio-Aritao Road which connects Baguio to the rice terraces. So, therefore, all the more we make now Baguio-Banaue as one tourism package.

But that is Baguio of today, going back to Baguio of yesterday, we are not surprised to learn that the lure of Baguio and the Cordilleras was originally the rich minerals underneath its soil as well as the rich soil on the surface. The pioneers who developed Benguet mines also started the country’s mining industry. The farmers of the province also found their gold mine in the vegetables and strawberries that came to be known as Baguio vegetables up to now even if they’re producing Buguias and Baguio strawberries, even if they’re producing La Trinidad. They’re all known as Baguio because the way you know Manila as Manila even if it’s in Quezon City or Bacoor for that matter it’s Manila, anywhere here it’s called Baguio.

But we want to promote this. To promote this tradition especially of the vegetables in the towns that surround Baguio, we have worked hard also to put value added. For instance, we funded the Benguet State University to start a Veggie Noodle Center so that the vegetables in the surrounding areas of Baguio can continue to be sustainable whether the bumper harvest… whether their harvest is bumper, whether there are many cheap imports the important thing is vegetables remain an important part of the culture of Baguio and its surrounding areas.

Remembering a hundred years of Baguio includes commemorating its great tragedies: the World War II, which started and ended in Baguio City; the earthquake of 1990. We recall the start of the war and the earthquake with mourning, but we also marvel at how Baguio bounced back after the war and bounced back after the earthquake to be the bustling center it is today.

Baguio is perhaps the only city in the Philippines whose development was supported by the mining industry and the tourism sector. That your city was nurtured by two seemingly incompatible industries is a testament that development is not an either/or proposition. Congressman Domogan is a testament to how mining has helped the community. He started as a janitor in Lepanto, rose up to be lawyer. And we were talking earlier about the Ms. Philippines of 2001 also who was educated to become a lawyer by her father who was working in the mines. And that has not stopped Baguio from being a tourism destination.

Up to today, when there are so many other tourist destinations in the country, my family and I try to take a trip to Baguio every New Year and Holy Week. And this is long before I became president because my husband’s family was one of the many families who stayed in Baguio so often during the whole summer break that they built their second residences here in Baguio including my husband’s family which built the Tuason compound for their own residence.

But to go back to mining and tourism as a combination, on Mirador Hill there is a property that belongs to the Presidential Management Staff, and I have given permission that this will be used to build a mining museum. For your Baguio Convention Center we want that the surrounding trees will be preserved. So I have instructed Secretary Ermita to instruct the GSIS that any development to be undertaken must be done only in the built up areas and not in any place that is still with plenty of trees.

Because I’ve been coming here as I said every year practically since I got married but even before I got married, you know, recalling the history of Baguio I’m trying to recall the first time I went to Baguio, I can’t remember because I’ve been coming all my life. I remember when I was very very young — maybe like three years old or some, which is when most of our earliest memories are — we were house guests of my father’s brother-in-law, Rogelio dela Rosa in his house which became I think the Girl Scouts House now and then later on we would continue to come and sometimes in my cousin’s house, sometimes in my classmate’s house and then in the Vice President’s Cottage. When my father was congressman and chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations in the Foreign Affairs House on Cabinet Hill, and then as vice president in the cottage, and then as president when my father were in The Mansion, that’s why it’s my second time now to be a resident of Mansion House.

And so, why do we keep coming here even if there are so many other tourism destinations that have developed over the last 100 years, because we love the mountains, we love the rice terraces of the neighboring provinces, we love the fresh air, we love the greenery of Baguio. These are the things that have been taken for granted not just in this country but around the world.

The environment — that is something that has been given to us by God but that are being ruined with mankind’s own hands. But for the most part, environmental degradation is a result of lack of awareness that is happening. It’s also therefore lack of making it a priority. That is why environmental conservation takes a very high priority in our development agenda. And we thank the leaders of Baguio for sharing this philosophy.

Together, we are finding ways to ensure that we balance economic and environmental interests exactly so that we can preserve our country’s natural beauty found in such places as the beautiful City of Baguio, the City of Love as Father Cosalan says.

Isu nga kablaawak dagiti umili ti Baguio on your 100th year. Congratulations to all the people of Baguio City for 100 beautiful years! — that is what your streamers are saying. And may you have many many more not years but centuries of beautiful and sustainable development.

Long live Baguio! God bless you all.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Awarding of the Builders of Baguio in Celebration of Baguio’s Centennial Anniversary. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412100110/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26198&Itemid=38