Thank you, Secretary Ermita, for your introduction. Ed Ermita has been with Lakas since its founding and since the start of his own political career. Thank you, Ed for your reliable and trustworthy work as the primus inter pares of our Lakas-led Cabinet.

President Ramos, beloved chairman emeritus, thank you for your words of wisdom. Thank you for continuing to be the beacon of sobriety, unity and peace not only for our party but also for our country. Every single one party member in this hall finds great relevance and urgency in your challenge and admonition.

Speaker Boy Nograles, congratulations on your election as President of Lakas. With your leadership, CMD will be in very able and worthy hands. A bar top-notcher, a leader of Mindanao and now Speaker of the House, you have the qualities, experience and stature not only to uphold the lofty traditions of our party but also of our country.

Beloved partymates, thank you for being my steady allies. Thank you for sustaining our party’s eminent role in the life of the nation.

In the last elections, our party’s victory brought us thousands of Lakas officials, including three senators, 96 members of the House, 41 governors, 38 vice governors, 67 city mayors, 49 vice mayors, 605 municipal mayors, 495 vice mayors, and a slew of governors, vice governors, city mayors and vice mayors, municipal mayors and vice mayors, provincial board members and city and municipal councilors.

Now, the merger of Lakas with Kampi will combine the talents and resources of two great political parties into a powerhouse team of 5 senators, an absolute majority of the House with 143 representatives, 55 governors, 85 city mayors, 945 municipal mayors and over 7,000 vice governors, board members, vice mayors and councilors.

Together with our other coalition partners, our merged party can create the dominant support infrastructure that is a key to delivering the governance that our people expect and deserve. Our merged party will be a colossus that calls to mind Mahatir Badawi of Malaysia, whose decades-old dominant political machinery, supported by key business groups, provided the underpinning for Malaysia’s development. Similarly, a composite of Ramos, Arroyo, and our successor will mean a two-decade period, 1992 to 2016, interrupted only by 2-1/2 years of Estrada, a two-decade period of political leadership by our coalition.

With the Lakas-Kampi merger, our energies can be devoted to the strong and growing economy which is the central pillar our party has labored to create to help guarantee peace, order and stability in our country. This is our motivation for getting up every day to work hard and focus like a laser beam to fix our economy. Our party has made tough and unpopular decisions to raise revenues and crack down on tax cheats so that we could invest in our physical infrastructure and in our people.

When we bring in investments and create jobs, our people have a more stable and predictable life. With more investments come more tax revenues that can be invested in schools, roads and bridges as well as health care, education and the environment. Over time, everyone will benefit.

Yet we are aware that no matter how much improvement there is at the top of the economic ladder, many of our people still struggle mightily. We are deeply aware that many hard working men and women work every day just to put food on their table and provide adequate shelter for their families.

The high price of gasoline and everyday commodities hits our poor the hardest. While the high price of oil and the high world price of rice are a global issue outside the control of any one government, we have nevertheless taken and must continue to take actions to reduce the pain on our people of these high prices. We have cut tariffs. We have started providing targeted cash payments to the poorest of our poor to help them cope. We are spending billions on seed support, irrigation, farm to market roads, no-frills agricultural cargo airports and roll-on-roll-off ferry systems for agricultural cargo to ensure food security. We have introduced in Congress an amendment to the EPIRA to protect our citizens from unreasonably high electric power rates.

We live in a time of great challenges. The issues we champion define our party. We count the fight for a strong economy to dramatically cut poverty, the fight for a clean environment and the fight for a quality education the highest imperatives of our time. These three issues – the three “E’s” of Economy, Environment and Education – are central to lifting our nation up and preparing the next generation of leaders, hopefully many of them from our party.

With our reinvigorated party’s leadership, and with our continuing unity, I remain bullish on our country, optimistic about our future and deeply committed to being a force for good. I am humbled at having the privilege of serving this nation not only as President of the Philippines but also as Chair of Lakas.

Let us work hard together for the good of the nation and for our party’s victory in 2010, when, by the mighty hand of Lakas and the blessings and support of the Filipino people, I shall pass on the torch of national leadership in a milieu of tranquility, justice, hope and economic well-being for our beloved countrymen.

Long live LAKAS CMD!!!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). Speech of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo during the Lakas National Directorate Assembly. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123058/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1069&Itemid=38