Thank you very much. Thank you.

Thank you very much, Brother Mike. Sister Belen; — those with seats may sit down — Secretary Mike Defensor who is also here; Chairman of the Social Security System, Bernardino Aves; our various guests; my brothers and sisters who are children of Yahweh El Shaddai.

Palm Sunday serves as a reminder to us all of the welcoming of Jerusalem to Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior.

We celebrate this every year because just like before, we remember, we consider until now our salvation and His response to our problems.

And our country really has many problems. Approximately eighteen years have passed since the good work of Yahweh El Shaddai began in Barangay Sto. Niño here in Paranaque under the leadership of our chief servant, our servant leader Bro. Mike Velarde. At that time — as I said, “Brother Mike, did you start here?” “no,” he said. “over there, near the airport.” Only a few hundred people attended at that time the weekly activity that now bears fruit in millions of members in various parts of the world.

And brothers and sisters, for me it is a great honor because 18 years ago, this very beautiful work started by Brother Mike on the 9th year… Nine years ago, I was already here at El Shaddai. That's how long our association has been. Now this year, Brother Mike invited me to attend here, to participate in the mass, to stay overnight on Easter Sunday. As I do, every Easter Sunday with you, unless I am out-of-town. Well, this year, I was invited there in Limasawa this coming Sunday. Because the First mass in the Philippines was held on Easter Sunday in Limasawa four centuries ago. So I told Brother Mike, I cannot go on Easter Sunday because I have already promised our brothers and sisters in Limasawa that I will attend mass there on Easter Sunday. “Can I, Brother Mike, even if it's not overnight, your usual Palm Sunday Mass, I'll just go to your anticipated mass on Saturday night before Palm Sunday?” Well, we know in the Lord there are no coincidences. The Lord really wants me to attend this evening, this day, because this day is our move to this place. And the move coincided with Palm Sunday and I know, I believe that this is to welcome the return of the good work of El Shaddai here in Paranaque.

The “Palm Sunday Family Appointment with El Shaddai Walk of Faith, Love and Unity” is a testament to our belief in the power of faith, love and unity.

And I, I do not lose faith and belief as the song we sing after communion says: let them see Christ in me. I do not lose faith that you, I, we, we will see Christ in one another.

We believe as children of God that each of us has a purpose to fulfill for His glory and for the glory of His kingdom. We also believe as Filipinos that God has a good and beautiful destiny for our country and our countrymen. And just like the song we sing after communion: Lord you are faithful. That is not lost in my belief.

My countrymen, we pray as children of God and as Filipinos that we love and unite all of us so that we can advance our country towards progress, peace and greatness.

This morning, as always, as your brother in Yahweh El Shaddai and a partner for the last 19 years in this work, I greet you all, Brother Mike, Sister Belen, all the workers in this vineyard — a happy, glorious and miraculous Palm Sunday.

I always include you all in my prayers, and you are always in my heart and mind in the governance of our country. May Yahweh El Shaddai bless us all.

Earlier, when I was praying after communion and we were singing let them see Christ in me, I said, “Lord, who are them?” First of all, of course, our brothers and sisters here in the work. Then I said, “Lord, are there more?” He said, “there are,” because He reminded me, in my reflection that when I go to various urban poor communities I see many out-of- school youth, young people who are not able to study. And these young people who are not able to study are very entertained by illegal drugs. So what reached me in my reflection is that if we want these out-of- school youth to see the face of Christ, we need to give them another way of life so that illegal drugs do not entertain them.

The government of your servant, our government, has had a program since last summer that was done in a small way for our out-of-school youth. When my father, Diosdado Macapagal was President of the Philippines, he created a program they called emergency employment. In fact, my father's emergency employment built many roads like the road in… That surrounds Sampaloc lake, in San Pablo City, or the road there in the mountains from San Carlos City to Bacolod City. In those days they were small roads, now paved roads. But in these times, we have many other expenses. Housing, for example, and other needs of our people. Affordable medicine that we import so that you — especially the poor — do not buy expensive medicine — if you buy medicine in government hospitals. So there is only a little left for what is called emergency employment.

But the message that reached me, from Christ whom we celebrate the beginning of his sacrifice on Palm Sunday, is that if we want our out-of- school youth to see the face of Christ, we must expand the emergency employment program for our out-of-school youth in urban poor communities.

This is my plan to expand this program this summer that is about to begin. And what I ask of you is your prayer that this will be successful so that many young people who seem to be lost because they are entertained and tempted by illegal drugs can return to the embrace of our beloved Jesus Christ.

Thank you very much and Happy Easter in advance to all of you!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Message during El Shaddai’s Eucharistic Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230134/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7624&Itemid=38