Thank you very much to the son of Batangas City, who is one of my many appointees as a member of my cabinet, Secretary Nani Perez.

Who else was appointed to my Cabinet? Joe Villegas mentioned earlier Secretary Ed Ermita and even the chief of our Philippine National Police is also a son of Batangas province, Larry Mendoza. I had a Cabinet member from Batangas, Secretary Renato Corona, who is now a Justice of the Supreme Court, also a son of Batangas.

Let me first greet the various officials of the province of Batangas who are here now: first of all, the father of Batangas, Governor Dodo Mandanas; and our host here in the city of Batangas City, Mayor Eddie Dimacuha; Vice Governor Peter Laurel; and the Congresswoman from the birthplace of General Malvar, Congresswoman Vicky Reyes.

Let me also greet the members of the Malvar family, many of whom are not only sons and daughters of a hero but for me personally, many of them have also been a part of my life and the life of my family. First of all, there is Dra. Isabel Malvar-Villegas, the surviving daughter of General Malvar. When I was studying at Assumption, she was our school dentist so every year, semester-semester she would examine me. Thank you Dra. Villegas for my teeth still being whole. But when I was in gradeschool, you know—oh, maybe my Cabinet members and the other officials are surprised why I really like to travel all over the Philippines and why I am very familiar with the location of all the places in the Philippines. In other words, why I am very good in Geography—when I was in grade five, my geography teacher was Ms. Malvar, Aurora Malvar. And when I became a college student, my teacher in Logic was Ms. Aurora Malvar who became Sister Anunciata, so she was also a big part of my life. That's why until now, Sister, I still love geography and many say I am very logical, thank you for what you taught me.

When I worked in the administration of President Cory Aquino, that's when I met the wife of the manager of Hacienda Luisita and I was surprised that she was also a granddaughter of General Malvar, this is Naty Malvar-Mendoza. And after that, her son is now the current mayor of Tarlac City, Mayor Aro Mendoza. Where is the mayor? And when my father was president and even after he finished his term as president, when he became president of the Constitutional Convention and even after that when my father fought with the various new heroes of our country during martial law, one of his close guides was none other than our speaker earlier, Joe Malvar-Villegas. When I became an economist and taught economics to our youth, I taught them the books of Dr. Bernie Villegas. And when I became a politician I met here in Batangas Board member Mike Malvar. So there are so many Malvars who have been a part of my life, part of my father's life, as well as the life of Batangas and our country.

And I want to greet all the people of Batangas who are paying respect now to the end of the Philippine-American War and to the heroism of General Malvar, the various mayors. And I want to greet our excellent Tagalog speaker, the Son-in-Law of the Philippines, the Labor Attache of the United States, Mr. Rick Nelson, so my greetings to you are in Tagalog. To all of you, my countrymen:

Good afternoon to you. And I am happy to be with you, my countrymen, especially the Batanguenos, on this historic day.

It is a great honor for me to be here at the Centennial of the end of the Philippine-American War, as Joe Villegas said, 100 years ago my father, Diosdado Macapagal, as President also attended the Centenary of General Miguel Malvar.

As we saw in the very beautiful scene presented by the students, as I told Governor Mandanas, “our scene here is very good. The script is beautiful, very profound, and the Tagalog is almost poetic.” I asked, “is this an inherited script or was there a competition and the children, the youth here, also wrote it?” And their emoting was very clear. That’s why we learned so much from what these children of Batangas taught us — these from the Sto. Nino Formation and Science High School Theater Art Organization. They described to us that in your province, a hundred years ago, the Filipino-American War formally ended where, as we saw, General Miguel Malvar rose to prominence.

We remember that General Emilio Aguinaldo declared our independence on June 12, 1898, and the first Republic of the Philippines was established on January 23, 1899. Two weeks after the inauguration of our Republic in Malolos, Bulacan where — before that, at the Tejeros Convention, Aguinaldo was elected as President of the Philippines — the Filipino-American War broke out on February 4, 1899.

The arrest of General Aguinaldo in Palanan, Isabela happened on March 23rd, 1901, and when that happened, it signaled the end of the first Republic of the Philippines, they say, but there were also some generals who continued the fight.

And since then, on July 13, 1901, General Malvar led them, the generals who continued the fight. General Malvar held the political and military control of our Republic. And for more than a year, the Batangueño general bravely fought in Mt. Makiling and the mountains of Batangas. Finally, at General Franklin J. Bell's headquarters in Lipa on April 16, 1902, the Filipino-American War ended.

Now, as Joe said, I wish I could declare General Miguel Malvar as Second President. I asked Nani Perez, my Secretary of Justice, “is that within my power?” Nani said, “you want to, no matter how much you want to do it, the president cannot declare someone as president. That needs to be fulfilled first by law.” So perhaps we need to place our hope in our Congress for that to happen.

But while we wait for that, in our reflection on the Philippine-American War, we see that our heroes and other brave Filipinos showed their love for their country in various ways, whether in times of war or peace. In our reflection on that war, we also see the heroism of General Miguel Malvar, whom we can call a “Man of Action.” And as we saw earlier, General Malvar was born into what could be called a good family. He was born in Sto. Tomas, Batangas on September 27, 1865. Nani, isn’t that also your birthday? That’s why Nani’s birthday is made a holiday, it turns out it’s also General Malvar’s birthday. Anyway, General Malvar chose to leave a comfortable life to fight for the new Republic of the Philippines.

The message of our celebration today is clear. It means that we should not lose heart in facing our problems. If we fail at first, we should not immediately give up, but rather, find out where we went wrong and strive harder to achieve success.

The chapter of our history that we commemorate today was redeemed by the lives and blood of our ancestors. This should serve as an inspiration to us in redeeming our countrymen from poverty. It will be easy because we no longer need to sacrifice our lives and blood. All we need is to unite, help each other, and work hard to give the Filipino people a good future.

Batangas is a good place to say that because not only did Batangas nurture and create General Malvar, but as Governor Mandanas said, Batangas is now number one in investments in the entire country.

Like General Malvar, I expect that the Batanguenos of today will not surrender in the fight against poverty, especially since you have won. You are even better off than other parts of the Philippines. I hope your good unity, concern, and greatness will serve as a good example to ensure the success of our fight against poverty.

We continue to implement projects in Batangas that improve the lives of the people of Batangas, the people of Calabarzon, and the entire nation. One of these, which we discussed in our Cabinet meeting earlier, is the Batangas International Port, which we expect to provide more jobs for the great workers of Batangas, as well as the great workers of other parts of Calabarzon. This Batangas Port, if we count the five most important projects of the Macapagal-Arroyo administration, the Batangas Port is one of the most important projects we have. This port is the flagship project of Calabarzon, which was initiated by the Department of Trade and Industry when I was undersecretary of that department. Earlier, as I was entering the provincial capitol, Governor Mandanas asked me, “Is this your first time entering the provincial capitol?” I said, “First time as president.” But when I was undersecretary, I was always here because the Calabarzon project and because the flagship of Calabarzon was the Batangas Port even when I was undersecretary.

You know, Calabarzon is a prime example of why the CORD system (Cabinet Official for Regional Development) created by President Cory Aquino was good, because she chose the Secretary of Trade and Industry, Secretary Joe Concepcion, as her CORD for Region IV. And from being the DTI’s CORD, Calabarzon came about, and as Undersecretary for Planning, I was the one managing the planning for Calabarzon, so I was always here.

In the planning of Calabarzon, of course, industry needs a port – it wouldn't make sense to bring the products of Batangas all the way to Manila. There were many candidate International Ports in the Calabarzon masterplan, but because Nani Perez was the Secretary of Transportation at that time, the Batangas Port Project won, so Batangas Port became the port of Calabarzon. But when I became president, I was surprised that the construction of the international port itself had not yet begun. Imagine, I was Undersecretary of Trade and Industry when this project started – 1989. After that, I became Senator twice, then Vice-President, then President, and the construction of the international port still hadn’t begun. So, how close Malvar is to the Macapagal family, how close the Batanguenos are to the administration with so many Batanguenos in our cabinet, I forced myself to find all the bottlenecks, and I forced myself to address them. And finally, on the first anniversary of Edsa 2, on January 16, construction began. And it is a great honor for me to have broken ground on a project that is so important to my life and to our administration.

The Batangas port is one of our main ways of answering the challenges of the new century.

Earlier, Governor Mandanas explained to our Cabinet meeting the various other important projects of Batangas and Calabarzon so that this region can finally fully exist, especially as we enter the 21st century.

If you think about it, our world has changed a lot in the past hundred years since the Philippine-American War ended. Those who were once our enemies are now our close allies.

Although the Americans were our adversaries a century ago, they became our allies in World War II. Those who were our enemies during World War II, the Japanese, are now providing us with the largest amount of official development assistance to continue our development projects. In fact, the funding for the construction of the Batangas port comes from the Japanese government.

Therefore, the enemy is different, and the face of the adversary and warfare is different now. Our enemies are no longer countries but terrorists who sow terror, such as in the southern part of our country, especially in Basilan.

The Americans are now our partners in fighting terrorism in our land. Through the Balikatan exercises we conduct, Filipino and American soldiers are training together to suppress terrorists.

Instead of showing who is better, everyone involved in Balikatan has something to learn from each other. The cooperation of the Americans does not mean that we underestimate the skill and courage of the Filipino soldier. Our soldiers and leaders, like General Malvar, have already shown their courage during the Filipino-American War. They are still brave today. Now we are trying to see how the combined courage of Filipinos and the equipment of the Americans can be used effectively to end the violence of terrorists in the south of our country.

The twin wars against terrorism and poverty are the heaviest challenges we face today. Fighting terrorism is also fighting poverty. That's why Dr. Villegas, the grandson of General Malvar, is one of the best economists in our country because our enemy now is not the Americans but poverty. Therefore, it is our duty to all fight poverty so that we can continue to enjoy the freedom fought for by our revolutionaries in the past.

Until his death on October 13, 1911, General Malvar never forgot the well-being of his countrymen. His last instruction to his children was this, and may I quote. He said, “you should respect and love those who have, but more so, much more the poor,” General Malvar said.

In our fight against poverty now, let us also show courage and love of country like that shown by General Malvar and his fellow revolutionaries. They defended our freedom then, so it is our generation's duty to protect this freedom, including freedom from oppressive poverty and the violence of terrorism.

If we do not unite and work together now to succeed in this fight, all that our ancestors fought for will be in vain. And because General Malvar and his fellow Batangueños showed their mettle to demonstrate the resilience, courage, and fortitude of the Filipino, I expect you, the people of Batangas, to once again lead the way in overcoming our problem of poverty. This may be the best tribute we can give to the ideals of General Malvar and other brave Filipino heroes.

Therefore, today I am pleased that if General Malvar continued the fight even when it was said that the republic had fallen when Aguinaldo was imprisoned. Even though we struggled in the world last year, Batangas is still number one in investments. So like General Malvar, Batangas continues the fight against poverty.

And as a continuation of respect and conclusion, earlier Dr. Villegas, Bernie Villegas, showed the message given to you by my father, during the 100th Birth Anniversary of General Malvar, and with your apologies, I will end by reading the message of Diosdado Macapagal as a tribute to General Miguel Malvar. He said:

“The Philippine revolution spawned a number of courageous generals who led our country in its glorious fight for freedom. Among the bravest and most patriotic was General Miguel Malvar of Batangas. Long after Aguinaldo’s capture General Malvar carried on the fight against the American forces convinced of the justice of the cause for which the revolution stood. But a stout heart alone, he realized could avail him little against the superior force of the enemy. In fact, he had to fight not only against the american forces but also against sickness and starvation which stalked his units. “I am giving up,” he told General Bell to whom he finally surrendered, “Only because my soldiers and my own family who have fought side by side with me all thse months are suffering from hunger and all kinds of hardships.” For his frankness, his dignity, his unusual courage and firmness of character, General Malvar won the admiration of the American General. He lived long enough to know the glory of being proclaimed everywhere he went as one of the greatest Filipinos who ever lived. The first one who offered the strongest armed resistance against the Americans. Truly, General Malvar has become our countries symbol of courageous resistance against foreign domination.”

So now today Batanguenos, we honor our memory of General Miguel Malvar. And today let us tell him who is watching our program now in his name, we will fight the new enemy of our country, the problem of poverty.

Thank you very much and Happy End of the Philippine-American War to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Commemoration of the Centennial Celebration of the End of the Philippine-American War. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225958/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7644&Itemid=38