Thank you very much, Secretary Ebdane.

Vice President Noli De Castro, Major General Maligalig and the administration faculty and staff of the Philippine Military Academy, General Esperon and the other officers and members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, Congressman Domogan, Governor Melchor and the other officials of the Philippine government, Cabinet members, foreign diplomatic military and defense officials, proud parents lalung-lalo na ang ina ni Andrelee Mojica.

I learned about Andrelee's story that when he was still in high school, his father got sick and because the tuition for college needed to be paid for his father's treatment, he stopped studying until, without his parents' knowledge, he took the examination for the Philippine Military Academy and passed.

And I have learned that many of our graduates today have a very similar kind of success story as Andrelee. Congratulations! To their parents for bringing them up that way. Congratulations! Also to the proud friends and family, and I must especially congratulate the vigorous participation of the Cagayan province delegation.

And before I forget, at the end of my speech which I shall do at the beginning, in honor of the graduates of the Philippine Military Academy today, as your going away present to your underclassmen, I hereby pardon the outstanding punishments of the cadet corps of the PMA as may be prescribed by the superintendent of the PMA effective today.

Sa inyong lahat, congratulations! Maragtas class of 2007.

As General Maligalig said, your class proudly derives its name from the 13th century epic poem ‘Maragtas’. For the information of others, this legend narrates the tale of ten Bornean datus who fled persecution and sought freedom through uncharted seas and shores.

Today, eight centuries later, through you, Maragtas class 2007, government will reach the farthest communities of the land and assure their security and freedom. Because you, Maragtas class 2007, will be enablers of a peaceful and productive life among our people.

Indeed, as General Maligalig pointed out when he talked about the multi-faceted expectations of your class, the armed forces must be the vanguard of a strong economy.

Speaking of the economy, the strength of the peso is boosting social amelioration by denting the price of water, gasoline, LPG and food. We’re making headway in the social payback of economic growth — this is the real story taking place in the lives of the people. The combined potency of a robust economic blueprint and the productivity of Filipinos here and abroad has caught the eye of investors and political observers who are now seeing a permanent projectory of economic and political stability.

The focus of the world is not only on the Philippine economic recovery, but the way we are making democracy work while keeping the threat of terror at bay. We are consolidating the political, economic, social and security ramparts of nation-building in a manner and pace that has never been done. And this is a tribute, the resiliency, excellence, spirit of enterprise and courage of the Filipino people, the same resiliency, excellence and spirit that we have seen in the personal histories of many of the members of Maragtas class 2007. Congratulations! To you for that.

For every ounce of vigilance we invest in keeping the economy strong, the people reap tenfold — internal jobs, better schools, more health services, roads and bridges — all working to drive their hopes for the future.

Maragtas class 2007, you are the first, as General Naligalig said, to graduate under the enhanced mission of the Philippine Military Academy. And this enhanced mission in turn is anchored on the Philippine defense reform program which we have started to implement last year. We are determined under this Philippine defense program to modernize the AFP in order to deliver the best equipment and supplies to our soldiers in the field.

And you, my dear graduating class, you will be able to experience during your career something that many since the class of cavalier Ronald Patugalan probably have not seen in a long time, you will eventually one of these days be able to use brand new helicopters in your machines. You are also the first to graduate since the passage of the anti-terrorism law formally known as the human security act which gives us a potent piece of armor to shield not only the people but our economy as well from the scourge of evil.

I am glad that in his remarks, General Maligalig also talked about human security, the many facets of human security. Of those many facets, we can somehow recognize and classify them into two major components of human security — freedom from fear and freedom from want. This is our formula for enduring peace.

You, our young soldiers, will spearhead the fight against terror in the same way that our young professionals and entrepreneurs are leading the fight against poverty while helping build excellence for our people everywhere in our nation and in the world.

Therefore, let me take advantage of this gathering to share the paradigm for peace we have developed in dealing with Mindanao at a time when hard power has fallen short in proving its value to the world. The Philippine model for dealing with the flashpoint area of Mindanao has focused on a unique combination of soft and hard power. To promote peace, we have been able to meld together confidence-building measures grounded on strong interfaith dialogue and cultural awareness, investments in economic and basic infrastructure development, and mutual security arrangements to keep the peace in Mindanao.

And that is what you will do, young soldiers.

I have read in the papers that many of you are excited to go to Jolo. Yes, you will go and you will fight, but you will also build schools, you will build roads, you will teach the children to read, and you will understand one another’s religions.

The force of political stability must be seen in all other facets of our national life rather than just anti-terrorism and anti-insurgency. Safe streets, inviolable homes, public mobility free from crime, workers, public servants, farmers, professionals and investors must enjoy equal protection and freedom from fear. And this is what you, Maragtas class 2007, will provide for the people.

Therefore in ending, to the Maragtas class, my marching orders are — have a leader’s heart. What is a leader’s heart? I don’t have to describe a leader’s heart, because in her valedictory address, we heard Andrelee Mojica talk about it. She has a leader’s heart. I know you all have a leader’s heart in Maragtas class 2007. Have a leader’s heart and love the people you serve. Become legends in your own time, not only in your success stories as you have gone through the Philippine Military Academy, but in the successes that you will share with the people in the communities that you will serve.

And in going forth to your mission to serve the people, step forth with courage, integrity and loyalty.

Congratulations!

Thank you all very much!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the 102nd Commencement Exercises of the Philippine Military Academy (PMA) ‘Maragtas’ Class 2007. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151059/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1967&Itemid=38