Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines Before the Forum for Sustainable Development Strategy for Manila Bay

[Delivered at the Hotel Philippine Plaza, CCP Complex, Pasay City, June 7, 2006]

TOWARDS A SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY FOR MANILA BAY

Thank you all for coming to this forum. This is one of the biggest gatherings of Filipino decision-makers who have the will and the heart to protect our coasts and marine resources. And we also thank our partners, the UNDP, represented by Madame Noble; the global environmental facility and USAID; and of course our Regional Program Director of the Partnership for Environmental Management in the Seas of East Asia, for being at our side to protect the seas and marine life not only of the Philippines but of the whole of East Asia. Not only are we here to comply with our commitments to sustainable development strategy for the seas of East Asia, we are also here as responsible citizens complying with our own medium-term Philippine development plan to manage our natural resources and protect the environment to improve our quality of life and that of future generations.

Speaking of protecting the quality of life, allow me to have a little digression. On this occasion celebrating the quality of life, we celebrate the victory of life as I thank congress for its immediate action in abolishing the death penalty law. But make no mistake about it, the abolition of .the death penalty will be complemented by a stricter and sterner enforcement of the law in all fronts.

This is not a victory for criminals as some would claim, but rather clear proof that Filipinos respect life and uphold the virtue and religious doctrines that are expected of us as a dominant Christian nation. We are also glad that the Philippines has been taken off the watch list for human trafficking, which demonstrates our solid and effective programs to protect the welfare of women and children.

We urge our religious leaders to help the government in the moral and spiritual transformation of convicted offenders, particularly those serving maximum jail terms, even if they are not allowed parole. For our part, we assure the public that we will implement all available means of improving our jail facilities in order to render them more conducive to our prisoner rehabilitation and reform programs. We praise God for this event, and we to pray for a society of peace, harmony and solidarity under the rule of law.

Our administration is preparing for the future and doing everything in our power to spend value-added tax moneys on health, education and infrastructure; engaging foreign travel to promote investments and protect OFWs; and creating energy independence and promoting environmental quality

Our medium-term plan embodies our Ten-Point Pro-Poor Agenda which provides that by 2010, we shall have brought clean water to the entire country. And to do that, we must take care of environmental quality. We can only ensure clean water by implementing the Solid Waste Management act of 2001 and the Clean Water Act of 2004 which both became law during my administration. And also by rationalizing and prioritizing reforestation in watersheds to preserve rivers, like the Pasig River, and other fresh water systems and also for flood control.

Our medium-term plan also considers that we are the second largest archipelago in the world with a fragile island ecosystem. We have—according to the notes given to me by Angie Reyes—842 coastal cities and municipalities, so Bais and Puerto Galera are only two of those more than 800, and 62 percent of our population makes use of the nation’s coasts for fishing, transport, settlement and other activities.

To protect our coasts and marine waters, however, we must protect the entire environment—our forests, our lands, our waters, our air—for almost everything that ensues from environmental degradation flows down and impacts negatively on the quality of our seas as we have seen happening to Manila Bay.

And the poor are the first ones to suffer the effects of environmental degradation. Makeshift shanties are the first to be carried away by the floods and small-scale fishermen are the first to lose their livelihood due to coastal destruction. Once upon a time when we were very young, Manila Bay gave us the biggest amount of fish. Now, Manila Bay gives us a tiny fraction of the entire marine production of our country.

This forum—following the style of Secretary Reyes since he was in the armed forces and through the Department of National Defense and through the Department of Interior and Local Government—must focus on a holistic approach. In the cabinet they call Angie Mr. Holistic, remember Bebet? A holistic approach that emphasizes fighting poverty and enabling every man and woman and child in the Philippines to participate in sustainable development practices.

The Manila Bay Environmental Management Project is a good test case to demonstrate that the country’s most important bay can meet the needs of all sectors relying on it for food, livelihood, commerce and transportation while protecting it from further degradation.

When Angie invited me to open this forum, as I am opening it today, and he said it’s going to be in a hotel, “Angie, let’s do it in front of the problem. Let’s physically face the problem. Let’s do it facing Manila Bay.” and that’s why we have this opening session here today.

And today, I would like to let you know that I have signed or I am signing—actually, I have signed but if they have it here I can ceremonially sign it again—I signed yesterday an executive order adopting integrated coastal management. I learned from Dr. Chua another acronym—ICM. As a national—but I know it as Integrated Coastal Management—as a national strategy for the sustainable development of our country’s coastal and marine habitats and resources, I’m further directing Secretary Reyes to be the lead to formulate jointly with the Department of Agriculture, the local governments involved, the NED A, the Department of Foreign Affairs, the Department of Tourism, the Department of Transportation and Communications and National Integrated Coastal Management Plan in accordance with the agreements that will be forged in this forum and in other consultations with various sectors.

We must act together, and we must act now. And on this note, I open this very important forum on Sustainable Development Strategy for Manila Bay.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].