Thank you, Secretary Remonde.

If you think I’m such a hard working president, you can blame my slave driver boss in the Department of Trade and Industry, Joe Concepcion, for training me to be hard working. (Applause) Chairman and Mrs. Concepcion, Joey, Marie and the other members of the Concepcion family, Peter Favila, officials of RFM, ladies and gentlemen.

To the RFM family, happy golden anniversary! (Applause) And congratulations on your new Fiesta Pasta Plant, the largest pasta factory in the whole of Asia! (Applause) Joey was telling us in his speech about what happened fifty years ago in the founding of RFM. But, while we were listening to Joey, Marivic was also telling us how a lot of eyebrows were raised — even the government was against it at that time — when Mr. Jose Concepcion, Sr., Don Salvador Araneta, Mr. Server, Mr. Alvino Sycip and other partners put up a flour mill because they said we don’t grow wheat. What will you do putting up a flour mill, and you’re going to have to aircondition the whole plant? But today, that pioneering company has grown into a huge, diversified conglomerate, steered successively by three able generations of Jose Concepcions. (Applause)

Under the leadership of my boss, JoeCon, Jr., RFM strengthened its forward and backward linkages, venturing to feed milling, hog and poultry raising, and meat processing. And as he pushed his flagship company into new frontiers, JoeCon kept reminding his people, his consumers, and the Filipino public that — “Yes, the Filipino Can!” (Applause) He brought this motto with him when he joined the Department of Trade and Industry. And I guess, that’s where I learned from him not only the value of very very hard work because we use to start our days with breakfast meetings and work well into the night. But one time he told me, “You know, you’re married so you should have some family life, so you can go home after dinner.” He used to tell me that.

But today even outside of government and back in business, JoeCon continues to play a leading role in public affairs especially in the ASEAN Business Advisory Council which is so important for our country. (Applause)

And when his turn at the helm came, Joey III held on, as he said earlier, to his grandfather’s vision and his father’s philosophy as he further expanded into other products that are now household brands like Selecta, Sarsi, and now Fiesta, to name just a few. Joey is even at my request producing vegetable-based noodles that is called “Proud Harvest” and aptly so. (Applause) We were not embarrassed to ask Joey to help our farmers in the Cordilleras and also to help our consumers look for a cheaper substitute for flour or wheat-based noodles because Joey is supporting the government’s program for entrepreneurs by helping them become good managers under the “Go Negosyo!” (Applause)

This is truly a partnership with our government program to establish a deep foundation for a broad middle class. Thank you for your support, Joey, for “Go Negosyo!” and also for Proud Harvest. (Applause)

I am sure that during this third generation of Jose Concepcion’s leadership, RFM will continue to be a giant in food processing in our country and even abroad, in foreign shores in the next 50 years. For instance, Peter told me that these spaghetti products are going to be exported to Vietnam. See, didn't they say Vietnam is our competitor, but we are selling to Vietnam because of the competitiveness of RFM. Congratulations! (Applause)

We encourage continued activity by big and sturdy business groups like RFM. This also means we hope RFM will participate in the bidding in the privatization that government continues to promote, as a counterpoint to our own pump priming. The global credit crunch can be an opportunity, not a crisis for sturdy giants like RFM. Indeed, this is a time of opportunity to the fiscally strong. On the side of economies, to the likes of oil-producing countries, the Singapores of the world and other fiscally strong economies, this is a time to exploit the financial vacuum, as they did earlier this year by buying into large financial institutions. Similarly, on the part of corporations in the private sector, this is the time for the business group like RFM who have the financial liquidity to expand their role in their respective markets. And I am glad Fiesta is a symbol of their response to that challenge. Congratulations! (Applause)

Of equal importance to sheer financial capacity is the ability to decide and move quickly — the road between a decision to do business and the actual writing of the check is fraught with uncertainty. But Peter told me that this plant was put up in 80 days so RFM has the financial clout and also the decisiveness to be a major player in this globally competitive world. (Applause)

Going to nations again, the bastions of wealth with both financial capacity and quick execution are the Middle East powers, given their oil-driven wealth and their unitary government apparatus. The fact that the Philippines has a Mindanao close to the hearts of Middle East powers opens up such opportunities. I hope that a large and sturdy and decisive company like RFM will avail of these opportunities and do business with the Middle East soon.

Because the U.S. financial crisis appears deeper than most anticipated; Fortunately, on the home front, the Philippines appears in relatively good shape. Thanks to our fiscal reforms — that manifested in seven percent plus GDP growth last year. The impact of the current world financial turmoil on the Philippine banking system is limited. Local banks are generally domestically-oriented and still focusing on the traditional banking business of accepting deposits and granting loans to creditworthy companies like RFM.

Therefore, the exposure of Philippine banks to distressed banks is minimal. When the crunch burst into a crisis, our banks exposure was only two-fifths of one percent of the total asset of the banking system when Lehman Brothers declared bankruptcy. After that, our banking systems have frequently reduced this exposure to one-third of one percent, and this exposure is fully reserved.

The solvency position of the Philippine banking system is adequate to whether the present world financial crunch. The innate conservatism of our banks is matched by the prudential foresight of our regulators. The reforms that the Central Bank instituted in the past years in terms of capital buildup, enhanced risk management, and adherence to good governance are serving us in good stead. These reforms have resulted in a stronger banking system, well-capitalized and improved asset quality including holding the loans of sturdy companies like RFM.

I count on JoeCon’s help, not as the head of RFM because that’s Joey now, but to the ASEAN Business Advisory Council, as during these important times, I have proposed for

ASEAN Plus 3 to convene on the sidelines of the ASEM Summit in Beijing next week to tackle the impact of the current credit crunch.

I am asking developing and emerging economies to unite and come up with a coordinated approach to cushion the impact of a collapse of highly developed economies. I’m urging the developed countries or G7 to consider the interest of developing countries in their plan to prevent a worldwide economic meltdown.

As part of our initiative, on my instruction — Secretary Gary Teves, who is now in Washington — convened a meeting of the ASEAN Economic Ministers and they have come up with some common actions in order to prepare for any contingencies that may happen in ASEAN. And I will be sharing this with you in the next few days. For the moment, I can say, quoting what our boss Joe Concepcion used to say almost everyday in our meetings at the Department of Trade and Industry — “Yes, the Filipino Can!” (Applause)

The Filipino can withstand the global credit crunch and soon arrive at a better day to achieve our dream of reaching the threshold of first-world in 20 years.

Yes, the Filipino can because we have companies like RFM. Yes, RFM can maintain the quality of its products, increase its growth and sustain its commitment to social responsibility to help our less fortunate stand on their own.

And so on this day, as we celebrate what the Filipino can, let us say, “Mabuhay RFM!”

More power in the next fifty years.

Thank you all very much. (Applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the rededication ceremony of the RFM flour mill and launching of the RFM pasta plant in celebration of RFM Food Corporation’s 50th anniversary. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135058/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1753&Itemid=38