Speech Before the House of Representatives of the People

His Excellency Salomon Nguema Owono

Distinguished members of the House of Representatives of the People

Colleagues in the Philippine delegation,

Ladies and gentlemen,

Good morning.

Thank you very much to the House of Representatives of the People of Equatorial Guinea for this special session in my honor.

The legislature is the voice of the people, in Africa as well as in Asia. We are proud to say that in Asia, the Philippine Congress has been a beacon of freedom for one hundred years now.

Our two countries share a legacy and a similar culture though we are located far away from each other, you in the western edge of Africa and we in the eastern edge of Asia, and the color of our skin is different from each other. Equatorial Guinea is the only hispanic country in Africa and the Philippines is the only hispanic country in Asia.

At the Asia-Africa Summit held in Bandung, Indonesia in April 2005, the leaders of Asian and African countries signed a Declaration on the New Asian-African Strategic Partnership, which identified concrete measures for partnership. Likewise, the leaders tried to strengthen both multilateral and bilateral ties.

That is why we were very happy when President Obiang made a state visit to the Philippines in May of last year. He left to strengthen the bilateral ties between the Philippines and Equatorial Guinea, and to explore ways for cooperation and greater interaction between the peoples of the two countries.

We explored new areas of cooperation and talked about the opportunities that each country offers.

During his visit, President Obiang expressed interest in opportunities for training and greater technical knowledge, particularly in the agricultural, fisheries, and financial sectors, while we, for our part, expressed interest in concessions in oil.

We witnessed the signing of the General Agreement on Economic, Cultural, Scientific and Technological Cooperation, and an Agreement on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments – the first two bilateral agreements between the Philippines and Equatorial Guinea.

We appreciate the opportunity to meet again with President Obiang to renew the bilateral relations between the Philippines and Equatorial Guinea.

This is my first state visit to an African country since I assumed the presidency in 2001.

I have come to Equatorial Guinea to further strengthen the ties between our two countries and to continue the initiatives that our countries have begun during the visit to the Philippines of your President last year.

Our state visit here is a good opportunity to foster these forms of cooperation and further strengthen bilateral relations and, based on our historical ties, to a greater development and progress.

We are proud of the contribution of Filipino workers to the development of this country, particularly the 2,500 Filipino professionals employed in the banking, finance and oil sectors of Equatorial Guinea.

We are very willing to help Equatorial Guinea in the development of its human capacity and infrastructure.

The Philippine Government is willing to forge collaborations with Equatorial Guinea.

We reiterate the Philippines’ readiness to enter into arrangements for joint ventures in petroleum upstream activities on the basis of equitable sharing and mutual benefit.

Distinguished members of the Chamber, let us work together to bridge the gap between Asia and Africa and to bring our peoples even closer.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech at the opening session of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea’s Camara de Reprentantes del Pueblo during her state visit to the West African nation. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412150004/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2022&Itemid=38