Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 8th Annual Convention of the Philippine Society of Geriatric Medicine

[Delivered at the Centennial Hall, Manila Hotel, November 8, 2007]

Thank you. Thank you very much Secretary Duque.

Our very young president of the Philippine Society Geriatic Medicine Dr. De la Vega, our convention chairman Dr. Alejandro, our friend from Okinawa Mr. Etokasu, executive director of the aim policy center Potch Macaranas, (applause) delegates to the annual convention of the Philippine Society of Geriatric Medicine.

And may I give special acknowledgement to the doctor who introduced me to the value geriatric care Dr. Emmanuel Gatchalian. (applause) he came into my mind when I got the invitation to be here with you today.

And I am glad, I’m glad to be here with you today. I see people from the Philippines. People from all over the world who have the passion to improve the quality of life of our elderly. This is so important for us Filipinos because Filipinos unlike the Japanese are a young population. And so, most of our resources are concentrated on how we can take better care of the majority of our population who are young. But I thank you for being here for being a reminder that that we must take care of the elderly even though their population is not as large as the population of our young people in the Philippines. (applause) and we officially recognized this.

In my state of the nation address last July, I expressed the conviction that we must invest in strengthening our social safety net including better access to healthcare, job training and care for our elderly. In that same state of the nation address I asked congress to pass legislation that brings improved long term care for our senior citizens. (applause) and today that we are here together, I ask you who love our elderly to help our administration draft the appropriate legislation. (applause)

It is said that the expanded senior citizens’ act which is passed during our administration is one of the best in the world. But we want to make it even better.

Subject to your advice, the legislation I am thinking of is one that will increase the number of older persons who will go through a geriatric health screen, especially screening for geriatric syndromes such as urinary incontinence, memory and affective illnesses, height and weight determination, and hearing evaluation.

The legislation I am thinking of is one that will put more money in the hands of the older persons for medicine, for medical care and provide some form of pension for more of them. (applause) I’m glad that Potch is here and concerned about the elderly because even if he’s not a doctor, he knows finance and he knows management. And that second part of the legislation that we need is not really healthcare itself but how to access health care. And maybe A.I.M. can help us work on that as well. (applause)

But aside from the lack of money which is a very big factor, it also seems that there’s lack of knowledge about health issues in old age that prevents an elderly person from seeking a sustainable healthcare program. So I propose that the Philippine society of geriatric medicine with the help of our friends from all over the world join hands with the department of health in propagating knowledge about these issues. This convention is a very important way of doing that and let’s take the momentum and continue to spread that awareness.

There’s also an apparent lack of trained health professionals in the field of geriatrics and gerontology. There’s inadequate research on key issues pertinent to old age.

Only four medical schools I understand, offers special geriatric content in their curriculum: the university of the Philippines, the University of Santo Tomas, St. Luke’s – that’s why Dr. Gatchalian was telling me all about it, St. Luke’s medical school and Cebu doctor’s university. In fact, upon the invitation of Dr. Gatchalian many years ago before i became president, I had the honor of being the one to inaugurate St. Luke’s geriatric care center. (applause) and seeing what I saw there, I felt then I still feel now that we have to expand the field of participation.

Among state universities I am told that U.P. Manila is the lead agency for institutionalizing geriatric training. But as I said we have to expand the field. So this morning, I was talking to Secretary Duque and I think Dr. Duque that we should help U.P. Palo in Leyte, University of Northern Philippines and Mindanao State University to develop geriatric training. And I hope the society will help us to do that. (applause) tomorrow I will go to Leyte because we’re going to have a conference on peace. In Leyte, they have been very successful in bringing down the insurgency but at the same time I have asked my… Those who were doing the advance work for me to include among the activities that I will be doing in Leyte a meeting with the head of U.P. Palo so that we can discuss how to develop geriatric training in U.P. Palo. And I will be bringing with me a check of one million pesos so can they do the start up of developing their curriculum. (applause)

Meanwhile as we develop this relatively stronger state universities as we help them to develop geriatric training, we ask your society and we ask our friends from around the world attending this global conference to join the DOH, in training national and regional program coordinators to cascade your knowledge to the frontline health providers among our local government units because the department of health is devolved the provincial health officer, the municipal health officer, the rural health worker – they are all reporting to their local government executives rather than to the Department of Health. Let’s all work with them, cascade whatever we all know collectively so that they can help to increase life expectancy.

Earlier, I was listening to what Dr. De la Vega was talking about. And I had read about Okinawa earlier. How I wish that someday, first of all, we have to become first world like Japan but we are trying on the verge of first world in 20 years. And of course, other first world countries are not as good as Okinawa but maybe indeed someday and it’s good to have a dream. I wish that someday we could be like the prefecture of Okinawa which has the most number of centenarians in the world. And the biggest percentage of centenarians in the world as well.

And I am told that in Okinawa even at a hundred or so years, they still go out to tend vegetable farms, walk to the market, and in the evenings go out for folk dances. I have seen a few of such examples in the Philippines. Some very outstanding 90-year olds who are still very active. I’ve seen some of them still sing in the programs of women’s groups or the older person’s groups. But there are very, very small percentage but the fact is this women that I’ve seen 93 years old, 95 years old still active, our women who have been able to have at least a comfortable middle class life. So if they are able to do that and if the institutions around us will be able to do that even for the poor then we will see more of them even if we don’t necessarily reach the proportions in numbers of Okinawa.

We would like to see a significant number of our own population in this situation where at a very ripe old age of 90 at least still go to the market, still walk and still go to folk dances.

Indeed, a great deal needs to be accomplished. First of all we need to go as I said, to the verge of first world and we hope to do that in 20 years. But we need not wait 20 years before we improve our old age health care. We can begin today. The Philippines remains committed to doing this, to vigorously pursue active measures that I have mentioned earlier to create a “society for all ages”.

Many of us want to live a ripe old age. So, let’s all join hands to bring about the day when everyone who grows old will have a kind of care that will allow them to age gracefully and productively.

Thank you for reminding us to care for the elderly.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the 8th Annual Convention of the Philippine Society of Geriatric Medicine. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140037/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2288&Itemid=38