Thank you very much, Congressman Dimaporo.

Thank you very much, Vice Governor Imelda Dimaporo; Chairman Buhain; Congressman Badelles; various mayors from all over the Philippines, Mindanao and the entire Philippines; our governors headed by the governor of Davao Del Norte, the President of ULAP, Governor Dolfo del Rosario; also Governor Loreto Ocampos, whose beautiful daughter sang our national anthem and the Lanao Del Norte hymn; ARMM Vice Governor Mahid Mutilan; Cabinet members — Secretary Mike Defensor, Secretary Mai Jimenez and Secretary Dick Gordon, Undersecretary Bacani; Congressman Monico Puentevella, Chairman of the Sports Committee of the House of Representatives, to all of you, good day, even though it is raining, to all of you.

I won’t make my speech long because I don’t want to give you all colds. Good afternoon to all of you. Assalaamu alaikum pagariya. I greet everyone who is here attending the opening of our national games this year. I especially welcome the residents of Lanao del Norte where I stayed, my life was long here. Thank you to the officials of DepEd here and everyone who helped to make this game happen. I also greet all our Muslim countrymen on the start of the month of ramadhan tomorrow. And I also ask our fellow Filipinos who are not muslim to join in the celebration of ramadhan and include in their prayers the peace of mindanao and of the entire country.

We desire nothing more than to end the unrest and terrorism here so that lasting peace may be fully achieved. Our success against terrorism and for peace will mean that work for development will be faster especially here in mindanao. And that the event will not happen again, waiting for several months, not just several months, several years to be the host of the games because of the threat to the security of the players.

The Palarong Pambansa is a symbol of excellence in sports. And now, more than ever, the palaro is a tribute to our unity and solidarity as a people. An affirmation that sports can bridge differences and misunderstanding, transcending religion, culture and tradition, understood by everyone regardless of one’s dialect and a common language of peace and camaraderie. It is also a tribute to the energy that the young can contribute to our country’s future. And I hope because you are young, you have a lot of energy and are lively, you won’t catch a cold even though you are getting wet.

Sports shapes the youth. And as Dr. Jose Rizal said, the youth like you are the hope of our country. An important goal in the Palarong Pambansa is to develop champions, local and international, from among our youth. That is why I am also appealing to all our players and athletes here, do your best to emulate famous Filipino players like Lydia de Vega-Mercado, Elma Muros-Posadas and Isidro Del Prado who started to become known in the Palarong Pambansa.

I also thank all the youth here who serve as models not only to their fellow youth but also to your communities, strengthening the body and avoiding illegal drugs. As Congressman Fuentevella said in his district in Bacolod, “do sports, not drugs.” and that is also one of the objectives of our games.

Before I became president, our law regarding prohibited drugs was very bad. Before you could be permanently imprisoned, it required 200 grams of shabu. So I immediately changed the law and lowered it to 10 grams to stop the relentless selling and imprison the drug syndicates. Now, we continue the campaign against illegal drugs on all streets, in all barangays, in all cities and towns. And our fight continues to imprison all those who sell illegal drugs. I will not allow drugs to destroy the future of our youth and the progress of our country.

So now, even more, improve your playing. Play sports, not drugs. What we learn in sports should be used to prepare for the future — competitiveness, team play, respect for the rules of the game. These are needed in sports. These are also needed for a strong republic. We also need to continue fighting terrorism and continue the peace talks while continuing the rehabilitation of areas affected in mindanao. We need to ensure that the spread of peace is accompanied by community development. We need to uphold the entirety and integrity of the territory of the Philippines in accordance with our constitution. We need to give everyone proper respect and recognition regardless of their religion or culture so that division that leads to conflict can be avoided.

Let us be united. Let us be one team, the team of the Republic of the Philippines.

That is why I am saddened by the impeachment case filed against Chief Justice Davide, whom I respect for his integrity and professionalism. No chief justice has imagined and undertaken a reform program of the judiciary as comprehensive and far-ranging as the program now undertaken by Chief Justice Davide. It is a bold and revolutionary reform effort that will bring our judicial system to the 21st century. It is a vital effort that will strengthen our democracy and satisfy our people’s demand for reliable and speedy justice. And that is why I am hoping that we shall be able to overcome the divisions and wounds that continue to divide us.

I will ensure and uphold both the integrity of the institutions of the Supreme Court and the House of Representatives. We shall overcome this conflict. I expect that soon, the conflict between Congress and the Supreme Court will be resolved because whether it’s the country or the games, fair play and teamwork are needed.

We need fair play. We need justice. And we need teamwork. We need unity. We need reconciliation both in the country, and in the games.

And on this note, I now declare the 2003 Palarong Pambansa open.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Program of the 2003 Palarong Pambansa. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615141339/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7188&Itemid=38