MOVING TOWARDS AGRICULTURAL STABILITY

I want to greet those who received awards today. I would like to greet those who started the implementation of the Republic Act 3844 otherwise known as the Agricultural Land Reform Code, who came here earlier. And also, I would like to greet and thank our foreign partners, who had been funding agrarian reform all these years.

Of course, our Gawad Saka awardees, congratulations to you all. This Lama Cooperatives, even when I was still a senator, I was already giving you prizes and awards as a guest of honor. In all the different activities, not only in Gawad Pitak, all awards, all awarding institutions that give awards, Lama Cooperative or Lamac always has an award, so you deserve to be in the Hall of Fame.

You know, I thank you for being here, because today is the day of the Gawad Saka awards. It is an anniversary, even a Ruby anniversary, of DAR and Land Bank. But I requested that instead of holding this celebration in your respective departments, I requested that we hold it in Malacañang. I ask you to have this Jubilee Celebration here in Malacañang, because I want to offer this special anniversary, the 40th Anniversary, to my father, Diosdado Macapagal. My father was the only son of tenant-farmers who became president. He was also the Father of the Land Reform Law or R.A. 3844, which, at that time, forty years ago, was – Peping Cojuangco knows the story because he was a congressman – for my father, that was his political suicide because he forced the passage of that law.

It was an exercise of political will, but that’s the same political will that I inherited. It’s the same political will that guides me in fighting poverty and terrorism, and in upholding the Constitution.

I’ve taken an oath to protect the Republic and the Constitution from harm. I shall carry out this oath with the full force of conscience and authority. I shall carry out this oath bearing in mind the supreme interest of the people. Any of my actions may be challenged before the Supreme Court, to which I commit obedience, but I shall not argue about these matters in the media.

There should be no doubt as to the willingness of the Executive Branch to help the Senate and the House of Representatives in their inquiries. Closer consultations are needed to ensure the safety and security of the officers who are scheduled to give their testimony. There is no need to stretch this into another propaganda charade. This is a matter of safeguarding lives and national security.

The Government guarantees due process to everyone. This will be observed in all institutional hearings and investigations. While all these judicial and legislative processes ensue, it now behooves all our people to close ranks behind the pursuit of normalcy in our national life, and the pursuit of continuity in our socio-economic directions.

We must now dispel the Oakwood syndrome and apply our full attention to the ever-constant threat of terrorism. Once more, I must stress that our best defense lies in the vigilance of each and every citizen. We’ve stepped up intelligence gathering and sharing of information with our neighboring countries. The hunt for terrorists must involve all communities and territories across borders.

I commend the Armed Forces of the Philippines Southern Command for accounting another notorious terrorist. The long hand of justice will catch up with these characters one way or another. The AFP is directed to inform the public of the full circumstances of the slaying of Edris, to obviate any reports questioning the rules of engagement.

We cannot forever be distracted by spectator politics. We have to willfully turn our attention to the priorities of vigilance against terrorism and against poverty.

They say that, in the past century, the most important and most extensive way to share the wealth of the nation with the poor has been land reform, which we are celebrating today.

Although this was a problem for my father then due to the strong opposition of land representatives in the Senate, Congress did not fund his law. Fortunately, we have Official Development Assistance (ODA). But I have a story about ODA. During my father’s time, he was about to leave office, last year of his administration. He obtained funds from the World Bank, an education fund for the extension program of newly freed farmers. When he was no longer in office, the education fund was placed in the Cultural Center of the Philippines. That’s why I keep looking at the Cultural Center – I watched there yesterday – I’m also happy because there is culture, but I’m saddened when I remember the land reform that could have been done earlier if it had been placed in its original purpose, that’s what it should have been for the land reform program. Nevertheless, since my father signed the Land Reform Law, almost six million hectares have been distributed to almost three million farmers.

Now, the remaining one million hectares to be distributed to farmers can be more easily acquired, or perhaps helped to become leasehold, because this is easier for some of our farmers. Why do we say we can probably do this with the remaining land, because I believe as a gift from God on the Ruby Anniversary of land reform, because the Supreme Court has already ruled on the case of stolen wealth. So now, the most important challenge for Obet Pagdanganan is to speed up the release of these funds. There is a lot of legal red tape there, that is the biggest challenge for Obet Pagdanganan.

We will turn the misdeeds of the past into the seeds of hope for the future. The money that we have recovered will be applied to the continuing quest for social justice. I will return to the people what belongs to them. We must never again allow plunder to stalk our nation.

The greater part of the 38 billion freed by the Supreme Court will be allocated for DAR’s current programs budgeted at 8 billion, with 22 billion more set aside for other obligations and proposals of the Land Reform Program.

The Land Bank was created 40 years ago by my father’s Land Reform Law to fund this land reform. However, the Land Bank was not funded. I expect that now the Land Bank can also use part of this fund freed by the Supreme Court to fund land reform. And this is in addition to their good work borrowing from other ODAs and other sources to lend capital to farmers.

A large role of the Land Bank in my administration’s program to spend 20 billion pesos each year for the modernization of agriculture. I saw on television, someone criticizing, why did I say we spend 20 billion pesos each year. It’s not true, because 12 billion – I don’t know how much – came out of the budget. This 20 billion is not only what is counted from the national budget because a large part of the 20 billion is credit. Credit does not come from the budget, it comes from loans, and the number one source of loans for our farmers is the Land Bank of the Philippines. And I am pleased to learn that so far, for the first half of the year, the Land Bank has lent about 7 billion pesos to our farmers. I was even more pleased to learn that the Land Bank’s total goal is to lend 17 billion pesos for the modernization of agriculture. So, thank you, Gary and the people of Land Bank.

We also have many Agrarian Reform Communities (ARCs) – that’s what I’ve been saying, it’s the law of Peping Cojuangco that hasn’t been funded yet. Some guerrilla bases that I visited, when I visit them, I find out they are actually ARCs. But the ARCs have no funds, broken promises, so I’m also telling Obet to use this stolen wealth to fund these ARCs, especially the farm-to-market roads.

At isa rin, irigasyon. Irrigation is the single most vital component of agricultural modernization. In fact, it’s suppose to fund — what? 20 percent of our agricultural modernization budget. It is also the single most important source of increase in farmers’ income.

I did a study of land reform beneficiaries. Why some are rich, why others are poor. The difference is, those who got rich have irrigation, and those who remained poor, have no irrigation. That’s why irrigation is number one in making the difference. That is why I congratulate Cito Lorenzo, who during my presidency, the NIA completed the Angat Afterbay Regulatory Dam, the Kabulnan Irrigation and Area Development Project, the Pampanga Delta Development Project, 52 smaller-sized communal irrigation projects or systems, all of which cover almost 63,000 hectares of farmland, more than the total hectareage covered in all the previous years combined in the history of the Philippines. Right, isn't it?

The Mal-Mar Irrigation Project is also now operating after Salamat was ailing in the very same town. Cito Lorenzo was in Butig, at the gate of Camp Bushra, to groundbreak this Lanao del Sur project. The death of Salamat is the end of an era, but that groundbreaking of the irrigation is the beginning of another era for the people of Muslim Mindanao.

I also instructed Cito Lorenzo to build a dam system for the tobacco farmers of llocos using part of the funds of Republic Act 7171. Last year, they got very low prices for their tobacco because the rain flows straight from the mountains to the sea rather than irrigating their plant. What they use to irrigate is water they draw from the ground, but it’s salty water. So, for two years now, two harvests now, the harvest has not been good and the buyers have to select the good pieces, and they do not get the price they would have wanted. So, therefore, the solution is to leave that water on land and use it to irrigate. And, this is what Cito will do next as far as irrigation projects are concerned.

I’m also instructing Obet to use part of the expected proceeds of the coco levy funds to finance a leasehold program for the coconut farmers. Because many of the coconut farmers tell me, rather than buying the land which requires a large capital, they would rather lease the land so they can use their capital for their second product, because their income from a single coconut product is not enough.

I also welcome the partnership forged by DAR with the state universities and colleges to extend modern technologies to the agrarian reform beneficiaries, and also grant scholarships to their dependents. This is part of what I instructed since 2001. I said that we must spend 2 billion pesos a year on agricultural research, and part of that should be resources coming from the state universities and colleges. So this is in fulfillment of that. The other big part of the research money has gone to the development and propagation of the hybrid rice, which has doubled the income of many of our farmers. So the research and development component of our agricultural modernization program should be funded in great part by the state universities and colleges. I also commend the plan to set up agro-forestry resource centers, because reforestation is one of the programs that we must do in the holistic approach to fighting insurgency in the mountains.

When my father signed the Land Reform Code, R.A. 3844 — you know, I could never remember what the number was. I would say, is it R.A. 3488? Now, I will remember because the 38 is the 38 billion for the poor. Parang yung Republic Act 7171 noon na hindi rin nai-release noong araw, ang tawag nila Republic Act 7-awan-7-awan , but now Republic Act 7-adda-7-adda especially for irrigation. In any case my father said at that time, as Obet quoted: “The time has come to abolish tenancy in our farms. We must give the tenants liberty from economic peonage, in which they have long languished, so that they will become free men who will share with dignity in the task of building the nation.”

Now, after forty years, because of the decision of the Supreme Court, perhaps what he said, “It is the time,” will really be the time. So let’s work together to promote the reforms that will lead us to a brighter future.

Happy Ruby Anniversary and congratulations to all of you!

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].