Thank you very much, Secretary Arty Yap.

Chairman Muñoz, President Echaus, all the leaders of the sugar industry, my fellow government officials, Secretary Pagdanganan, Limcaoco, Bunye, ladies and gentlemen.

Good afternoon to the Cebuanos. To my husband’s fellow Ilonggos, good afternoon as well. And to all the rest of you, good afternoon.

Thank you for inviting me to participate in your discussion of the Philippine Sugar Industry. And thank you for the nice words you said President Echaus. And thank you arty for calling me a friend of the sugar industry. Let me say that I also appreciate you because the sugar industry has been a friend of mine all these years, thank you.

Indeed, I avoid speaking engagements but I’m making an exception for PHILSUTECH because I want to use this occasion to thank the industry once again for supporting me in ‘92, ‘95, ‘98, my candidates in 2001, and again in the last elections. Salamat gid, daghan salamat, dacal a salamat mga sugar farmers sa Pampanga.

Indeed, the sugar industry is very close to my heart starting from my father whom you supported since he first ran for senator in 1955, ‘57, ‘61, ‘65. And I inherited something from my father — a habit. He in his time and I in my time, we always have two teaspoons of sugar in our coffee. One for us and one for the industry. my father came from a sugar province Pampanga. And he was supported by the sugar provinces all his career including especially Negros Oriental.

My husband’s family for generations has derived their income from sugar farms, so I can truly say I am part of the sugar industry.

And so I’m happy that it is before the sugar industry that I am speaking for the first time before any agricultural sector since the may elections. Let me therefore begin not just with sugar but with my strategic policy for agriculture for the next six years.

First, agriculture is a source of jobs for our people. I’ve said in my inaugural address that we shall try to create six to ten million jobs in the next six years. I also said that one of the major ways to create ten million jobs is to develop two million hectares of agri-business land.

Second, agriculture is a source of food. And because you want to be competitive, we want our people not to spend too much on their food so that they won’t always ask for higher wages. That’s why we must reduce the cost of rice, corn, sugar and the other crops that we call wage goods through greater productivity and efficient transport and logistics. I won’t spend too much time about transport and logistics today but greater productivity, that’s where PHILSUTECH comes in. Your work is technology transfer for greater productivity.

I’ve been with you three times. And in 2001 as a new president I was with you, we crafted a road map for the sugar industry. That road map continues to pave our way forward. In 2001, we released 600 million pesos from the ACEF fund for sugar agricultural competitiveness to build small dams and roads as well as to purchase farm equipment and other things to improve productivity. And I’m glad that this contributed indeed to your productivity.

In 2001, when we were together, you were producing 1.8 million metric tons. Now, you are producing 2.3 million metric tons. Congratulations!

In 2001, when we started our road map, the average sugar production per farmer was 98 bags per hectare. Today, it is 115 bags per hectare. Congratulations! Once again.

One of the reasons is that we’re using hybrid cane just as in the more general knowledge of the Filipinos we’re using hybrid rice for our rice farmers. We used to import sugar. This year, we exported some 59,000 metric tons and next year, we expect to export around 230 metric tons to our neighbors in Asia on top of our sugar quotas to our traditional markets like the united states.

This outstanding production of the industry during the time, the period of our common road map, was very good for three years. It brought up domestic supply and prices stayed good for three years. But early this year, we all were very sad because then the prices went down. At that time — and this is one reason why he’s D.A. Secretary today — I ordered NFA administrator Arty Yap to buy sugar at 700 to 720 per bag to provide temporary relief to the industry. And now, we’re having better times. I also issued EO 295 and Memo Order 134 to stop the smuggling of sugar- containing products and to regulate prices.

Today, reports continued to reach me about sugar smuggling. As I said earlier, if the price goes down because of economic factors like competition, well, the answer is to be competitive. But if the price goes down because of smuggling as well then that’s not fair and we have to stop smuggling. Reports reaching me indicate that some imported products are being shielded from my directives through the device of tariff reclassification. In fact, the memo that President Echaus gave me earlier, I glanced at it very quickly before I came in, that’s one of the issues that you have raised.

So, I am — arty, tell the Tariff Commission this – I’m directing the Tariff Commission to review its classification regulations for sugar-based imports to ensure that my directives are not circumvented.

I also asked George Jereos, the new commissioner of customs to come here today with me, because I’m ordering the Bureau of Customs to stop the smugglers on their tracks. That’s why I brought him with me so that he can hear my instructions in front of the sugar industry. We met earlier in a private meeting. And I also gave special instructions to the Cebu collector of customs, Billy Bibit. And I told them that I shall give them two months to give significant results against sugar smuggling. but that’s on the part of customs.

On the part of the sugar industry the challenge is how to remain profitable while consumers enjoy lower sugar prices. The answer is, as I said earlier — productivity and efficient transport and logistics. Our goal is to be able to bring down production costs to be competitive with Thailand, Australia, South Africa or even Brazil. I’ve instructed PHILSUCOR to help finance the importation of urea as proposed by one of our sugar cooperatives. This should help bring down fertilizer prices which is one of the reasons for the high cost of production.

And in the memo that was given to me by President Echaus, you’ve asked to have sugar designated as a special product in the Doha round of the World Trade Organization. Without making any promises, I will help you achieve this the best I can, best effort. best effort basis.

And I want to acknowledge not only your gains in productivity, I want to acknowledge your highly relevant efforts to produce ethanol from sugar cane and to generate electricity from boiler steam. These fall squarely in line with our energy independence program. We were trying to draw out every competitive advantage we can get from indigenous sources and technologies. Ethanol as a gasoline additive is both renewable and environment-friendly.

Brazil has taken the lead. And Thailand will soon use a five percent ethanol blend which we are aiming for.

And I told the leaders of the industry, for this purpose, you might want to top the DBP’s lending window for loans for the environment.

I also look forward to the groundbreaking in 2005 of the joint venture with the first farmers mill and Talisay bioenergy for a new Bagas-fired boiler. This will generate a surplus of 20 megawatts to be sold to the Central Negros Electric Cooperative. The environmental compliance certificate for this project I understand has just been approved. It’s another boon to our people who are struggling for clean, stable power. Congratulations, first farmers!

With all these uses for energy and power coming from sugar. In fact, I hope the day will come when the sugar that I put in my coffee, the two teaspoons, will be just one of the many products coming out of our sugar plantation. I hope the day will come when sugar will be so diversified as far as its products are concerned — food, power, energy — that indeed, will be the dawn, the new dawn of our industry.

I can’t forget when I was a brand-new senator, there was the fear that sugar would be a sunset industry. Well, we’ve worked together all these years — I became senator in 1992, it’s 2004 now — twelve years later, we haven’t seen the sunset. Let’s see the dawn. Let’s make sure that our industry will never see the sunset but rather be united. Keep our industry forever in the new sunshine.

Congratulations! And thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 51st Annual Convention of the Philippine Sugar Technologists Association (PHILSUTECH). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133248/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5690&Itemid=38