Thank you very much, Secretary Gabby Claudio, for your introduction of me.

And I would like to greet and give my hats off to Speaker Boy Nograles for his firm leadership of the House of Representatives. (Applause)

And thank you also, Boy and the other people of Davao City for hosting this very important convention. (Applause)

Board Member and President Pearl Angeli Pacada, congratulations also on your leadership of the Board Members League. (Applause)

Let's discuss how we can help with the contribution you are requesting for your condotel there in Ortigas. (Applause)

Other officials of the Board Members’ League, at kasama rin natin ditto, our Cabinet member from Mindanao, Secretary Nasser Pangandaman. (Applause)

To all of you, thank you for inviting me here.

I got the invitation a few weeks ago. My schedule was already full today because Friday is Climate Change Day and I had some visits scheduled to see Solid Waste Management facilities and to advocate among the different local governments; but I decided to redo my schedule and do my Solid Waste Management Day right here in Davao City and in the surrounding areas. (Applause)

And I thank you that, that is one of your advocacies — fighting global warming, fighting climate change — and solid management waste is a very important contribution to that. Because next to fossil fuels, the second biggest source of climate change is the methane coming from garbage.

And all of these you are doing in accordance with your theme: “Moving Forward in Unison Towards the Provincial Board Members’ Vision for a Stronger Philippines.” I thank you for your theme, it is very similar to the vision I have been speaking about of a strong republic.

Indeed, this is an important convention because Board Members are crucial to the growth and resilience of a province. Put together, your power of the purse and your power to legislate, just like the power that Boy Nograles and his colleagues wield, can wield significant influence; Boy in the country, you and your provinces’ growth path and the pace by which your provinces’ programs are executed. That is why when you came forward the several occasions to support me during the trials of my presidency, it was really important and crucial support because of your importance in your provincial governments. Thank you for that. (Applause)

Now, the experience you have in your respective Boards and your will for your provinces are being summoned to address the concerns being raised by the economic crisis that is sweeping the world today. We must all continue to focus here at home on creating jobs and keeping prices low. The government, national and provincial, must provide incentives to help the private sector to keep and create jobs.

One of the things we are doing in the electronics industry, to help the electronics which is the hardest hit industry of the global crisis keep and create jobs, is, that if they don’t lay off their workers and they keep them, waiting for the rebound even if they are not doing any real work, they can pay them minimum wage while TESDA finances the industry specified training program. That is something we’re doing in the national level. Something that you might look at also at the local level.

The government must also continue to come to the rescue of the poorest among us with targeted subsidies of food, fuel and rice. And I thank your local governments for helping us to do this distributions because as a result of our being able to provide a food, fuel and rice at subsidized prices to the poorest of our constituents, the country has experienced a drastic decline in the hunger rate this past month. Thank you again for your support there. (Applause)

To fund all the things we need to do, to keep the Philippine economy strong during this global economic crisis, we must “cut government waste.” And that is at the national and provincial levels.

In challenging economic times, the government — national and provincial — must tighten its belt and live within its means, just like the average household.

To that end, at the national level, we are taking a series of actions to stop unnecessary and wasteful spending. The taxpayers deserve no less from their governments and public servants. And these measures are probably things that also the provincial governments can replicate. So I call on you to the extent practicable, to legislate programs similar to what we have done. The series of belt-tightening measures that we have done for the national government which I hope the provincial governments through your legislative powers can replicate. For instance, I have ordered all national government agencies, including Government-owned and Controlled Corporations, to reduce their Maintenance, Overhead and Operating Expenses by 1.5 percent and allocate the savings to emergency employment for the next six months.

I have directed national agencies to undertake electricity and fuel saving measures. Our targets include bring down consumption of fossil fuels by 25 percent; reduce electric consumption by at least 10 percent; turn off air conditioners at 4:30 except those with 24-hour work; gumamit ng fluorescent bulbs imbes na incandescent bulbs; convert 20 percent of vehicles in major cities to non-fossil fuel users.

Government vehicles not on official trips should be garaged in the agency office and the keys kept by guards during weekends and holidays.

This coming Independence Day, we will forego the annual parade which usually costs 30 million pesos and instead hold a mega jobs fair so that our workers, our 46,000 workers displaced by the global crisis can find livelihood or employment.

Indeed, the government — national and provincial — must pour all savings and revenue into programs that help the poor and the middle-class. This includes more and more investments in education, healthcare and infrastructure which are well within the spending authorities of the provincial governments. And now that we have lowered the hunger rate, let us continue with successful programs, let us all support programs for providing meals for our children in school; and I’m glad that Board Member Pacada mentioned your support for the early childhood development because part of that is giving our day care, pre-school and grade one children a healthy start with a nutritious breakfast.

It doesn’t have to be sumptuous but it can be nutritious — rice, malunggay — these are very good for nutrition. Also, we all have to work together at our different levels to help provide job and training opportunities for our young graduates, because not only are we holding this convention during women’s month, we’re also holding it during graduation month and there are those young graduates looking for a job soon.

One of the things we are doing in the national government is that DSWD is doing a poverty mapping. And so, for enumerators to find out who are the poorest of the poor, DSWD is using the young graduates so that they have a job immediately. That is a few thousand of them and I hope that you can also look for activities whereby you can mobilize the young graduates.

We must tackle many challenges to keep our economy and way of life going strong. And on the part of government — national and provincial — we must live within our means and run a lean, efficient government. This includes on the national and local governments continued fiscal prudence as we in the national government together with Congress, which has the power of the purse and the power to tax, work towards a balanced budget. And all the while, we must also simultaneously invest in key programs for our people.

We have our programs at the national level, you have yours at the provincial Level; but over these past eight years, we have been jelling our programs together and I’m very happy with that.

On our part, the national government has increasingly invested in the growth of our local government units. Even in the cash-strapped early years of my administration, because I inherited a very parse purse when I became President in 2001, we still took great pains if you remember, to release your IRA in full, even if we had to sacrifice the national government spending and we even paid the debt that previous administrations owed to our LGUs.

One of the areas in which you, the Board Members have supported me was in the massive reforms that we made in taxes. In 2005, we made the most massive of those reforms, the Value Added Tax which was at very great cost to my popularity. Not only that, it was challenged in court but it was finally implemented in 2006.

Forty percent of all internal revenue, including the Value Added Tax goes to IRA, with a three-year lag in computation. So when we first implemented VAT, the expanded VAT in 2006, the VAT went up by 100 billion pesos. And so now, three years later, due to the three-year lag in computation, this year, the IRA went up by 40 billion pesos. (Applause)

So maybe you’re beginning to notice this big increase that you have to budget. So this year, you the local governments, are reaping the benefits of my political sacrifice. But one of my konsuelos is that the Board Members supported me (applause) during that period of sacrifice.

And certainly, it will be doubly worth the sacrifice if you in the League take up the challenge now that you have this big increase in IRA, to make sure that each province spends your IRA windfall prudently. Not on trimmings, but only on strategic programs that will keep us growing in spite of the slump in the world today, and that will lay the foundation for sustainable growth, because that is indeed what a stronger Phillipines is all about.

So, together — and I thank you for your resolution and it looks like that we will continue to be together — together, we can achieve our common vision: a strong and resilient Philippines; because each of your provinces through your wise legislation remains strong and resilient during this period of crisis. The country as a whole will be greater than the sum of its parts. And the strength of your provinces will be more than an equal contribution to the strength of our Republic.

So to all of you, thank you very much for your support and may the results of your workshops be successful in how to further strengthen your provinces and our republic.

Thank you all very much. (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the 18th National Assembly of the Provincial Board Members League of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412104237/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=22856&Itemid=38