Many thanks, fellow countrymen, and good times for our new sectoral representative of BUTIL, Congressman Agapito Guanlao. Congratulations! (applause)

Our congressmen, congressman and congresswoman who are here today, Congressman Dong Gonzales (applause) of the district here and Congresswoman Nelly Chavez; (applause) and of course our host city mayor, Mayor Oca Rodriguez; (applause) the various officials of Pampanga who are here, the Board members, councilors, Mayor Flores and Chairwoman Zeny Ducut and our Undersecretary of Agriculture Jess Paras, he is also Capampangan, (applause) Capampangan but he settled in Cagayan de Oro but he is Capampangan from Cagayan de Oro; and of course our President of BUTIL here in Pampanga, President Galang; (applause) and the various farmers, leaders of the farmers here in Pampanga, as well as in Nueva Ecija, as well as in Bulacan, three provinces, are all here today. Congratulations, Happy Farmers’ Month! (applause)

Because the month of May, as Lito told me, is Farmers’ Month but there is really no Farmer’s Day so one of the initiatives of Congressman Guanlao is to have a Farmers’ Day aside from Farmers’ Month — May 15 is the fiesta of San Isidro Labrador. So like Women’s Day, we have Women’s Month in March, we have Women’s day on March 8; we have Farmer’s Month in May, we don’t have a Farmer’s Day. So, that is one initiative of our new Congressman. Congratulations, Lito! (applause)

And I am happy that this occasion is being held here in Pampanga, one of the biggest producers of food in the country. Although of course we recognize Nueva Ecija now, the number one agricultural province because Pampanga has a lot of industrialization and as a service center and as a hub of Clark-Subic. Bulacan also has a lot of industrialization in Bulacan so even though that is the case, the production of Pampanga and Bulacan is still large although Nueva Ecija is now number one.

It is important in the history of Filipino farmers our province. It is here that the mass movement was born, whose first aim was to reduce the oppression of tenant farmers. It is also here in Pampanga where the step taken in land reform, President Diosdado Macapagal, was taken and he sacrificed the support of key influential tenants of large lands because of his desire to immediately address the suffering of farmers due to tenancy. So during my administration, share tenancy was removed so that the harvest of the farmer goes to him and if he does not own the land he will just pay rent like you pay rent for your apartment. That is one program then the second program is land to the tiller.

I believe that BUTIL will lead to encourage the representatives to pass the law extending the Agrarian Reform before Congress adjourns in June. (applause)

And there are already many, as Congresswoman Nelly Chavez said and I will not repeat what she said but we have seen many programs that we have established to increase the income of farmers and the continued strengthening of this program. Our most prominent program for the agricultural sector is FIELDS. You all know what FIELDS is where we strengthen and expand the infrastructure that will benefit farmers. And under FIELDS, the government also provides assistance and subsidies so that the price of equipment such as seeds, fertilizers, dryers is more affordable. But our new topic is more than just trying to have subsidies for inputs, let's just increase the income of the farmer so he can afford the inputs.

So last year we increased the price of buying palay and we increased it. If before it was only 33,000 metric tons, right? being bought at 17 pesos, now it is one million metric tons. So more farmers can sell their palay to the government at 17 pesos, the best price in our history. (applause)

One example of the government's support for agriculture is irrigation, or the letter “I” in the FIELDS program. Within this program, during my eight years as president, we made hundreds of thousands of hectares Jess, right? that were previously without water and therefore unplantable. It was repaired and given water again through the rehabilitation and restoration program, because they said that since the irrigation systems were built, no one had rehabilitated them. We prioritized this, so many thousands of hectares are now being planted again.

So as we have industrialization here in Pampanga and also in Bulacan, because of irrigation, the number of hectares for our planting continues to increase. And especially here in Luzon, one of the largest producers of rice for our country, the irrigation project continues and we are fixing it. Our priority is to fix the damaged irrigation because it reaches almost a million hectares. And secondly, we will help those who do not yet have irrigation to have small-scale communal irrigation systems.

For fertilizer, our priority is to support horticulturists in producing organic fertilizer from composting solid waste, this will help farmers and also help against climate change. Because climate change is the source of bad weather, always typhoons instead of ordinary rain, typhoons, often strong, difficult for farmers. So we need to help prevent or delay the arrival of climate change.

The number one cause of global warming is the use of gasoline, so we are looking for new sources of our fuel and many of these are biomass, the crops planted by farmers that will be made into fuel, so farmers can do a lot to prevent climate change. And secondly, the second source of global warming is methane from solid waste, so we must avoid that. We must be zero waste. Our solid waste must be divided, make the recyclable before recycling, the biodegradable should be made into fertilizer. So that's what is needed, that's what our farmers can do. So as… well, I have already given a lot through Congresswoman Chavez as a good start for Congressman Pitong Guanlao, it is for the farmers here in Pampanga, Nueva Ecija and Bulacan to help you with the solid waste management program to make the solid waste you get from around your farms into fertilizer, organic fertilizer. You know the multi… the DENR said the multi… the Materials Recovery Facility that… solid waste is turned into fertilizer and recyclable materials are made from the recyclables.

Depending on how big it is, it can be worth 200,000 pesos or it can be worth two million pesos, so this is a good project. So to help Pitong with many farmers who also helped him get elected, I will give him 10 million pesos now for — (applause) the fund BUTIL, there, okay — for solid… the fund BUTIL is not Congressman Guanlao’s fund BUTIL for our project of converting solid waste into organic fertilizer for the various farms of our horticulturists, as this is the time of harvest, he will start this now, the Climate Change Mitigation program in the farms of BUTIL here in Pampanga and in Nueva Ecija and also Bulacan.

Long live BUTIL! (applause)

Congratulations, Pitong! and Happy, Happy Farmers’ Month to all of us! Thank you very much. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Butil Farmers’ Day and thanksgiving of Butil Partylist Representative Agapito Guanlao. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412103109/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=24985&Itemid=38