Thank you very much, Secretary Joey Lina, for your introduction. At your service.

Our host City Mayor, Mayor Jun Acharon; our Governor of South Cotabato, Governor Daisy Fuentes; our Congresswoman here in GenSan, Congresswoman Darlene Custodio. Is that all? I was with them earlier. Please come forward; our Congressman from Sarangani, Congressman Erwin Chiongbian; our Governor from Sultan Kudarat Pax Mangudadatu; oh, Governor Escobar from Sarangani; all the mayors of South Cotabato.

I am now with my Cabinet members, aside from Secretary Lina, Secretary Rene de Villa; Secretary Sim Datumanong — is he not here?; Secretary Nani Braganza — she is no longer with us; Secretary Paul Dominguez; Secretary Mai Jimenez; P.A. for Mindanao Jess Dureza.

I would like to express my greetings to the various presidents of ABC in SOCSKSARGEN: Chair Delia Rabanez of GenSan; Chair Jesus Desidegis of Sarangani; Chair Roberto Sunga of Koronadal; Chair Fernando Janoto of South Cotabato; and their respective bosses, the barangay chairmen of SOCSKSARGEN.

So our graduation today is for our peace and order, our soldiers and police, the 601st General Alexander Yano; Region XII Director General Rodolfo Tor; the president of our Philippine Public Safety College who initiated these courses, General Ramsey Ocampo; together with our leaders in our business industry here in Gen. Santos, their president, the president of the Federation of Fishing Association, Domingo Teng; to all of you, our brothers and sisters, our barangay tanods:

First of all, I addressed the barangay tanods from South Cotabato, Sarangani, GenSan — and according to him, the boss of General Yano, is General Gene Senga. Sorry, Gene. Okay — barangay tanods from Koronadal, all provinces and cities in this region who completed your tanod training course. I am also happy with the officials of the PNP and the local governments for their swift compliance with my order to train all barangay tanods.

Everyone knows that our barangay tanods are the frontliners in maintaining peace and order in our municipality because you are at the forefront or cutting edge of law enforcement. You are among those who will coordinate and cooperate with our local leaders in monitoring all kinds of social or economic problems related to any crisis. This includes problems concerning terrorism.

Last night, at midnight, the unilateral ceasefire will be over. We may face a fresh wave of terrorist threats. The police and the military must be prepared backed by the vigilance of alert communities and citizens. We shall sustain punitive actions. At the same time, we shall continue our search for a principled peace. We shall not be threatened or intimidated. The force of our collective vigilance, international cooperation and programs of meaningful social and economic uplift will continue to marginalize and eventually defeat terrorism. Enduring peace and security can be attained through people’s solidarity behind firm and caring leadership.

Barangay tanods, join me in leading Mindanaoans regardless of creed, ethnic origin or social station from the clutches of fear to a heightened sense of security, from the morass of poverty to equitable enterprise, from conflict to peace. The promise of Mindanao must be redeemed or the future of our entire nation cannot be won.

As I said before, the principles upon which we are building everything for the advancement of Mindanao. One principle is that our ultimate goal must be peace and shared progress. The second principle is that our philosophy must be based on the constitution, the sovereignty of our nation, and the integrity of our territory.

The third principle is that our society is multi-ethnic and must be based on social justice for all and the institutionalized accommodation of ethnic traditions. Christian and Muslim, Chinese and mestizo, Tagalog, Ilonggo and Cebuano – these only name a few – are all Filipinos. A beautiful testament to my vast and diverse heritage as a nation.

With these three great principles, I would add a fourth. In our search for peace, there is no room for terrorism or brutality. These acts must be condemned by all. This includes our condemnation of the hostage-taking of Filipinos, not only here in the Philippines but also there in Liberia.

I have instructed the DFA to get the facts about the abduction of Filipinos in Liberia, and maintain a direct link of communication with the Liberian authorities. OWWA must keep closely in touch with the concerned families with whom I deeply sympathize. We will do all we can to keep our nationals out of harm’s way. I shall be personally monitoring this issue until it is resolved.

Maintaining peace abroad, and in our country, is the duty of everyone, especially here in our country. This is a duty not only of the police or military but of everyone, especially the barangay tanods (village watchmen). The vigilance of all reduces our fear against threats, and to allow our citizens to continue with their livelihoods.

For all of you from General Santos, because General Santos is known for its tuna product, I have good news. DTI Secretary Mar Roxas said that the European communities have agreed to lower their tariffs on Philippine tuna under their tariff rate quota starting in July. We can now sell up to 25,000 metric tons of tuna to the countries of the European communities, with only a 12 percent tariff. Previously, our tariff was 24 percent, now up to 25,000 metric tons, the tariff is halved. Previously 24 percent, so it was expensive and… So only a few would buy, even if our fish is of good quality. For your peace of mind and progress, we can now reach Europe with perhaps double our tuna product.

I have asked the Fishing Industry of GenSan headed by Mr. Dominador Teng to give a briefing later to the GenSan and national media regarding what this means to the people of Socsksargen. But I would like to let you know that this is the first successful conclusion of a complaint filed by the Philippine government under the WTO.

There are still various announcements. We will prioritize infrastructure projects so that progress truly reaches the city dwellers. So that these city dwellers can prosper. I want you to know that 90 billion pesos from the entire national budget for 2003 is allocated for Mindanao. This is 26 percent of the total budget this year. The population of Mindanao is 20 percent of the country's population. But the budget for Mindanao is 25 percent of the national budget. Included in the budget is the construction of infrastructure like the upper mainit bridge in Sarangani which I inaugurated this morning. I have also issued a directive to begin work on the maitum-palimbang road, to boost commerce and peace there. So where are our DPWH representatives here? Our DPWH, I have a notice of cash allocation, 36 million pesos, so it can be completed… So that the maitum-palimbang road can be completed quickly. Okay.

I have already issued a directive to begin work on the General Santos fishport to strengthen commerce here, and I also have a notice of cash allocation for an additional 81 million pesos, on top of the 60 million that was already released so that before work begins, as our foreign partners, China, need to release their contribution and the government of the Philippines, 140 million, because this project is worth billions. One hundred million dollars this project — oh, no. That’s not right. It’s 50 million dollars. Fifty million dollars this project requires 140 million pesos from the national government in order to start this project. So today, the 140 million pesos is available.

You might now be asking what you can do as barangay watchmen to help with our initiatives in Mindanao. Your help is a great contribution to the development of our programs in Mindanao because your role is important, especially as watchmen or those who monitor your barangays. As I mentioned earlier, you are the first responders to cooperate with city officials in solving any problem in the barangay. This problem could be related to terrorism or crime, drugs, or any disturbance. And also in our various programs for our progress.

Then, Secretary Mai Jimenez will talk to you about our distance learning program. Because many of your barangays are far, especially in Glan, right? In Glan, it’s really far. In Jose Abad Santos in Sultan Kudarat, it’s really far. There are even rebels there sometimes and the teachers are afraid to teach there, so there are no teachers in those remote barangays. That’s why we want to have distance learning in those barangays. So, we will be having distance learning in these remote barangays where the teachers are scared to go. We will call this a strong republic school and those who will help, will assist with enrollment and identify where we should put this distance learning, including the barangay captains and barangay tanods in choosing the locations.

Join our crisis managers and our multipliers in our development program. Join the officials who will be called upon during a crisis to contact the crisis manager. As you finish your training, my confidence further strengthens that you will better safeguard the peace and security of the country through your service in your barangays. Your continued cooperation and support will lead us here in Region XII, and throughout the Philippines, towards our dream of having a strong Republic.

Many thanks. Thank you very much to all of you.

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Apil kamo sa aton mga crisis managers ug sa aton mga multipliers sa atong programa sa kauswagan. Apil kamo mga opisyal nga tawagon sa panahon sa krisis ang crisis manager. Agkayong nagtatapos kayo sa inyong pagsasanay lalong tumitibay ang aking pananalig na higit ninyong mapapangalagaan ang kapayapaan at seguridad ng bansa sa inyong serbisyo sa inyong mga barangay. Ang inyong patuloy na pakikiisa at pagsusuporta ang maghahatid sa atin dito sa Region XII maging sa buong pilipinas tungo sa ating pangarap na magkaroon ng malakas na Republika.

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Graduation of Barangay Tanod and Presentation of “Mindanao Natin”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412200748/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6472&Itemid=38