Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Secretary Peña for your introduction.

Secretary Favila; Undersecretary Cruz; Mr. Rosini, welcome to the Philippines; Mr. Javier; Mr. Moore; Mr. Forman; officers and employees as well as partners and friends of Microsoft Philippines; representatives of the ICT sector; members of the business community; guests; ladies and gentlemen, good evening. It’s a great evening. Congratulations! Microsoft on your 10th anniversary.

I thank Microsoft and I congratulate you on your 10th anniversary, but more than that, I thank you that on this your 10th year of operation in the Philippines you’re providing 300 million pesos in technology grants to the Philippines. Thank you for your support for our communities.

These are grants to the Philippines in software, training and cash, much to the benefit of public servants. Thank you also for increasing your local partners to the tune of 1,200 businesses you’ll be supporting, adding 30,000 new jobs in our country. That’s a great contribution on your 10th anniversary. Thank you also for launching the new program ‘Bintana’ — the Philippine version or Tagalog version or Taglish version of windows. Thank you for having ‘Bintana’ just for the Philippines.

Microsoft is not just one of the best known brands in the world, it is a force for good. And you are a force in our nation’s struggle towards unity because to have unity in our island nation with a big digital divide, we need advances in ICT, in information and communication technology and software.

Indeed, we need unity. We need to be one Philippines, not two Philippines. We need to have one Philippines that works, not one Philippines that doesn’t… That works and one that doesn’t work. We need the only one Philippines. We need to have one Philippines made up of those working to facilitate the economic take off of the country, and Microsoft is part of that. We don’t want the other Philippines made up of those who are hampering it.

We need only one Philippines. One Philippines who are introducing reforms in the poisonous political system. We don’t want the other Philippines that thrive in a poisonous political system.

We want only one Philippines made up of those working for national unity. We don’t want the other Philippines made up of those fueling national discord. We want one Philippines making up… Made up of those working for national development and progress. We don’t want the other Philippines made up of those advancing for national doom and disaster,

We want one Philippines made up of those who are for a better future like you who are here in this room. We don’t want the other Philippines made up of those who want to destroy our future.

I thank Microsoft for being part of that Philippines that helped us to be poised for take off. And I thank Microsoft for what you are doing to bridge the digital divide, to bridge the poverty gap and therefore to promote more unity in our country.

Thank you Microsoft. And may you have many, many more years and many more investments and expansions in the Philippines.

Thank you very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the 10th Anniversary of Microsoft Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412062918/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5105&Itemid=38