Thank you Secretary Claudio for your introduction.

And first of all, I want to congratulate our newly elected officials of ULAP under the leadership of Chairman Governor Leo Ocampos and President Benhur Abalos. And also to thank immediate past President Monching Guico for the work he did as interim president for a year and to greet the elder statesman of ULAP, Governor Aumentado, and thank you for the beautiful Loboc Youth Ambassadors’ performance today. (Applause)

I want to congratulate not only the presidents of the leagues who are here on the platform but also the other leagues who are on the front row. To all of you, congratulations! And most of all, congratulations on your unity. Leo and Benhur’s speeches were about unity. And ULAP showed unity. Thank you very much and congratulations! (Applause)

Your solidarity is for the good of the country and the people. Thank you for your concern and sacrifice especially in the face of the challenges of the global economy, unrest in some parts of the country, and attempts to destabilize the stability of the government.

I strongly support you, my local leaders. You are the pillars of our government. I am grateful that you are cooperating with each other as well as with me in the effort to create a strong and growing economy to help ensure the peace, order and stability of our country. You are at the forefront of progress, peace and stability, unlike some who still want to destabilize our country.

Thank you and you are my allies against those who are still clinging to the politics of chaos. And thank you for being my partners in reform and economic upliftment. Thank you for your call to stop the political bickering and move the country forward on the path of more jobs, capital, peace and security.

Thank you and all sides of ULAP are working together. Together we will lead the people forward, not backward as some want, but forward as your resolutions state. Thank you for your help in our efforts to ensure political and economic stability.

This is a great time for the regular election of our officers of ULAP or the election of our regular officers of ULAP, the unified ULAP. This is a crucial time for our local government executives to be united.

The U.S financial crisis appears deeper than most anticipated. But the Philippines is in relatively good shape — thanks to the fiscal reforms that ULAP supported that manifested in 7 percent plus GDP growth last year.

We have thus far been able to withstand the full force of the global contagion. We had mentioned earlier of the meltdown in Iceland. Imagine, a developed country declaring itself bankrupt, but we have been able to withstand that because with your support we took decisive action a few years ago to fundamentally alter our economic fortunes. When some governments were cutting taxes, we raised them. But we couldn’t do that without your support. When some governments were deregulating, we were bringing more discipline and order to our financial regulatory environment. When some governments were going deeper into debt, we were fiscally prudent, building up our reserves and investing in our infrastructure and also giving out the IRA in full. And even paying the debts of previous administrations to you. (Applause)

These were not easy decisions and I paid a steep political price in terms of popularity. But I could still do it because you were there for me through thick and thin. Maraming salamat. (Applause)

You recognized that what we did was what needed to be done. And now these actions have allowed us to build a stronger economic foundation which is serving us well during this time.

The potential exposure of our banks to the asset deflation triggered by the U.S. financial crisis accounts only for one-third of one percent of total system assets. This exposure is fully reserved, our banks are well capitalized, and the innate conservatism of our bankers is matched by the prudential foresight of our regulators.

In fact, Standard & Poor’s has said in a now quite well quoted statement and I quote: “Yes, the Philippines is ‘lucky’ because they have made the necessary adjustments and reforms when times were still good. So, they are facing the global market problems and economic slowdown from a considerably improved position, compared to what they were in 3 to 4 years ago.” And Standard & Poor’s continues and I quote again: “The Philippines is an ‘island of calm’ currently while there is turmoil in the highly rated and previously stable countries such as Malaysia, Thailand, India, etc.”

Against this background anyway, I directed our economic managers — when this is one of the recommendations I should acknowledge of Governor Ben Evardone who is our LGU adviser for public affairs — I directed our economic managers to draw up a contingency plan on the impact to respond to the impact of a possible U.S. economic recession on the ordinary people of the Philippines.

In yesterday’s Cabinet meeting, the economic managers and DOLE came up with these contingency plans. The plans include strategies – well, they’ll be presented in greater detail maybe in the Philippine Business Forum on the 22nd of October — but in general may I say the plans include strategies to pump prime growth, to upgrade the country’s infrastructure, to protect labor, and to expand social services.

Now let me talk about the infrastructure spending, the accelerated infrastructure spending provided for in that contingency plan. It includes greater participation by the GFIs, GOCCs, the private sector and the LGUs in infrastructure projects. Our economic managers have come up with a Comprehensive and Integrated Infrastructure Program. This is an expanded version of the infrastructure portion of the Medium-Term Public Investment Program. The financing scheme comes from public and private sector sources: ODA loans, the GAA, the public-private partnership or joint venture, corporate funds, proceeds accruing from those mandated by law like EPIRA and NG-LGU cost-sharing.

Thus, our contingency measures involved you the LGUs. Kaya yung sinabi ni Benhur kanina, yung resolution ninyo tungkol sa census… Nonoy Andaya is still abroad, on the way back from the IMF World Bank meeting in Washington. And I understand the IMF also had very good words for our, you know, for our being able to weather the global credit crunch relatively well. But he’s a lawyer so it’s good, I’ll take it up in good time and ask him if it can be done.

Meanwhile, your IRA is being fully delivered continuously. And we expect that you will use it to alleviate poverty. And hopefully, although we will not touch any purely locally government funded project because you have local autonomy, I hope your development fund will be used for the infrastructure we are talking about — the NG-LGU partnership.

Part of the contingency plan is a labor contingency plan and this includes “Expatriate Livelihood Support Fund”. Because according to a well-known OFW, not, Jun Palafox ‘no? One of the top architects in the world who does a lot of work in Dubai, he said that our OFWs should not be called OFWs but “expats” because the bulk of them are professionals and skilled workers. They shouldn’t be called OFW because that gives them a lower salary. But when you call them “expat”, psychologically they get a higher salary. So, we have this “Expat Livelihood Support Fund” to serve as a buffer fund that Filipino expats that may be displaced by the global economic meltdown, can access. It can serve as a counterpart fund for returning expats’ livelihood progress. The details will be fleshed out by DOLE and will be presented in another event.

The last few weeks have revealed that the world needs more than confidence. Just as we had structural reform when times were better, the world also needs structural reform and global cooperation. That’s why I have called for a meeting of the ASEAN+3 next week when we have our ASEM, the Asia-Europe Meeting in Beijing. It’s a parallel initiative to what the leaders of the G-7 have undertaken.

President Sarkozy, he was able to call that meeting because he is the president of the Europen Union. Now we are no longer chairman of ASEAN this year, the chairman is Thailand, so I have made a proposal to Thailand to call a parallel meeting in Beijing. Per my instruction also, in Washington last October 11, Secretary Gary Teves, who is there with Nonoy Andaya in the World Bank Meeting, met the ASEAN+3 Finance Ministers and their representatives together with the World Bank, the IMF and the ADB senior officials. And they — this is a very important result — they reached an understanding to establish a standby facility to assist ASEAN countries who have severe liquidity problems — thank God we’re not of them yet. The facility can also be used to purchase what the bankers call toxic assets and recapitalize troubled financial institutions and private companies. The ASEAN+3 members and the multilaterals welcomed our initiative not only in providing access to financing but also more importantly in boosting confidence in the ASEAN economies.

The World Bank and the IMF will draft the implementing mechanism as soon as possible, in consultation with ASEAN Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors.

Immediately thereafter, they will convene another meeting to discuss the guidelines for the facility which we suggested should be quick disbursing with minimal conditionalities. And another very important element here, the World Bank indicated that it could initially commit to 10 billion dollars as its contribution to the standby facility. Hopefully, the IMF, ADB, Japan, China, and the rest of ASEAN will contribute an equivalent or even larger amounts. I’m also calling on the G-7 countries when we meet together with them in Beijing next week to consider the emerging economies in the bold actions and extraordinary measures that they plan to undertake to ease the crisis in the global financial system.

And amidst this storm in the global economy, we will continue in our country the programs most effective in combating poverty and hunger, because this will also serve as our shield against the global crisis.

So, I thank you again for pointing out in your discussions that political grandstanding as you said in your resolution should take a back seat to the pressing tasks we must carry out in order to reduce the impact of the global credit crunch.

And I thank you once again for leading by example in setting aside political bickering and posturing and uniting to make our country and your jurisdictions move forward.

I’d like to congratulate Mayor Lawrence Cruz and Vice Mayor Henry Lim for the Supreme Court decision on the case that you filed. We respect the position of the

Supreme Court on that matter, after all — and I think Lawrence knows this – many times I have publicly announced that no matter what the Supreme Court ultimately decides, the government will not sign the proposed MOA.

And I have also announced many times in public that we have refocused our peace talks from one centered on dialogues whose with rebels to one of authentic dialogues with the communities. And that disarmament, demobilization and reintegration is the context of our engagements with all armed groups.

Our LGUs are the frontlines of the communities. So, I ask our LGEs with jurisdiction over communities covered by the dialogues to help us. I also ask you to help us ensure that no one will take undue advantage of the verdict that would lead to the deterioration of the situation on the ground and that would pull the nation further apart. And as you have united I know you have the capability to help unite our country as a whole.

In the light of everything we need to do, I look to you, our local government executives, to be the frontline examples of good governance, and I look to you to continue to be a bastion of support.

Once again, congratulations to our newly-inducted officers!

And thank you all very much. (Applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Oath Taking of the Union of Local Authorities of the Philippines (ULAP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134929/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=13&Itemid=38