Thank you. Thank you.

Salamat. Salamat. Thank you.

Maraming salamat, Kalihim Mendoza.

Thank you very much also General Villanueva, the various officials of the DOTC and Philpost. Thank you very much, Mayor Lito Atienza for the good work you have done in the environment here, especially because the front of PhilPost is beautiful, the PhilPost Corporation building is smiling.

I also greet Secretary Mai Jimenez and various officials, especially the postal workers, ladies and gentlemen:

Congratulations for more than a century, you have been working so hard. You have been messengers of all Filipinos. I commend you for your good work.

In your continuing drive to keep up with the times, you have opened your express mail service, congratulations to our express mail service drivers. It has dedicated hubs for door-to-door delivery. You have also tapped I.T. to improve your money order system, congratulations also. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.

And with the anti-drug campaign, you youth, join the youth and the Postal Corporation. All of you will buy anti-drug stamps when we write letters.

I congratulate General Villanueva who not only did these innovations that I just mentioned to improve efficiency and reliability but was also able to raise funds for your salary differentials and your rice allowance.

I am not surprised, I am not surprised that Diomeng was able to do this, because General Villanueva has always been good not only in the conduct of warfare but also in the management of resources. You know before I placed him in Philpost, when he was Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, he was also the chairman of RSBS, and under him for the first time in a long time, the AFP pension fund RSBS was able to make a profit for the first time in a very long time. (I also greet Rene Diaz, he is here.) So what he did with the pension fund of the soldiers, he is also working on your provident fund to be successful.

In his report to me, as I understand it, in 1993 — who is here who was still here in 1993? Many already — you established a provident fund. But I understand, the DBM did not recommend post-facto approval because they are still studying the rationalization of the various provident funds in the various agencies and corporations of the government.

But I can understand the urgency of addressing the personal needs of our employees because we are now in the midst of among the most difficult times in the history not only of our country but of the world economy.

Since 1997, we had the Asian crisis. In the year 2000, we had an impeachment crisis. In 2001, the I.T. bubble in America burst and the world’s exports went down — because America is the number one buyer of the world — including the Philippines. Then 9-11 happened and there was terrorism all over the world. Early this year, SARS happened in our region. And though the Philippines handled it very well, tourism in Asia and the pacific went down. All of these contribute to trying times and our hardworking government employees must have ready access to credit. I recognize that since 1994 your provident fund has provided you with an accessible source of low-rate loans for your emergency needs.

I congratulate your fund for growing to a self-sustaining and viable source of steady credit for PhilPost employees despite the fact that since 1996 PhilPost Corporation has ceased providing for the employer contribution to the fund. Kaya sabi ko, as long as you do not require the employer contribution, I cannot see why we cannot institutionalize your provident fund.

Therefore, with the condition that you said you agree to that we will not require employer contribution until a total policy is made for all agencies, I am hereby giving post-facto approval to the Philippine Postal Corporation provident fund.

This is a sign of my gratitude for your sincere and meaningful work not only for Philpost but for our country and people.

Jobs, investments, reform — these are our priorities at sa inyong suporta, we shall pursue them as we ward off those who wish to foment division in our society. We shall pursue our reforms through the unswerving pursuit of justice and reconciliation.

I have prayed hard about the current impeachment controversy, and I have consulted with the leaders from the great institutions. There is a growing consensus among the great institutions that we have crossed a political threshold to the point wherein it is now proper for the president to step in and forge a principled solution to the impasse.

A few days ago, I proposed a covenant among the three great branches of government. Today, I would like to add that such a covenant may be premised on several fundamental principles such as the following:

First, we must respect the supreme welfare of the people as defined by our constitution and political traditions;

Second, there must be an affirmation of co-equality, independence, but indispensible cooperation and harmony among the three great branches of government;

Third, we must reinforce the principle of checks and balances as an instrument of national unity and stability and not of partisanship;

Fourth, the executive, legislative and judicial authorities must come together as trustees of the public interest and come to a resolution of the controversy within the rule of law; and fifth, democratic governance must be based on mutual trust, respect, civility, responsibility, and transparency among its leaders.

I believe these principles are even now leading us along the road to a principled solution, and therefore, along the road to stability and political progress.

Among the great institutions, there is now a growing consensus that we must have a common stand that will reflect our collective statesmanship. I cannot do it alone. Everyone concerned will have to bend backwards a bit without sacrificing principles. I am sure that right now a win win solution is in sight.

Of course, there is no doubt that there are continuous efforts to show divisiveness in our nation. But with you, the bureaucracy supporting unity and reconciliation, the plans to divide our society are futile and will fail.

They will fail because people are tired of infighting. People want unity and reconciliation. We have the support of the people in seeking unity and reconciliation.

So, government workers, if you and I are united in this goal, there is no turning back from the tide of positive change — change in the powerful institutions of our country, change in the bureaucracy like the reforms being done in Philpost, and change in the entire nation.

We want to promulgate justice with reconciliation. We want reforms to uplift the poor and make life more comfortable for the ordinary Filipino. And that’s the contribution of PhilPost — making life easier for the ordinary Filipino. You and I, because we are the government, the government will lead these reforms, will lead this reconciliation.

So, Philpost personnel, thank you for your help with our reforms for justice, for unity, for the comfort of the ordinary citizen.

I greet these Manila youth who see me. I also greet the Philpost personnel who are in front of the beautiful fountain. You can't see me very well because I'm small, but I will come down later to greet you.

To all of you, my heartfelt thanks for your support of the administration. Together we will succeed in the necessary reforms and the necessary unity of our country.

Happy anniversary to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the 105th Anniversary of the Philippine Postal Service and Celebration of Postal Consciousness Week. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615141142/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7533&Itemid=38