Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines On the 2007 Reformation

[ Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, January 31, 2007 ]

Bringing home the fruits of reform in 2007

And closer to home, I’m once again in the proud position this year to announce strong economic numbers: our stock market has never been higher in a decade nor delivered better return for investors; the peso is at the highest point in recent years; exports have grown by double digit; direct foreign investment has soared to two billion U.S. dollars; almost one million jobs were created; our credit outlook has come up.

Our national budget is being passed and we are no w investing for the second complete year in a row of long overdue infrastructure investments. This deludes billions for education, health care and start up capital for social infrastructure. Billions more for new roads, bridges, ports and physical infrastructure.

And let me be clean we continue to pay down our deficit. And our economic managers are determined to meet their goal of balancing our budget in 2008. And lest anyone falsely declare that we will spend beyond our means before the upcoming election, I’ve something to say—no way. We have a budget in place and the discipline and political will to stick to it.

We want to create high-paying jobs here at home so that Filipinos no longer need to go abroad for a job. We want overseas work to be a career choice, not the only option for a talented man or woman in search of a better life. Our overseas workers are heroes who contribute much to our nation. But it is time to plan for the day when our heroes can come home, be with family, buy a home and live in comfort and dignity right here in the Philippines.

And part of a bright new future for our nation is to take control over our reliance on energy, to become free from dependence on foreign oil and become self-sufficient through the use of sustainable, alternative forms of energy. This will enhance our national security, lift up our economy and preserve our environment.

To that end, no nation can aspire to become modern without thinking of our environment. I want to press ahead with a massive green Philippines environmental plan that is comprehensive in scope and thorough in execution. A plan that includes reforestation, preservation of our reefs and waterways and scrubs the land and air of pollutants that endanger the health of our citizens.

Yet with all of our dreams come the day-to-day realities that change and reform never move fast enough. Disparities exist that are hard to witness; there are too many poor, too many sick, too many without a job. I wish I could just make the process move forward to slow down and eventually halt the inequalities.

Goodbye to political violence

And one reality that must be resolved is our sad history of political violence. We have just received the first Melo report on the assassination of political activists and journalists. I had asked justice Melo last August to take a hard look at what’s behind our nation’s dangerous predilection to want to subvert democracy through the barrel of a gun.

I have reached out to those who share my deep concern for the victims in order to press them into service to help solve this never-ending pattern of violence. I met with amnesty international in London over the summer, with friends from the European Union, local religious and civic leaders and our enforcement community to try and get to the bottom of these killings once and for all.

Investigations suggest links to both right and left — to communists, communist rebels as well as possibly elements of our own military. The investigations of the national police’s Task Force “Usig” have unearthed some interesting facts such as 23 cases of killings perpetrated by the NPA against their own men, the discrepancy between the number of cases reported by the front organizations of the communists and the numbers in the police files, and two cases where the supposed victims were confirmed to be alive. It’s disheartening to contemplate that anyone upholding people’s rights could engage in such deeds. I need to absorb fully what it means.

Yesterday, we came out with a response to the first Melo report. There is much to ponder and much to be done. We are not stopping in our crusade for human rights. We want a wider, deeper understanding that will involve more cooperation from all concerned parties and sectors. We’re calling on the relatives, the witnesses and even the militant groups to speak out, lay the evidence and serve the high cause of justice. The government shall consolidate its agencies and resources for this effort, invite international cooperation, protect witnesses, field special prosecutors and ask for the installation of special courts to move forward. The AFP itself is deeply involved in this effort to check its ranks and protect the name and prestige of the military organization and the majority of our soldiers from the stigma of this issue.

I do know this: I believe 99.9 percent of our military are good, hard working and patriotic Filipinos. They do heroic things, like killing terrorists in battle, putting their lives on the line every day to protect the nation and make our homeland safer.

In order to address the recommendations of the Melo Commission, we will work with the Church, activists, the journalist community, government officials, the international community and justice Melo to strengthen any findings and put teeth in the recommendations.

We will do everything in our power to crackdown on political violence leading up to this may election so that our citizens can vote free from fear. So that our candidates can campaign without the shadow of assassination. And so that our journalist comrades can cover the election, not their head, in pursuit of press freedom.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library