Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Opening of the First Siargao Invitational Billfish Tournament

[Delivered in Siargao Island, April 17, 2008]

In behalf of the people of the Philippines, welcome to Siargao.

Economic development in our rural areas is not just about promoting modern agricultural practices or investment in our mining sector, it is also about working to responsibly develop those parts of our country that are uniquely suited for development as environmentally sensitive destinations for domestic and international tourists.

Siargao, known around the world as one of the best surfing destinations, also has incredible game fishing resources. These serve to help position Siargao as an adventure sports tourism paradise.

This is the first and what will be hopefully be a regular sport fishing tournament. It will help put this beautiful area on the world tourism map.

Tourism has the potential to be a major driver of economic development for our rural areas. As part of our commitment to helping develop the tourism assets of areas such as Siargao we are local governments improve their infrastructure. That includes the development of the Siargao airport, the road from Siargao to Cloud 9 our championship surfing spot, and the improvement of the Siargao hospital.

I have met with a number of companies in my travels around the world to promote international investment in the Philippines who say that the natural beauty of our provinces are magnets for tourism investments. We are working with local officials to ensure that these investments materialize. This includes infrastructure development, environmental protection initiatives, and even staff training.

Thank you all for being here. I hereby open the First Siargao Invitational Billfish Tournament.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech During the Opening of the First Siargao Invitational Billfish Tournament. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412122056/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1343&Itemid=38