Thank you very much.

Thank you very much Secretary Joey Lina and good afternoon to all of you.

I greet the very supportive Local Government Officers Leagues who are here today: Governor del Rosario, the president of the Governors’ League of the Philippines and the Union of Local Authorities of the Philippines; and many Vice Governors who are here, your partners in the Provincial Board so they are the presiding officer under the leadership of Vice Governor Julius Herrera. I also thank Board Member Palmero for his kind greeting earlier; and Vice Mayor Louie Bustamante is our distinguished delegate from Metro Manila. Joey Rufino, my Political Secretary, is also here; guests:

Good afternoon to all of you. To my fellow delegates from Pampanga and Tarlac, good day to you all. To my relatives from my mother's side, good evening to you all. And to our brothers and sisters from Mindanao and Central Visayas, good afternoon to all of you. And to the townsfolk of my husband, the Ilonggos, good afternoon to all of you. There are so many more here. From Pangasinan. And a warm welcome to our friends from Waray country. And of course to our Bicolanos, good afternoon also to all of you.

And I am happy that we are here today.

I greet the Provincial Board Members of the Philippines on the occasion of your tenth National Convention. Ten years is a very important milestone, which we can call a Jubilee celebration.

And this is not only special because this League has been around for 10 years. Our gathering today is also special because this day falls within the Lenten season of the anniversary of People Power 1 and People Power 2. People Power 1, as we remember, culminated on February 25, 1986 and People Power 2 began on January 16, 2001. From January 16 to February 25 is forty days, and praying for forty days is what we call Lent, which is part of our culture along with the nine days we call a novena. It's as if the Lord sent a message, because He is the source of People Power, that the two People Power movements in our history are part of one event and spirit, and should be celebrated together.

Therefore, every day during this Lent, we celebrate People Power 1 and Power 2. I celebrate it, along with various important parts of People Power. And now, it is only right that I am with you in this celebration because I and the people consider the Provincial Board Members of the Philippines, those who make the laws of the province, as true servants of People Power.

So you are an important part of People Power. That's why I greet you all, all of us. When we say Happy People Power Anniversary, that includes the Board Members of every province of our country.

And as I was passing through the middle aisle, I recognized so many of you because many of you were former mayors, many of you were re-elected as board members. So you are not new to running the government. Many of you are veterans in making laws. Many of you are veterans in running a town. And you know what ordinances the province should pass to help in the good operation of a town.

I also have great admiration for local government officials. As Joey said – actually, I really pushed Joey to become Secretary of the Interior and Local Government, he was a sure-win for re-election as Governor but he sacrificed and suddenly left the contest there locally and became Secretary of the Interior and Local Government. And it's good that he carries with him your dreams, your aspirations. So when he says I'm giving you all of my IRA now, when he says there's no more 10 percent or 20 percent retention, there's no more LGSEF and the debts from the previous administration are being paid, it's because Joey is urging me because he comes from you.

When I was a new president on stage at Edsa 2, January 20, 2001, what I said then was that our main goal should be ambitious. Our country has been fighting poverty for a long time. We should now be ambitious, let's give ourselves a deadline. Let's say, let's strive to eradicate the poverty of our country within a decade.

How will we do that? We will look at the different measures of poverty and address them. For example, many of you are in the provinces. In the provinces, a large part of the poverty is among the farmers. And a big problem with agriculture is the Agrarian Reform. There are still two million hectares that have not been distributed under the Agrarian Reform. So if we want to eradicate the poverty of our country, let's aim to distribute those two million hectares within a decade. And if two million is our goal in ten years, that means 200,000 hectares is our target each year.

That's what it means to have an ambition with a deadline so that we are all together in this roadmap and every branch of government, every level of government has its role.

Indeed, when I went to the State of the Nation Address of Congress, I mentioned the four parts of our fight against poverty. First of all, it is the 21st century now, and how is poverty fought in this 21st century? Above all, jobs. There should be jobs for those looking for jobs. And how do we attract job opportunities? We need investments. And how do we attract investments? We need a good macro-economic environment.

That's what I tried to do in the first year of my presidency, the macro-economic development should be fixed so that investments will come in, whether foreign or Filipino. And what are the parts of the macro-economic environment that they are looking for? Peace is one of them, and local government can do a lot for peace because you are there, you are the ones who recognize who the bad elements are in your area. So many local government units have helped in the fight against those who fight our peace.

But what I can say is a very important thing for our macroeconomic environment of investments is red tape. That is something that investors, whether local or foreign, really dislike.

And as I recall, as a Government Official since 1986, my first job was at the Department of Trade and Industry, and I set up a one-stop-shop for investors. So over the past years, the one-stop-shop has been established at the national level, but investments don't happen at the national level. Investments are placed in a locality—a place whether it's Metro Manila or even in the provinces.

Therefore, what investors are looking for, from the national down to the local level, they want to have only one point of contact, one caretaker, or just one office to go to. So it is very important that the one-stop reforms that are being made, or the shorter periods to get approval, must also happen in the local government units. That's why it's important that the Provincial Board Members, your provincial ordinances regarding business, you need to take charge of this so that the processes for entering investment, whether local or international, can be shortened or simplified.

And I respect that investors don’t come to the Philippines, they go somewhere in the Philippines. So in the past, during State Visits by the presidents, they would bring the Congressmen and Senators. That's easy to understand because the budget comes from Congress and the Senate, so they need to show that the budget spent on those State Visits isn't wasted.

But when I became president and you were seated, I met with the Leagues, government officials, and they said, “Those who will take care of investors, those who will offer investors, are not the Congressmen and Senators because they are in Congress, making laws.” When it comes to investments or offering investments, it is the local government officials who will entertain them. And the laws needed are not only national laws—actually, now almost all national laws for investment are already there, but the Local Ordinances and Provincial Ordinances. So since then, when I learned that insight, not only Congressmen and Senators are brought along, but also representatives of local government units; governors and city mayors are always included in the Official Visit and State Visit of the President of the Philippines.

In that way, when we are there, they also sell the provinces to our investors, but of course, it also depends on you how the laws are presented, how the laws are reached by the investors, because if the Philippines is competing with other countries for investors, including our own domestic investors. Because if our businessmen see that the laws in Vietnam are better, they will move there even if they are Filipinos. Or China, they will move there even if they are Filipinos. We are competing with other countries for investments, even investments from our own businessmen. Well, the same is true for the different provinces, they are also competing on where it is good to go.

And you know, there are investors who sometimes leave. And when they leave, the DTI conducts an exit interview to find out why they are leaving. And in the results of the exit interview, it is seen that the support of local governments for their investments is a big thing. So this is very important that it should be part of your workshops: how to have seamless efforts between national and local governments with regard to investment promotion.

The provincial board does a lot, many approvals. For example, aren't environmental clearance certificates and other things like that, involved with the provincial boards? So in the processes of approving the various papers needed for investments, the provincial board is of great importance. And when we are looking for Official Development Assistance to have infrastructure because investors are looking for us to have infrastructure—roads, ports, telephones, airports—many of these cannot be covered by our budget because I inherited a budget that would be 225 billion pesos, thankfully we were able to bring it down to 147 billion. And if we want to keep our macroeconomics good, we should try to bring it down to 130 billion pesos with our best efforts.

So much of our infrastructure will really come from Official Development Assistance, and many want to help because our credit rating is good now. Thank God that Official Development Assistance sources see that our utilization is good. So if the utilization is good, they don't waste [funds].

For example, Japan, because they are having problems, reduced their ODA by 10 percent, but officially, they did not reduce Official Development Assistance to the Philippines because our use of it is good. Well, Japan accounts for 70 percent of our Official Development Assistance, comes from Japan, and they are having a very hard time with their own economy, but their help to the Philippines continues, it is not being reduced. So it would be a shame if we waste that help through red tape. And it is very important, when a provincial project—right, Dolfo?—when a provincial project is submitted to Official Development Assistance, the approval, the concurrence of the provincial board is very important. So the role of the provincial board in creating the macro-economic environment that will provide jobs for our people is very important.

So I am happy that we are together to discuss that. That is the first part of our four-part fight against poverty.

Secondly, because as I said earlier, most of our poor people are in the countryside, our farmers. So we need things like land reform and what we can call the modernization of agriculture.

Actually, this is really one thing why we released your IRA, this year, and even paid the IRA from previous years.

You know our exports have fallen by 40 percent, due to the world's difficulties. But even though our exports fell by 40 percent, our GNP still rose by 3.7 percent. Why? Because we took care of domestic demand.

When I was at the world economic forum, when I was telling them that our exports fell by 39.5 percent and our GNP still rose by 3.7, because I built up domestic demand and yet we kept the budget deficit at 147 billion, they were all impressed. And they really said, “how did you do it? How did you build up domestic demand?” Well, when they were talking with Dante Canlas—because he was with me there—about the ways we built up domestic demand, the number one way in which our domestic demand was built up was when the entire IRA was released and the IRAs from previous years were paid, you LGUs, you spent it through the budget passed by the provincial board, you spent your budget on good productive income-generating activities that gave income to the people, so our domestic demand rose and we survived the crisis of 2001. Many of those here are the expenses for agricultural productivity. That's why the farmers, somehow, had expenses; and not only had expenses, our agricultural production increased because you spent on the countryside.

Last year, our import requirement, the deficiency in our rice production was 650,000 metric tons, but because of our cooperation in spending on farm-to-market roads, whatever is needed for agriculture, it increased by 300,000 metric tons. So this year our shortfall is only 390 metric tons. So it is decreasing.

And that, I suppose, is why I was accused of being stingy with the IRA and why I was waiting at Malacañang for who would fawn and ask, well, the release of that money was weak, your spending was weak, your allocation was weak. That's why I am grateful that in that regard, we were also able to help the countryside and the improvement of our GNP.

The third part of our fight against poverty is direct assistance to the poorest of the poor. For example, I mentioned land reform. Another example, as I said in the State of the Nation Address, I want to build 100,000 housing units for workers – that's what many of you know as economic housing – and 50,000 housing units for the very poorest. Well, economic housing involves banks, we can fix that if we fix the Securitization Law; we can fix that if we fix the Asset Management Law; and things like that; if we fix Pag-IBIG so it moves faster. But houses for the very poorest, for those who can only afford rent or amortization of 300/500, you won't find those 50,000 in the market or the private sector, the government needs to build those. But 50,000, how much will that cost and how much is the entire budget for that? It's a huge amount, billions of pesos are needed, and never before has the government put money for that kind of housing in the budget. In fact, my estimate is it should be five billion pesos, but since never before was five billion pesos put in housing in the budget… Isn't our budgeting, your budgeting not zero-based, it is the present budget plus five percent, plus 10 percent, depending. So five percent or 10 percent of zero, is really nothing. So we really have to squeeze blood from stone. And I pushed Emy Boncodin, I think she found 2.5 billion for housing for the poorest of the poor, that's not enough, so we need to partner – the provincial government and the National Government, find the poorest in your province and maybe that's what we can work on together.

For example, well, there's nothing here… Is the one from Nueva Ecija here? As far as I know, for example, Tommy Joson, he has housing for his poorest farmers, and from what I hear, 5,000 is his housing. Well, if it's 5,000, and if there are ten wealthy provinces that can do that and we partner, we can get the 50,000 housing units for the poorest of the poor. But of course, the provincial board needs to allocate that budget, just as Congress needs to give us a budget.

Then the fourth thing, what we call good governance is needed. raising moral standards in government and in society. And that is one reason why I have already given you all your IRA because I don't want the political system of patronage where you have to go to the President to beg for additional project money because in the first place you were reduced by 10 or 20 percent. You should have funds for your projects because it is your right and not because you begged for it. And because LGUs are empowered in this administration because your IRA is not reduced, your money to disburse and budget suddenly increases. Before, Joey, 106 billion was released by the government, now, 136 billion was released for local government. Ah 134.

So this is probably what we will discuss in the next two days: how the provincial board can help bring in business, especially cutting down on red tape and being investor-friendly, in helping farmers who are very poor, many are very poor, in our country; how to provide direct support to the poorest in your various communities and how to raise the level of morality in our communities.

So we have a lot to do. We have only been together for a year as an administration, but from what I see now, we have been together for a long time as those who serve the people. Let us use our long-standing relationship, let us use our new agreed-upon priorities of this People Power administration. And hopefully, with our unity, truly within a decade we can say at the 20th anniversary of the Board Members League of the Philippines, hopefully we can celebrate that poverty has been eradicated in our country.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 10th National Convention of the Provincial Board Member of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230622/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7611&Itemid=38