Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, during the celebration of the 107th anniversary of Philippine Independence.

Thank you very much, Secretary Durano and everyone who prepared our celebration today.

Speaker de Venecia and all the elected officials present today; excellencies of the diplomatic corps; members of the Cabinet and other appointive officials; Mayor Atienza and all the local officials; distinguished guests, my beloved countrymen.

The flag waving above us, all the way to the other side of Rizal Park, is a symbol of the blood, sweat, and toil of the heroes who fought and sacrificed their lives for the freedom and independence of the Philippines. There is a reason why the flag dominates us. It means that no one is above the flag or the laws that bind the nation. Like the flag, the law looks upon all of us equally.

May our flag, this national day, serve as an impetus for a new era that will celebrate all that is admirable in the Philippines.

I desire a country free from poverty, free from hunger, free from inequality where even those who work hard and follow the law are just running to stay in place.

I desire a single Philippines. So today, while extolling the lessons and memories of our heroes, I call on everyone: let us cast aside the dirty kind of politics and focus on economic progress. Because economic progress is the key to our complete freedom.

Let us strengthen unity and fervent love of country above the benefit of a few. Together, let us establish a single Philippines, free from conflict and full of hope and opportunity for all.

In my interaction with working, ordinary Filipinos, in my frequent visits to the provinces, I deeply feel the hopelessness of many of us. We must all unite to alleviate their suffering.

The first stage of our economic reforms has been established. I have been given by Congress – congressmen and senators here, thank you very much – they have given me the power to increase the coffers of the nation so that we can fund… we can fund many long-awaited needs of the people. We can fund this without having to rely on debt after debt to achieve some of these things.

Here is Senator Mar Roxas, representing the senate, thank you also, Senate and Congress.

Now we are beginning the second stage. Part of the second stage are the reforms in the administration itself, we will fill the coffers of the nation not only through new taxes, but through more effective work of our personnel. Through the suppression of corruption. So in this second stage, we aim to reduce the prevalence of corruption in government by half within three years, and we will strive to eliminate it completely by the end of my term. And part of this in suppressing or halving corruption in government within three years, in one year, we also aim to suppress the corruption coming from illegal gambling.

Yes, the second stage has begun. And above the fight against corruption, the second stage also includes, we will seek greater independence in gasoline, energy and crude oil. We will also look for, we will build infrastructure that will appease investors to provide jobs for our many citizens looking for work. And above all, in this second stage, we will deliver more quickly to the poor because we can now, with the new funds, provide more blessings long desired by our poor people.

Thus, because of this second stage that will happen because the first stage was established, at the end of my presidency, as I declared when I was campaigning, every Filipino child who is qualified should be in school; and most Filipino families should have a child studying in a course that can provide a livelihood.

Once we achieve the second stage, we will complete the remaining ten-point program that I declared when I took my oath as president last year – a program that is pro-poor, pro-development and pro-peace. And thus, in building and fulfilling the ten points of our platform, as we strive as a millennium development goal, we will halve the percentage of the poor in society and ensure food on every table.

And so that the implementation of these proposals can always be monitored, I will once again rely on the ten groups of civil society, including the bishop-businessmen’s conference, which on the previous day of Edsa signed agreements with several government agencies to monitor the fight against corruption. We will expand their monitoring, not only in the fight against corruption, but also in promoting education for all and in alleviating poverty in our country.

My countrymen, the flag is the symbol of power and determination, and engrave this in stone: I will demonstrate the power and determination to strengthen our democracy and keep the people on the right path.

Respect for the flag is my patriotic duty. Service to the poor is my God-fearing pledge. For this great purpose, I dedicate my honor, my future, and my very life.

On this great national day, my countrymen, what I ask of you, my beloved countrymen: help me to be a good president.

Thank you very much. Long live the Philippines!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the 107th Anniversary Celebration of Philippine Independence. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412081053/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5080&Itemid=38