Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 103rd anniversary of the Bureau of Customs

[Delivered at the Social Hall, Main Bldg., Bureau of Customs South Harbor, Manila City, February 7, 2005]

Thank you.

Thank you, Nitz.

Commissioner Jereos, Secretary Angie Reyes of DILG, Tony Meloto and the other civilians who are here with us today, Tony Bernardo and the other former officials of BOC, present officers and staff of BOC, other government officials, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:

Happy Anniversary to all of you!

I don’t usually attend anniversaries but today I decided to attend the Customs anniversary because the Customs bureau stands at the apex of one of the most important concerns of our 10-point pro-poor agenda, and that is balancing the budget.

Many people ask me how can you remember the ten-points. Well, we have the acronym “BEAT THE ODDS.” The very first one there B is for balancing the budget. Balancing the budget is a function of efficient, equitable collection of taxes and their full faithful and honest application to the people’s welfare. We’re all part of this far-ranging responsibility to make taxes work for the people.

As performance gains in all revenue fronts, so does the entire economy.

As our partnership with Congress continues to reap revenue measures, our revenue agencies will continue to be held to a higher level of performance.

Popular acceptance of new taxes largely depends on our efficiency to collect taxes under existing laws.

Honest tax collection is your main task. This responsibility puts the customs worker at the forefront of public interest. That’s why let me take this opportunity to congratulate you on your highest level of tax collections in history. Your high tax collections compared to target and compared to last year are proof not only of growing efficiency but of better morale and discipline. Mabuhay ang Customs!

We are not only intercepting more contraband, as was shown to me by your officials when I arrived, but making smugglers think twice.

The days of smugglers are numbered. We will beat them in their own game and draw the noose tight on their operations.

These things did not happen by accident. They are a result of day to day leadership of good commissioners, the perseverance of diligent Customs personnel, and the complementary work of related agencies like those under Secretary Reyes.

Nitz Amatong and George Jereos are about to retire and leave us. I would like to congratulate them both for a job well done.

It is also my pleasure to welcome Cesar Purisima to the DOF and Bert Lina to the Customs watch. Cesar recommended Bert because Bert knows the ropes and will slide into the job without effort. I ask you to lend him your full support.

The scope of the bureau is stretching out globally. We are poised to bring the Philippines to the edge of greater stability and competitiveness in order to create more jobs and more income for our people — that is always our ultimate goal. To be able to do this, we have to be stable, we have to be competitive. Stability and competitiveness mean that we have to be part of the whole network that facilitates beneficial commerce. And that’s why we have the officials of PCCI here with us today and I acknowledge their presence.

Aside from efficient tax collection, the PCCI only knows too well that trade facilitation is the name of the game — to reduce the cost and the time of doing business as well as to improve transparency, predictability and consistency across all transactions.

The road to change starts with an acceptance of the sad reality that the Customs service continues to be one of the most stigmatized agencies in the country.

The perception of corruption has to be reversed lest our surging economic gains are overcome by nagging skepticism. At the same time, we must also liberate the ranks of customs from fear, blackmail and undue interference from unscrupulous vested interests. The work has begun and we must carry on to the finish.

Together, we shall strike a fundamental dent upon the culture of corruption. The culture that is fundamentally behind the decades-long failure to collect the right amount of taxes.

When I talk about fighting the culture of corruption, I’m speaking not only of the lifestyle checks that have already taken their toll on a number of officials across the government. I’m also speaking of investments in technological change and procedural reforms.

With regard to technological change, today, we launched here on the platform, in Manila our new network with the world automation project of the U.N. which aligns our software with over 85 countries worldwide for common standards of import and export processing. I previously launched this network in the Customs offices of Cebu and Bohol. At that time, when I saw the presentation of Balong and he had that last frame of the man under the coconut tree transacting customs business, I said, “Balong, when will that happen?” He said, the whole system to be completed will take ten months but the scene of the man under the coconut tree transacting business with customs can take place in three months from now.

I’m also glad that today again on this stage, we launched still another facet of our strong partnership with the PCCI for the internet lodgement of import entries.

Now, with all of these combination of different technological changes your clients can file their entries in the comfort of their homes and offices. A user-friendly customs service can indeed work wonders.

With regard to procedural reforms — well, today earlier, when one of my long complaints has been… I’m very happy about your seizures but I would wish that we were more aggressive in filing cases. And today, I saw a number of seized goods in a number of vans and I said, “so, when are you gonna file the case against the consignee?” “oh, maybe two weeks.” And so I said, why? “because there has to be an investigation.” But we’ve already seized the good. So, we know that prima facie there was smuggling. And then the answer was “but they might, you know, we have to investigate because they might have a defense, they might say that it doesn’t belong to them.” I said, well, then let them say that in court.

So today, as part of your celebration of Customs, I’m asking George Jereos to make sure that the consignees of all those seized goods that we inspected today will receive a charge sheet today.

On the matter of legislation for procedural reform, there is the new accountability reform law, commonly called the attrition act. That’s our latest tool for reform.

Job security and compensation are now tied to performance. We shall set the goals fairly — that’s done, Nitz by the DBCC? — measure the results transparently and make the firm moves to proscribe or reward those deserving either way.

I know that some of you are apprehensive about this law, but those who do their jobs faithfully need not worry. It will be used neither as a means for political vendetta, nor for sham rewards, nor for unjust punishment.

It will be used to build faith in good governance. And that is what I want our theme to be for this customs year: “Let’s beat the odds; let’s rebuild faith in good governance; let’s balance the budget; let’s collect a lot of those taxes.”

Join me in this quest.

Mabuhay on your 103rd anniversary!

Thank you and God bless.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the 103rd Anniversary of the Bureau of Customs. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412082206/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3073&Itemid=38