PORTRAIT OF THE FILIPINO AS WORKER HERE AND ABROAD

This year’s award ceremony is unique. Because the world changed on March 20th when the Coalition led by America took action against Iraq. Why did the world change? Because this change brought about a new Asian perspective on political and economic security. We now need to be more responsible for the safety of our countries. And for the Philippines, that perspective should consider our eight million citizens who contribute to development, even to our economy, even to the world economy because there are one hundred and forty countries where our Filipino workers are employed.

And you, great Filipino workers, are called new heroes because of the immense service and honor you give to our country. Our Filipino heroes give a good reputation to our country, because they say that if Filipinos are that good, for example, in Saudi Arabia, then the Filipinos here in the Philippines are probably just as good. So, you are excellent ambassadors for our country.

And not only that, what you send here, when the day comes that you are able to work here, that is also an investment that has grown our economy. You send tuition for your children and siblings, so millions of young people are able to study or finish their education and provide a new generation of skilled workers. This is thanks to our OFWs.

The housing you send, the houses you build for your relatives, there are thousands of them. And those you love who are getting a new house because of you, that also means a new life.

And the other day or last week, I went to a meeting with the housing industry. According to them, their biggest market now, the biggest source of their housing business is OFWs buying homes for your families in the Philippines. And if they say that housing has the biggest multiplier effect, even that housing is a contribution of our OFWs. You send capital, so I said, if the day comes that you can work here again, it will be because of your investment. Because of your investment, the remittances you send to your relatives, many businesses are launched, even small businesses across the country. And small businesses, according to economists, are the most efficient in using capital.

The successful businesses built in our country because of your remittances are a major pillar of our economy. Many barangays, towns, cities, and provinces have flourished with the contributions of overseas Filipinos. And this perfectly matches my main program in our government to provide jobs for our people. I said, the first most important thing is small and medium enterprises.

So, when other countries experienced the Asian crisis or the crisis after Iraq and 9-11, which weakened businesses around the world, the Philippines remained strong because we don't rely on exports, but on small and medium enterprises in our own country. And a lot of that capital also comes from you. And as I said, if we don't rely on exports, we rely on housing which has a large multiplier effect, and that also comes from you.

Therefore, the great Filipino worker who sends at least six billion dollars every year, that is a huge contribution. This is not only a direct contribution to the family, but also to the multiplier effect and providing jobs for many.

I am very happy to report to you, our dear new heroes, that for the first quarter of this year, our economic report showed that our gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 4.5 percent while our gross national product (GNP) grew by 5.6 percent. The other countries I visit don't have that much growth. And what is the difference between 4.5 percent GDP and 5.6 percent GNP? The difference is that the 5.6 percent GNP includes your remittances. So, we see the value of your contribution to our country. This means that the difference comes from the contribution of overseas Filipinos. So, thank you very much for your remittances, thank you for your heroism.

And this is it, as I said, your contribution perfectly matches our goals. Those declared from my first State of the Nation Address as President in 2001. I said then, what is the desire of the average Filipino – jobs, education, a home, let's add, food on every table — this is the aspiration of the masses. And I also said, this is the core of my vision. This is, in common sense and plain talk, is the core of my vision.

But one year of seeking to carry out that vision made me realize that these are goals for our people, while the vision of our nation must be to rebuild and strengthen the Philippine Republic. Because only a strong republic can ensure jobs, education, a home, and food on every table of our citizens.

If you need to go to another country to find work, that is because our republic is not yet strong.

Two essential features mark out a strong republic: the first is independence from class and sectoral interests, so that the republic stands for the interests of the people rather than a powerful minority; the second is the capacity, represented through strong institutions and a strong bureaucracy, to execute good policy and deliver essential services.

Basic services should be delivered by a strong republic to the people wherever you are, whether in the Philippines or abroad.

That is the reason why I said that with the new perspective needed after the world changed on April 20th, Filipinos abroad need to be included in the consideration. This new perspective should recognize that here in Asia, as I said, we need to be more responsible for our own political and economic security. This includes our citizens not only in the Philippines but also Filipinos abroad. We will do everything to keep Filipinos safe, not only in the Philippines but also in different parts of the world.

Since the problem of global stability worsened, it has always been the policy of our government that our primary duty is the safety of Filipinos, whether in the Philippines or abroad. Our main concern is to keep you safe and out of danger. I must be concerned about the peace and security of 8 million Filipinos who live and work in over 140 countries around the world.

In recognition of your contribution to our economy, a law has already been passed giving you the right to vote abroad.

Even in America where three million Filipinos are – three out of eight million Filipinos are in America – your contribution to the economy of the Philippines, and even the whole world, is recognized. That is why President Bush reported that America will begin a project to facilitate the sending of money by Filipino workers from all over the world, not just those in America, to the Philippines. And we agreed that this project will improve the lives of millions of Filipinos, by making your remittance fees lower and making it easier for funds to reach the Philippines from America and around the world. Hopefully, within six months, you will feel these lower costs.

And from where Pat Sto. Tomas and I came from, Japan where almost one hundred thousand Filipinos also work. Yesterday, Prime Minister Koizumi said that we can now start formal discussions about the economic partnership agreement between the Philippines and Japan. And for the Philippines, the main thing we are pushing for is for Japan to open its doors to our nursing aides and our I.T. workers. This is unusual because until now, Japan's doors are still closed to workers from other countries.

In Korea – where Pat Sto. Tomas and I came from – there are also many Filipinos. The only thing is, out of the thirty thousand Filipinos, more than half do not have proper documentation. So we are asking them to pass the Work Permit Law, so that not only trainees, for example, those workers there with low salaries, will have the same salary and security of tenure as Koreans.

The President said earlier that, although that proposed law is heavy, because of course a country is afraid to lose jobs for its own citizens, they will give an extension or a grace period or that amnesty period to our Filipino workers, so that they do not have to be immediately sent home because they recognize that our Filipinos are skilled and they really want them there.

So, we also recognize the outstanding OFWs today. In this recognition, your president and your government desire the continuation of the courage and resilience of your spirit in any trials that come. You have already proven this, along with many of our countrymen abroad. As they say, the Filipino worker is proven to be strong, proven to be brave, and will not back down even in times of war.

Therefore, we thank you, great Filipino worker. We hope that the day will come when you will work here in the Philippines because of your help, our republic has become stronger. But one thing I regret, especially for the seamen, the day comes when you exceed the age limit, you return here even though our republic is not yet strong and you look for work in our country. I then established a part of DOLE, the Undersecretary of Labor for Reintegration, Undersecretary Lucy Lazo. And I said, her only job is to help those OFWs who have returned because there are no jobs waiting for them abroad. I said to Pat, “Pat, why are they losing their jobs, they are so good?” Because Pat said, sometimes they have an age limit, and when they enter here, the factories also have an age limit, or maybe the salary they receive abroad is too high to match their salary.

So a different way is needed. So perhaps, if you were sending capital before but you know how to be a worker or technician or professional, you need to be helped now to start your new life. And that is also one commitment of this government to you.

Hopefully, many will know that when you return home and you are looking for your next livelihood, the next chapter of your life, Pat and her Undersecretary, Lucy Lazo, are still there, who I said will help all our great Filipino workers have a new life here in the Philippines.

Therefore, once again, my friends, thank you for investing your best years of your life for our country. We are striving to reciprocate you not only while you are achieving success through the awards given to you in these ceremonies, but also throughout your life, we will strive to ensure that our country does not forget you. And if you have taken care of our country, our country, the Philippines, will also take care of you throughout your life.

Thank you very much and congratulations, great Filipino worker!

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].