The power of Filipino women is very important to the overall welfare of what we call our human resources. We have come a long way, but we still have a long way to go before we can say that the power of our women is fully realized.

The problem of poverty in the Philippines still has the face of women. Many women continue to suffer from physical and emotional battery. Therefore, attitudes still need to be changed. The structures of community and culture still need to be reorganized and undergo change.

Last year, I gave an instruction to the National Council on the Role of Filipino Women to write a draft framework plan for women, including current policies and what are called emerging women’s concerns, and our proposed policies regarding women.

You will see a video of their summary. This is not yet the launching because before I formalize and release the executive order, there are still other things I want to ensure in accordance with the policy of our government.

However, it is good that we already have what can be called a penultimate draft. And once we have a plan, there will be a more concrete basis for agencies to plan and for budgeting gender and development projects. And because there is a plan, there can be answers to the shortcomings in current gender mainstreaming activities.

This new plan is expected to give special attention to two things: first, women’s economic empowerment; and second, protection of women’s rights. In these two important areas, the Commission on the Role of Filipino Women has also added gender sensitivity in governance.

In this plan, we expect that the poorest women and rural women will be the primary beneficiaries.

Currently, one of the government's major programs is for women. For me, economic empowerment for women is what is called the Grameen Banking Strategy or microfinance. Our goal is for the NCRFW to help the NAPC reach 300,000 women to benefit from microfinance annually. In this way, within our three-and-a-half years of the current administration, one million women will be able to enter microfinance and have the opportunity to earn a living.

Through this plan, we also hope to improve the implementation of policies that defend the rights of women in terms of human rights. In other words, through this plan , we shall focus on abused women, violence against women, the protection of the girl-child , and measures to combat trafficking of women and children .

When I spoke at the United Nations General Assembly, I said that as long as we do not address the empowerment and rights of women, we cannot say that we have eradicated the problem of poverty in countries.

And within a year of that, there was a major event – 9-11. The war against terrorism. And one thing I constantly say around the world is that the fight against terrorism is a twin fight against poverty. But now, I want to add that we cannot say that poverty has been eradicated if we cannot enforce the empowerment and rights of women. The fight against terrorism, the fight against poverty are also twin to the fight for the rights and empowerment of women.

For example, those countries or communities where terrorism is more prevalent, those are also the societies where abuse of women is more prevalent. Look at Afghanistan under the Taliban. Look at Abu Sayyaf in Basilan and listen to the testimonies of women hostages, they testified that they were raped by the Abu Sayyaf.

So if we talk about the rights of women in the Philippines, we need to suppress the terrorism of Abu Sayyaf if we want to prevent the rape of our women in the south.

But it seems the world has been turned upside down. Some say that when we ask the Americans to train our soldiers to suppress Abu Sayyaf, that is anti-women. Anti-women is Abu Sayyaf, not those who suppress Abu Sayyaf.

And to ensure that even those who help us suppress Abu Sayyaf truly defend and respect the rights of women, I reduced the membership of the Visiting Forces Commission to three. They will come from the DFA, DND, and DSWD. The sole task of Dinky Soliman of the DSWD is to ensure that the rights of women are respected even with visiting forces here.

In the past, according to visiting forces rule, soldiers were not supposed to leave their camps , because we don't want prostitution . What happened? Prostitutes were brought inside the camp. I said, rather than that, let's be direct: the rules and regulations must say that the visiting forces are not allowed to procure the services of prostitutes . So our policy now is explicit. If they want to go out, they can go out as long as they are guided to ensure that no prostitutes are brought into the camp and no prostitutes are dated outside the camp. That is the way to ensure the protection of the rights of women without exploitation. But it is more important to suppress those who rape our women – the Abu Sayyaf. It has become part of their terrorism to rape our women.

An important part of the framework plan for women is regarding the reproductive rights of women. I want to ensure that the policy included there is consistent with the population policy of our current administration.

According to our Constitution, responsible parenthood is important. This means that parents should study the responsibilities within the family, to their children, and to each other. Part of this is deciding how many children they can raise with dignity. Their decision must be in accordance with the religious and cultural beliefs of each couple.

That is our policy. So I want to make sure that these policies are included there, clearly and without any possibility of misinterpretation.

It has been one year since we last met, and we have already taken steps. And I pray that in the next year, our women will feel the implementation of this so that it can help suppress poverty and the exploitation of women. This will also empower women in our new century.

Happy International Women’s Day to all of us. Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). Strong republic : selected speeches of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo . [Quezon City] : Philippine Information Agency.