Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Tourism Central Philippines Tour: RORO from Cebu to Bohol on board Supercat 34 Fast Craft

[Delivered while sailing over the waters of Cebu going to Bohol, February 24, 2010]

I’d like to thank Ann Lontoc, Undersecretary of Transportation, for presenting the white paper on the RORO industry. This was prepared by CRC or University of Asia and the Pacific but published by the Asian Development Bank. So now, what I’d like to do is to present an overview of our Tourism Policy and Program.

Since I became President, we’ve made it a policy of the government to spread development to all the parts of the Philippines not just Manila, the provinces at the heart and soul of our country. And our work is to nourish that heart and soul by investing in our people and in our infrastructure in order to be able to bring development to every Filipino.

Our visits to the nation are an important part of my presidency, and the more important, not only do we visit the different provinces, we invest in the provinces. The political process and the economic process in the Philippines is very… is warped and it brings too much power to Manila. So our goal has been to spread the opportunity across the nation in order to take back the tilt to the power brokers and elite in Manila.

To spread the development away from an inequitable concentration in Manila we created the Super Regions. If you will look at the screen, the Super Regions are the following: Agribusiness Mindanao, the Cyber Corridor where Cebu is part, the Urban Luzon Beltway, the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle and Tourism Central Philippines where we are right now. Central Philippines consist of the Visayas, MIMAROPA, Bicol and the northern islands of Mindanao. This area attracts the majority of our foreign tourists and tourism is anchored on Boracay, Cebu, Palawan and now including Bohol.

The biggest advantage of these places of Central Philippines is the natural wonders and the natural warmth of the people. And as far as our policy is concerned the job of the national government is to provide the access to those wonders. Roads, airports, ports because it should be the private sector who will build the resorts, it should be the travel agencies who should do the bulk of the promotion. But our job is what would be difficult for the private sector to do and that is infrastructure access.

So let me begin with Boracay which is the number one overall tourists’ destination, domestic and foreign. What we have done is we have upgraded the Kalibo Airport in order to make it receive international airlines. We have also more international airlines not only in Kalibo but in other parts of the country because of our liberalized air policy, and especially now Larry has just entered into an open skies policy with other ASEAN countries. And there in Boracay we have fixed the road from Kalibo Airport to Caticlan. It used to be called the “abortion road” but it’s now a very pleasant drive.

But even if we have made Caticlan closer to Kalibo Airport and closer to the international world by internationalizing Kalibo, we’re very happy that private sector initiative has also started a BOT airport project right in Caticlan itself. So, we are happy that there is infrastructure development even by private sector. Because Boracay is such a hub and it’s spilling over with so many tourists, we want to spread that development also outside Boracay. So, we’ve also improved the roads that are spillover destinations from Boracay. For example, the Aklan-Libertad-Pandan Road… Actually that should be… it is really Boracay, Ronnie, it is Boracay to Libertad to Pandan so that Pandan is only about an hour drive away now, so you can stay in a less costly resort in Pandan and then you can go swimming and enjoying the night life in Boracay. And we’ve asked the Tourism Association of Aklan to have dawn trips so that you think you can go back to the mainland or wherever you want to go and not have the litter on the beach and spend the night in a tent.

Now, we’ve also done other international airports. We built the Santa Barbara Airport and we fixed the road from Santa Barbara Airport going to Iloilo and on to the beaches of Guimaras which we have connected by RORO. Guimaras is also being connected to the other side, to Bacolod, also by RORO. In Bacolod, we have also built the Bacolod-Silay Airport.

Now, let’s go to Palawan. Palawan’s distinction is that it is the number one tourism investment destination. And what have we done to promote tourism and therefore tourism investments in Palawan. Palawan is the longest province in our country and that road from north to south of Palawan is as long as the road from Manila to Laoag — it’s 500 kilometers. All previous administrations from the Commonwealth to my immediate predecessor cemented 100 kilometers; I cemented 300 kilometers. I remember when I was still running for senator — no, even before that when I was just a housewife — and I learned from my friends that they couldn’t go to El Nido from Puerto Princesa because there was no road, but now you can do that. So the whole road network has been done, and we also built some other important roads. For instance, the road to the number one of the “7 Wonders of the World,” Puerto Princesa Underground River. That used to take the whole day’s travel but now it only takes… we took the trip last time, it only takes about over an hour.

Now, the reason why we have to do all of these is because as I said Palawan is very long. Aside from being very long, Palawan also has the biggest archipelago within our archipelago. We have 7,100 islands; Palawan has 1,700 and almost each one of them is surrounded by a beautiful white sand beach. So how do we bring the tourists there? Well, first we fix the road but how do we bring tourists there? We have fixed the Puerto Princesa Airport. We have fixed the Busuanga Airport. When I was a senator that was a dust airport, now it is a concrete airport. And Larry designed such a pretty terminal, energy-efficient and very tourist-friendly. The moment you get there it’s already the holiday ambience. And also we have also built a new airport in San Vicente which is on the other side of Puerto Princesa in the Pacific side.

So that is what we’ve done, as I said, 500 kilometers, we built 300. And I am so glad that now we’re able to travel, so you get to Puerto Princesa in a nice airport and you go to whatever destination you want to go to on the mainland on a nice road and many of the resorts offer also a nice yacht ride from the airport nearest to them so that the experience begins there as you very well know.

Now, what about Cebu? Well, Cebu is the number one favorite destination of foreign tourists, and when we started our administration we contracted McKinsey and Associates to do a study of tourism. And the reason why Cebu is the favorite of foreign tourists is because it’s got a good international airport and then the beaches are just a few minutes away, and then there are some beautiful resorts. And also, Cebu has plenty of convention space. I was able to do the South East Asian Summit in Cebu and I’ve tried to do some other summits in other parts but they just don’t have the convention space and they don’t have the number of rooms to house so many VIPs. So that’s one very big advantage of Cebu.

And just as we fix the roads from the north to the south of Palawan, we’ve done the same thing for Cebu from the north to the south of Cebu. In 2004, we started with the south because from my recollection before I was president most of the resorts were in the southern part of Cebu: Moalboal, Argao — what is that, Polka? — Polka in San Fernando and so on. And the road was horrible and I felt bad about that because it was my grandfather who built that road when he was district engineer of the Visayas, the entire Visayas during the American administration. And then when I went there in 2004, it was horrible, so we fixed that first so we have now a very nice road going to the south.

And then in the north, the father of Ace Durano kept telling me that you know because at that time the biggest employer in the Philippines was in Danao City in Mitsumi, and the father of Ace was telling me that for Mitsumi’s competitiveness it’s very difficult for them to transport their products to the wharf, to Cebu Port. So he said, we need — he was explaining to me about a bridge — he said, we need a bridge, but he mentioned the name of the bridge but I couldn’t picture what he was talking about at first. I thought he meant one of the bridges along the main highway that it should be widened. I didn’t know he meant we had to build a whole new billion-peso bridge which is the Cansaga Bay Bridge which we have just finished. So now that we have finished building the Cansaga Bay Bridge at a cost of more than a billion pesos. Now, the northern part of Cebu is also very accessible and that’s great because we have great tourism spots in the northern part of Cebu.

I just came back from diving in Malapascua, proud to have seen my thresher shark after just 18 minutes under the water, whereas, other tourists sometimes stay 5 days, 7 days to wait for their first shark. And the owner of the resort told me that… well, she married a Dutch man and when she came back — she is from Sibonga and then — but her husband decided that they would have their own first a private resort in Malapascua. And she didn’t want to go there at first because its four hours drive. Well, now it’s not four hours drive anymore, we drove through it it’s about two hours drive now. So it’s half the travel time.

And all along going there Ace and I took the helicopter and we saw so many resorts really cropping up through that whole area. I remember when I was a senator I wanted to book in the only world class resort then which was Alegre, but it was fully booked, but that’s a good problem for you. I’m glad that it was fully booked. One of these days we’ll get there. Okay.

And then in the City of Cebu and Talisay we have the SRP so that’s really now gonna be a whole road network from the north to the south. I know that if you wanna have continued to have your world class amenities I know that you need to have good power and good water. And I know that there… a few months ago you started to experience rotating brownouts. Well, I’ve been meeting with Secretary Reyes on that, he’s been here to Cebu, he’s been here for several days now, he just went back to Manila yesterday. And what he wanted me to reiterate to you is that on March 5, since I’m going to inaugurate Cebu Energy, the first 200 megawatts of its total of 600 megawatts investment in the Visayas totaling a billion dollars that makes them one of our Billion Dollar Club. The power situation in the Visayas, Angie Reyes said, will now be stable. So, you can rest assured that you have enough power.

For water, when I was not yet president I was already aware of the water problem of Cebu, and at that time, what everybody was talking about was to solve that problem was to bring water from Bohol to Cebu. When I became president I came across a big howl from the people of Bohol because they said, Cebu already took our sand, now Cebu will take our water. So, therefore, there was a very big objection and somewhere along the way in the steps required where you need local government approval, it stopped somewhere there. So, the next solution was to look for water from Carmen but somewhere along the way also that BOT project did not push through because of differences between the Metro Cebu Water District and the proposed supplier which was Ayala, and so it didn’t push through. But today, when we were driving through that now very nice road from the north to Mandaue City and down to Cebu, Mayor Nito Durano of Danao told me that he is developing a water project for Danao City and it’s going to produce more water than Danao needs and has already entered into a contract with the City of Cebu. So your water needs will also be soon complied with.

So, it’s important because I was telling Nitoy… because I understand now the water is now being rationed in the sense that you have rotating no water also. And I said, but you know, Cebu is a world class city so when you open the faucet it’s expected that there’ll be water in the faucet. So that they will soon come because these things are already in the pipeline.

Now we’re going to Bohol. We were gonna go there on the RORO ferry because we have the presentation of the RORO but it’s 4 hours or 5 hours and I don’t think we can give you enough seminars or lectures or dialogues to fill up 4 hours, so we just took this fast craft but we’ve included Bohol because in our presentation of anchor destinations because Bohol has become a favorite destination for tourists separate from Cebu. It used to be Cebu-Bohol but now Bohol is its own destination. And one of the reasons is, first of all, Bohol was able to defeat the communist insurgency, so now the peace and order is very good. And, of course, its natural wonders, the sand of Cebu came from Bohol in the first place according to the Boholanos, so therefore you can go now to the original owners of the sand. But to be able to do that we also had to finish the circumferential road of Bohol. So, again, it’s infrastructure that brings people there. And because Bohol is now a destination of its own, it also deserves its own international airport which we are building in Panglao Island. And one of the reasons why I’m going to Bohol is I’d like to find out from Governor Aumentado what is the status now of the Panglao Airport because the first step in bidding an international airport is we’ve got to buy the land from the owners for the runway and the terminal, and that’s usually the job of the local government.

There was a presentation of the RORO here. We don’t have to elaborate much but you see originally I envisioned the RORO system to be the out of the back solution to the problem of freight rates. There was such a long impasse between the freight users and the shipping industry, so we decided to go to this route, so the original idea was to be able to bring the plentiful agricultural products of Mindanao to the big markets of Luzon especially the Urban Beltway passing through this RORO routes. But as Ann has pointed out, one of the good side effects of that is it has developed tourism. For instance, you have to pay 5,000 pesos for a plane ticket… you had to pay 5,000 pesos for a plane ticket to Boracay; you just pay 500 pesos for a bus ticket to Boracay. And so therefore even the airlines have to bring down the rates as well.

Then Masbate and its own beaches can now be accessible even from Cebu through the RORO ports and then Negros Oriental where we are having a nice… we’re fixing the airport can also be connected to Siquijor — and where else are you connecting Siquijor, Paul? — also to Cebu, Southern Cebu, so also to the RORO. And then Camiguin can now be accessible not only from Mindanao but also from Bohol, so you have the RORO from Cebu to Tubigon to Jagna and then on to Bohol. And then you have other ports, Ubay Port to Maasin, Leyte so that you can also access the dive spots of Maasin — no, not Maasin — of Southern Leyte especially places like Limasawa.

So, I’m very glad and I’m very grateful to the private sector that they have responded to our investments in road, airports and ports by their own investments, but you the private sector have invested in capacity in hotels lodging houses and even infrastructure. And during the time especially when Ace Durano became Secretary of Tourism, since that time, we have had investments in these facilities of almost 600 billion pesos during our administration. Half of the P600 billion goes to Central Philippines where we are. But of that half that goes to Central Philippines almost all of it goes to Palawan, that’s why I said it is the number one destination for investments. And the biggest investment is the investment of Banyan Tree in Diwaran Island of Coron.

The story of the Banyan Tree investment is that Lito Camacho, who used to be my Secretary of Finance, has become the vice chairman since then of Deutsche Bank, so it’s his job to lend money to investors and then to help them find good investment facilities. So, Banyan Tree is his client; Banyan Tree is the founder of Phuket. And so he enticed Banyan to put up its own Phuket in the Philippines. Showed him first another property but when the CEO of Banyan Tree was flying over the islands in the northern part of Palawan he saw this Diwaran Island and he said, that’s where I want to put our resort. So he is already… he’s just now gotten his ECC, his Environmental Compliance Certificate, so he’s ready to start construction but he was ready even before but he was waiting for the ECC. And what we had agreed with him is that as soon as he starts construction we also start our construction, di ba Larry? Of the… Because there’s the Busuanga Airport which we have fixed then we have a road from… it’s already an existing road but we have to make it tourist class, tourist-friendly from Busuanga Airport up to the shore just opposite Diwaran and then Larry will fix a port there. So I realized that the ECC is sometimes such a big bottleneck even Badjan Resort still has a problem. So I’m gonna call the Secretary of Environment today to find out whatever happened to that problem. I know their problem is because they look askance at these stilt types of cottages because they don’t know how the sewerage will be handled. But I’m sure that that’s their problem. So I’ll call up the Secretary of Environment now so we can discuss it with him. Anyway he’s a career official so I think he is very familiar with the technical aspects of DENR.

So to make a long story short, our nation is blessed with some of the most beautiful scenic beauties in the whole world. And more important our nation is blessed with the most welcoming, energetic and friendly people on earth. So, if we want to succeed in building up our tourism industry, and we should because the tourism industry has such a big contribution to our economy. Ace said in 2008 it contributed 9% of our GDP, a total of 11 billion dollars, so that’s a huge contribution comparable to the OFWs’ contribution of about, at that time, 15 billion dollars and perhaps bigger than the contribution of the BPO industry of 6 billion dollars.

So, we really should develop tourism and what we have to do is we have to invest in our people. We have to invest in our infrastructure. We have to invest in our environment. So the reason why I’m visiting a school that teaches tourism in Bohol today is that I want to demonstrate that we have to invest in our people as well if we want to promote tourism. And as far as investing in our environment is concerned, that is the reason why we have declared several nature parks. For instance, here in Central Cebu which Ace tells me stretches the… which are the mountains in the Central of Cebu stretching from Carmen in his district to Talisay in the south, thus, declared as a nature park.

And on March 5, when Cebu Energy inaugurates its coal fired plant — of course, it’s clean coal now, meaning, that the emission, the carbon emission is much less than in the past technology. Still, I’ve asked them, could they make their project as carbon neutral as possible by having the Metrobank Foundation invest in reforestation in the Central Cebu forests. So since their plants will be in Toledo I’ll ask them to start their plantation in Toledo. So we have to do those things, and that the same thing, for instance, in Malapascua when my nephew started diving there in year 2000 he could see 8 sharks at one time. Today, we’re cheering because we saw three sharks, and some stay for one week and they don’t get to see any shark because there’s a tendency for the sharks to shy away when there are too many people, when it’s already over visited. But we’re still lucky here in Cebu because in many other parts of the country, which were originally beautiful when I was young, they’re not so beautiful anymore under the water because of all of the dynamite fishing. But here it’s still quite under control and it is important that we continue to maintain the pristine beauty of our nature both on top of the ground and under the water.

So, we have declared also many nature… well, we’re gonna go to Bohol so, you know, you’re in the tourism industry so you know Bohol’s natural wonders, and I want to remind the young people of Bohol that they should take care of the Chocolate Hills, they should take care of the marine life which attracts so much dive tourism in Panglao and — is it Pamilican or Pamilacan? –Pamilacan? I get them confused all the time. How will I remember? Pami, Bohol came later than Pamilican in Palawan. Maybe I’ll remember that. Pamilican letter A went ahead. Okay. And there, what we have to stop there is dynamite fishing. So, some of my friends who dive still hear that but I don’t think they hear that in Cebu, so that’s a good thing about that.

We have developed about a hundred marine sanctuaries in Central Philippines since 2001, that’s a lot but still the law says that every single municipality, every coastal municipality should have… should set aside 15% of its municipal waters for marine sanctuary. So, a lot are doing that. I asked the mayor of Medellin, “Yes, he has his marine sanctuary.” I asked the mayor of Danao, “Yes, he has a marine sanctuary.” But we’d like to have that done everywhere. And, in fact, one of the environment NGOs, Conservation International, which did the marine sanctuary of Sipalay in Negros Occidental, also one of our upcoming resort areas, I’m asking him to help me put up more marine sanctuaries. And we’re getting funding from the global environment facility of the UN — what is F? — UN Framework Convention on Climate Change which is part of the goodies I was able to get from the Copenhagen Summit. Although they will be starting from the northern part of Central Philippines which is the Verde Island Passage, supposed to be the center of the center of marine diversity. Because the Philippines is the center of marine diversity, the Philippines is one of the six countries in the Coral Triangle which is the Amazon of the underwater. But it’s the entire Philippines that’s in the Coral Triangle whereas in the other five countries it’s only a part of the countries in the Coral Triangle.

So, they say that the center of that is the Verde Passage but some say it is really in Tubbataha, so we don’t know. I mean, there’s a debate about that but the long and short of it is that I have to mention the environment whenever I talk about tourism because we have embraced the concept of a sustainable economic model where there should be no contradiction between a clean and healthy environment and a strong economy.

We can create jobs while we continue to keep our environment safe and sacred. So, to be able to do all of these, we have had to do some very difficult and unpopular decisions in order to be able to control our deficit and to increase our taxes especially the Value Added Tax in order to be able to pay for our economy’s future. Our Value Added Tax, though it made me very unpopular from which I have never recovered, at least gave us a hundred billion pesos of new revenues every year. So that’s what’s funding these roads, these airports, these RORO ports, and so what I can say is in its first day of my being president, we have committed to invest in the regions to bring development not just in Metro Manila but as much as possible away from Metro Manila through the Super Regions. We have to spread the footprint, the economic and political footprint of our nation in order to be able to make all regions develop not only Metro Manila.

That is why I insisted on investing billions in the whole country. Look at that, that Cansaga Bay Bridge is over a billion pesos by itself alone. So you can imagine how much all these others cost. So we’ve invested billions to connect the whole country and we thank the RORO industry for helping us connect our country. Also to be able to improve education so that we can improve the chance of our young to have a better life in the future. And also the third is to work on our environment so that our nation can continue to be beautiful and so that we can also tap the best of our natural beauty in our country in order to bring up the lives of our people.

And all of that is really being done by the tourism sector, by the transport sector, and I want to thank you all for your contribution to our economy.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Tourism Central Philippines Tour: RORO from Cebu to Bohol on board Supercat 34 Fast Craft. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080543/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27627&Itemid=38