Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines Before the European Business Community

[Delivered at the Sheraton Park Lane, Piccadilly, London, United Kingdom, September 14, 2006]

THE SUNRISE INDUSTRY THAT IS BUSINESS PROCESS OUTSOURCING

Aggressive trade policy has been an important benchmark of our overall economic plan under my administration. And this policy is now bearing fruit: the peso is up, the markets are up, exports and imports are up, inflation is steady despite the high oil prices in the world market, and investments are up. In fact, the net portfolio inflows into the Philippines are more than double that of last year.

Most importantly, our poverty level is down and our income level is up. Our poverty level has been going down by one percentage point a year during my administration. And if this keeps up, we will be able to comply with our millennium development goals of reducing poverty by half in 2015 compared to year 2000.

When my administration took over in 2001, I knew that in addition to sending strong signals on trade, I needed to get our economic house in order. I inherited huge budget deficits, a bloated budget, a dysfunctional bureaucracy and the worst revenue collection in a very long time. I knew that I needed to make fundamental reforms that would help drive our credit ratings up to improve our cost of borrowing and invite investments. And we have done that through new taxes or higher taxes, improved collections and a crackdown on corruption.

As a result, many of our industries are booming, including electronics, agriculture, mining and outsourcing, to name a few, For instance, the outsourcing industry employed only a few hundred jobs when I came to office in 2001. Today, in large part due to the new business climate we have fostered, there are almost 200,000 new jobs in this space — 2,000 to 200,000 in a period of five years, turning the Philippines into one of the premier global outsourcing locations in the world. That’s why I am in this BPO conference today to help promote the industry.

In my official trips I have taken the added task of being the main herald of world class excellence of the Philippines. I made it my mission for world class companies such as yours to meet world class talent from the Philippines because indeed the Philippines is recognized for its well-educated, English-speaking labor force. And this is a reputation we intend to maintain as our stronger fiscal position is making it possible to invest heavily in education and training for our young men and women.

Significant progress has been made in creating a better environment in which to do business in the Philippines. The government’s economic reform program has placed the government’s finances on sustainable footing and generated additional revenues for investment in infrastructure, which will lower costs and improve productivity for all businesses.

We will build on our past successes, and the modernization of our country will create excellent opportunities for ICT companies and entrepreneurs. As I said earlier, the Philippines is very well recognized for its well-educated, English-speaking labor force, a reputation we intend to maintain as our stronger fiscal position is making it possible to invest heavily in education and training for our young men and women.

I’m indeed very happy about the recognition of the Philippine labor force. And I would simply like to say that significant progress has been made in creating a better environment in which to do business in the Philippines.

The government’s economic reform program has placed the government’s finances on a sustainable footing and generated additional revenues for investment in infrastructure. And I would to like to say that we are constantly striving to make our country more competitive for both domestic and foreign investors.

Late this month, there will be a national competitiveness summit in the Philippines that will bring together private sector participants, government officials and other key players such as the legal community, to look at how we can create a road map to make us even more competitive.

Our investor-friendly reforms include comprehensive measures to reduce bureaucratic red tape and streamline administrative procedures.

Some of you or many of you know the Philippines and I would like to address some of the issues that businessmen in Europe have been raising about the Philippines. For instance, we have a new international airport that has not opened for many years. And I would like to say that the new manila international airport is a vital national asset that must be turned at long last to productive use. The government is determined to open the airport terminal as a matter of national interest.

We respect international law and contracts and expect to compensate the appropriate parties who did actual work in the construction of the project — that’s not the issue. The issue is not whether we are willing to pay those who built the airport or not, the issue is that the terminal had been held hostage for so long by a very questionable transaction entered into before my administration at the expense of the public good. We look forward to a final resolution of this matter as soon as possible.

Last Monday, we paid the preferred price under our expropriation proceedings, and we have taken physical possession of the airport. And when the international technical evaluators tell us in October that the airport is ready technically for operation, and then we will proceed to open the airport.

And I hope this airport will bring about more convenient travel and more convenient trade.

Trade of course is not a panacea; it poses problems for developing countries that need to weather the onslaught of competition. But in the main, I aspire for the Philippines not only to abide by all trade deals, by all contracts, but also to initiate new opportunities where none exist.

Many of us are disappointed about the Doha Round. You’re all businessmen even if you’re in BPO or not in BPO, you’re interested in the Doha Round. And though we’re all disappointed about the apparent failure of the Doha Round, I would like to assure you that we in the Philippines are committed and remain committed to the WTO process. But we are not going to sit idly waiting for the recalcitrant nations to sort out their problems. Who are the recalcitrant nations? The whole big controversy is really between Europe and the United States. And as I’ve always said, when the elephants fight, the ants stay out of the way.

In the meantime, we, the smaller economies are moving on many fronts to propel our trade agenda. And as chair of ASEAN this year, we are taking the lead reinvigorating ASEAN as a trading bloc.

The competition in the next coining decades would be one for talent and training, particularly within the Asian region. Asia right now is being powered by several engines — India, China, Korea and the ASEAN region — all these economies will compete for talent from the region. The Philippines has significant advantage from the point of view of language, education and familiarity with western business processes. That’s why so much of the world accounting is done in the Philippines.

Our economic reform program focuses and builds on some of our nation’s strongest competitive advantages:

We have a 94 percent literacy rate. More than 400,000 people graduate from our schools every year with specializations in such areas as I.T., computer science, engineering, commerce, accounting and medical sciences.

We have passed vital legislation to establish a stable and effective regulatory environment for the ICT sector, including an e-commerce law and an intellectual property code.

We offer excellent international connectivity and an expanding multimedia infrastructure to support 24 by 7 operations.

The Philippine animation industry is a major supplier to Japanese, American, Australian and European companies. Many of the cartoons you see are done in the Philippines.

Contact centers are currently the fastest growing services in the Philippines. And medical transcription services are projected to grow by 80 percent in 2006 with the domestic transcription industry enjoying a strong reputation for the quality of its work.

You know our great nurses here, great quality work. They do as much quality work in the Philippines together with our doctors on medical transcriptions. And not only that, they do higher levels of transcription like for instance, there’s a surgery ongoing somewhere, somewhere in the world on a path-breaking medical experiment and the doctor is talking, describing what he’s doing in this very innovative, path-breaking surgery and a Filipino doctor in the Philippines is taking it all down and putting it in the appropriate language.

And while our strength in contact centers is well-established, we are now focusing on growing the higher value-added segment of the industry, including accounting. As I said earlier, I’m very happy that Shell, HSBC and so many British firms do all their accounting or most of their accounting in the Philippines, legal, human resources and administrative services as well.

So I encourage all of you to take a closer look at the ICT opportunities in the Philippines by attending our annual I.T. Conference E-services Philippines — that’s what it’s called — in 2007 to be held on February 15 and 16 next year.

Going back now to the Asian region and the context of doing business in the Philippines. While I was in Helsinki — because Prime Minister Koizumi was also in Helsinki — we .took the advantage of signing the Japan-Philippines economic partnership agreement with the Japanese prime minister. And last year the Philippines signed the early harvest trade agreement with China. So we have these very important trade agreements. And not only trade agreements, in Japan we call it the economic partnership agreement because it’s more than a trade agreement. It’s an agreement not only for goods, it’s also an agreement for services like health services, caregivers and entertainers, accountants too are coming up.

Given the strategic location of the Philippines as a logistics hub, we fully expect to benefit from the economic activity being generated by China. And I am confident that Asia with the surge in importance of China is going to play an increasingly important role in the world. One reason why I am in Europe meeting with European leaders is a reflection of the need for our respective regions to work more closely together. Nonetheless, the U.S. is and will remain a strong presence in the region, certainly for the Philippines as our number one trading partner.

The ASEAN regional community moves closer every passing day to meaningful integration. And so doing business in the Philippines is like doing business with China, with Japan, with the United States and with the ever integrating ASEAN region.

You are not just businessmen, you are Europeans. And I know that when Europeans think of ASEAN, they think even in the back of their minds, they think of Myanmar. And let me take this opportunity as chair of ASEAN to say a little bit about Myanmar. Even as ASEAN remains constructively engaged in Myanmar, we hope to see tangible progress in Myanmar’s transition to democracy. We hope to see the early release of those placed under detention. We hope to see effective dialogue among all parties concerned. And this is a view, not just of the Philippines; this is a view in which the nine ASEAN countries are united.

As for the Philippines, because you are Europeans and human rights are so important to you, I would also like to convey that we have abolished the death penalty, the only country in the region to do so. You may have read some newspaper accounts from some NGO, human rights NGO about a spate of what we call extra-judicial killings. And I want to let you know again not just as European businessmen but as European citizens that I condemn in the harshest possible terms the indiscriminate killings of political activists and journalists.

No Filipino citizen regardless of political affiliation should have to pay for the right to free speech with their life. Unfortunately, this mode of political retribution has a sad history in our nation but I aim to stop it once and for all because the spate of killings has no place in a democracy or in our government.

I recently appointed a former Supreme Court justice of impeccable credentials, with the full powers of my office, to investigate and cause the prosecution of these killings to the full extent of the law. Just this morning, I asked for a meeting with the amnesty international, and I am very happy that they will help us to find experienced investigators who will help the independent commission do its investigations.

I am saying all these in a BPO conference because I think that a European businessman would like to look at the entire cultural environment in which he or she is doing business. And I would like to point out all these things to let you know that not only are we familiar with western accounting processes and other business processes, we are also very much in synch with you as far as the universal values of democracy and therefore of free enterprise are concern.

During my visits to Helsinki and Brussels, I asked Spain, Finland and Belgium to recommend members of the international NGO community to review the situation and our aggressive actions taking to end this specific kind of violence against political activists and media practitioners.

This issue, as important as it is, is just one of my many very positive discussions I’ve been having while in Europe. First and foremost, as what I’m doing here, I’m promoting the Philippines as a great place to do business. And the leaders of Europe are also very open to helping us resolve one of the greatest humanitarian issues in the Philippines today — the prospects for peace with our Muslim brothers in Mindanao.

For those of you who are not familiar with Mindanao, sometimes you may read about some fightings that have been happening — it’s practically history. We have had a successful ceasefire for the last three years. So you may have read some old news but today there is peace in Mindanao, there is peace in the Philippines. And with the journalists and activists who have been the victims of killings, justice will be done to them. Under our judicial processes that also convey and hew very closely to the judicial processes of countries like the United Kingdom and the rest of Europe.

All in all, it’s an exciting time to be in business in the Philippines because we have solved our budgetary problems, our deficit problems and therefore because of that we are able to get the confidence of the international business community

Of course, there remains much to do. And that is why I am very frank with you about the problems that we recognize and that we are working on. But all in all, our economic reform program, our tax reforms, the biggest reform in a generation, demonstrate our determination to make the Philippines a competitive investment location, in particular for sectors such as ICT.

And so ladies and gentlemen of the London, U.K. and European business community, I thank you for this opportunity. And I hope we will see each other in the Philippines. You only need to see us once because after that they can transact all our business on the internet.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].