Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 48th Annual Convention of the PHILSUTECH

[Delivered in Cebu City, August 16, 2001]

Thank you for inviting me once again to participate in your discussion of the Philippine sugar industry. PHILSUTECH is familiar to me, and I am a familiar face to PHILSUTECH. Because all these years that we have been having your conventions, almost every year, you would invite me because, as you all know, my husband’s family is in the sugar industry, and you have always considered me as a member of the sugar industry. Now, you have the sugar industry in Malacañang.

And so, of course, it is important that in your first convention during my presidency, I should be here once again. As we all know, being members of this industry. For a long time, the sugar industry was a bastion of Philippine agriculture. Its history has, in many ways, been the history of our economy and our society. Its problems are the nation’s problems. Its hopes are our people’s hopes. Today, more than ever, we need to strengthen the link between the sugar industry, the government and the public.

We inherited very difficult problems. From 2.5 million jobs less four years ago, unemployment now stands at four million. From a budget surplus in 1997 of more than a billion pesos, now my government inherited a deficit exceeding P140 billion. I am only so grateful to the lord, and to my economic managers, that near to date, we are now P11 billion below our budget ceiling and, therefore, there is room to spend more on agriculture, more on the sugar industry.

Between 1997 and the year 2000, poverty incident rose from 37 percent of the population to 4o percent. And that is indeed a large number. And unlike the situation in 1997, when a battered Asia could still lean on the strength of the advanced economies, today, our main trading partners like Japan and America, which also is the main market for our sugar are slowing down as well. These are tremendous challenges enough to face any new administration, but I will not back down. I will not shirk responsibilities that any president of the Philippines must be prepared to assume and to discharge. However, I cannot do it alone. I cannot fight poverty alone. I am not a miracle worker. And all of us must do our share.

Our challenge is clear — fight poverty. To succeed, our national agenda must revolve around four components:

the first, is an economic philosophy of free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century; the second, is a modernized agricultural sector founded on social equity and that includes sugar;

the third component is a social bias towards the disadvantaged to balance our economic development plan;

and the fourth component is to raise the moral standards of government and society.

So much remains to be done to modernize agriculture. Crucial to the modernization of the agricultural sector is the attainment of stability of productivity growth. And with the agricultural sector accounting for half of the population and 77 percent of the poor, it is most important to be able to broaden the base of rural development. We cannot accept that increasing poverty and inequality are necessary caused, a result of development. Therefore, the most vulnerable in these changing times must be sheltered from the pains of adjustment to the new economy. So, therefore, in agriculture, our specific objective is to create one million jobs in the agricultural sector. And we will do this through several means. The implementation of the agriculture and fisheries modernization act of 1997 is our main means, specifically, targeting public investments in the identified key strategic agricultural and fisheries development zones, or SAFDZ.

Just now, before we were greeted at the airport by governor Garcia, Gerry Montemayor and I came from the tiny town of Pintuyan, in the far away island of ….. In the Province of Southern Leyte. And we went there in order to launch the strategic agricultural and fishery development zone in that town of Pintuyan, because we want to begin the development of agriculture in a way by which it will produce one million jobs in the next three years.

When I was in Pintuyan, I instructed secretary Montemayor that hoping that the mayors of the 18 towns of southern Leyte will contribute P1 million through the identified agricultural projects in every development zone for agriculture and fisheries in their town, the D.A. will also contribute P1 million for every town. So in the 18 towns of southern Leyte, I instructed secretary Montemayor to distribute P1 million each or P18 million as the minimum contribution of the department of agriculture for agricultural modernization. We shall be doing this in every town in the Philippines. At 1,500 towns, the given minimum contribution of P1 million for the identified programs, already pre-identified programs for agricultural modernization. That means P1.5 billion. But since we are below our deficit ceiling by P11 billion as of last month, near to date, I told Gerry Montemayor, this is the time to release P1.5billion to start agricultural modernization to start the creation for the one million jobs. Because by releasing that money at this time, we will not suffer inflationary pressures and we will not suffer pressures to raise the interest rate. This is the best time to begin to spend on agricultural modernization, this particular month of august. So I think it is good that the PHILSUTECH convention is being held this month. Because, of course, of the 1,500 municipalities all over the country, I am sure many, many, many of these are in sugar. And therefore the project money that will be released, will be released for sugar modernization in those areas identified as key competitive areas for the crop of sugar.

Another way by which we will look for the one million jobs in agriculture is broad based development with targeted policies and programs to shelter the most vulnerable groups from their adjustment …. Attendance to development, especially safety nets for sectors affected by globalization. And to the extent that we will see that, indeed, sugar is affected adversely by globalization, then a great portion of that fund for safety net should go to sugar.

The agricultural and fisheries modernization act or AFMA, defines the principles that we followed in modernizing the agricultural sector and specified in detail the mandated programs and streams of public investments necessary. This is not a new law , but this is the first time that we will be implementing AFMA fully. Because the losses that in the first year of implementation, we must provide P20 billion for agricultural modernization. The budget we inherited provided only P14 billion. And while keeping with the difficult target of keeping our budget deficit at only P145 billion by making sacrifices in many other kinds of spending, we were able to increase the allocation for AFMA by P6 billion. And this year, we can, for the first time, comply with the law, that P20 billion should go to agricultural modernization. AFMA’s major provisions include reforms and reorganization in the provision of public production and marketing services. For instance, there will now be a focus and concentration on public investment in what I have told you earlier, the identified strategic agriculture and fisheries development zone. These are defined geographical areas of competitiveness and comparative advantage based on bio-physical and socio-economic endowment. And I would suggest that PHILSUTECH should ….. Immediately with the regional director of agriculture in your region to identify where the SAFDZS are in the various areas where sugar is being planted.

Another provision in AFMA is the crafting and execution of medium and long term agriculture and fisheries modernization plans in full consultations with all stakeholders and based on this strategic agricultural and fisheries development zones. I hope that this convention, PHILSUTECH, the biggest convention of the sugar industry, will be a way by which the department of agriculture and the sugar regulatory agency can consult with the stakeholders as we draw up the medium and long term plan for the sugar industry.

Another provision of AFMA is the phase out and consolidation of all directed credit into the agro industry modernization credit and financing program so that you will all know where to borrow. And right now where to borrow is the land bank of the Philippines.

Also in AFMA, there is a provision for strategic principles and guidelines for irrigation and watershed development providing for economic cost recovery and the devolution of communal systems to local government units, promotion of private sector led development of minor systems. For the first time, in the history of Philippine government, this year, we are providing P6 billion for irrigation. Of the P6 billion for irrigation, P5 billion 600 million is for ongoing large irrigation projects.

And I am happy to know that this September, we’ll have three of those major irrigation projects graduating so that they can provide for irrigation for thousands of hectares of farmland. One of them is in Luzon, and that is the CASECNANDAM which shall be opened on September 28. The other two are the Cabulnan and the Malmar Irrigation System in Mindanao. Malmar is thirteen years in the making. And actually, I said, that if it will not be finished this September, I will give it to the army engineering brigade to complete. And lo and behold! It will be finished this September.

So we will inaugurate those. And what about the Visayas? I think the best way to do irrigation, the quickest gestation period is in communal irrigation systems, small water impounding projects and shallow tube wells and that is where we are putting the rest of the P400 million that are still available for spending this year. Of the P400 million, P300 million have been obligated. And the bidding started at the beginning of this month. P100 million is what is still available for new programming. And I hope that the sugar industry will work with the department of agriculture to see where you need to have new irrigation projects for this year, but even if you don’t fit into the 100 for this year, next year there will be another P6 billion available for agriculture modernization and irrigation.

Another provision of the AFMA is the establishment of the national marketing assistance program and the national information network. And I believe these two together will make up over a billion pesos of expenditures. And this is important, therefore, that you all touch base with the marketing assistance units, although in sugar we don’t have much of a problem in marketing, because you already have a sugar quota as your main market. But this portion, the marketing assistance program, includes assistance in negotiations, assistance in market access. And I think that the PHILSUTECH should take advantage of this so that you can hire the appropriate experts to give us a good bargaining leverage for negotiating for greater market access, or at least for protecting our market access, or even for protecting our domestic industry from undesired intrusions of market access into our own country.

Another provision of AFMA is the coordination between the department of agriculture, the DPWH and the local government units in the formulation and implementation of the agricultural and fisheries infrastructure plant. I hope that every province and every district will have an agricultural fishery plant jointly for the department of agriculture.

This is probably one of John-john Osmeña’s first job, as chairman or presiding officer of the provincial development council of Cebu. Another provision is, product standardization and consumer safety, and establishment of the bureau of agricultural and fisheries product standards. And so, these are the main provisions of AFMA; and these are what we will seek to carry out. Because a law is a dead letter law. ….. To a dead industry, if it is not implemented. And now we will begin to implement this law in full.

Agricultural modernization will include, of course, measures to modernize the sugar industry so that we can shift from what we refuse to accept? That this is a sunset industry. Remember many years ago, they were telling us that sugar is a sunset industry, but we have never accepted that, and we must not accept that. We must make it one that is competitive in the new economy by modernizing. And PHILSUTECH is a great vehicle for modernization.

Yes, the sugar industry has its challenges, but it also has its opportunity. The increase in sugar production, this crop year, for example, shows how Filipinos can surmount adversity and perform better. Imagine at that time, when our major markets, the U.S., slowing down, we experienced an increase in production. That is a good sign for this industry.

Our sugar farmers and millers worked harder to produce 1.8 million metric tons of sugar. And you increased your output this year by more than 11 percent from the previous year’s production of 1.6 million metric tons. And that means we must give congratulations to the sugar industry for its increased production and increased productivity.

This performance is a collective effort of all the players in the sugar industry – from the field laborers to the planters, the male workers, the millers, the truckers, the shippers, the traders, all contributed to this exemplary performance.

The Philippine sugar technology association or PHILSUTECH, contributed much to this development. The primary function of PHILSUTECH, as I am aware, is to disseminate technology. And you have, by disseminating technology, contributed to the progress of the industry. The industry absorbs and adopts new technologies because of the thrust of PHILSUTECH to inform and to educate the players of the industry about this development.

So your theme for this year, “addressing challenges, exploring opportunities,” reflects the progressive thinking of the industry. PHILSUTECH, I recall, was established by the sugar industry on its own, with operations funded out of contributions from the producers. And now, we are beginning to see the results in productivity.

I understand that the distribution of high yielding sugarcane varieties was one of the reasons for the increase in production this crop year. I understand, too, that you expect productivity to improve further because the industry has already laid out its action plan for the next five to ten years. This is a model for other agricultural sectors to emulate. And because you have already laid out your five to ten years plan for the industry, this is what the department of agriculture should now examine and adopt in its own medium term plan because every sector is supposed to have a medium term plan that is done in coordination with the department of agriculture so that we can synchronize your own private investments as well as where the government will spend its P20 billion a year on agricultural modernization.

To provide initial funding for your action plan, I have facilitated the release of P278 million out of the total funding of P600 million from the sugar …. And because providentially, yesterday, Secretary Camacho gave a good news that we are P11 billion below our deficit ceiling, I think, Leony, you should work for the balance of the whole P600 million to be released to the sugar industry.

This fund will be used by the sugar industry through the PHILSUTECH, through your …district development councils rather, to promote productivity. For such projects such as the setting up tractor pools for small farmers, the improvement of micro-propagation laboratory, the establishment of field nurseries, the purchase of road building equipment for the repair and maintenance of farm- to mill roads and the establishment of organic fertilizer plant using sugar by-products.

How will we …. To P600 million if it is spent on these things? Some of the money will be spent for farm-to-mill roads. This will actually be part of the P1.5 billion that we have allocated this year for farm-to-market-roads. And as for your nurseries and your laboratories, this will be part of the P2 billion that for the first time, the government is allocated for research and development in agricultural modernization.

Your leaders visited me in Malacañang a few months ago, and gave me a list of policy issues. Most of these issues are related to tariff, WTO and AFTA policies. You requested to modify your duties on fructose and sugar with flavoring or color. The tariff commission conducted a public hearing last June 28, that is two months ago. Therefore, I ask secretary Montemayor to convey my instructions to the commission to report the results to the Cabinet Committee of the Tariff and Related Matters immediately.

You ask to transfer sugar from the temporary exclusion list to the sensitive list of the CETT, AFTA, the Cabinet …. Committee has approved your request. Our negotiators will bring the proposal formally to the AFTA council meeting in the month of September — next month. However, they have already laid the groundwork for the transfer since they have discussed this at various meetings of the senior economic officials of the AFTA countries. I know also that we need to address your problems with regard to farm-to-mill road and the installation of irrigation systems. That is why I said, it is important to let you know, that for the first time in history, as I said earlier, the government is budgeting P1.5 billion for farm-to-market-road which will include your farm-to-mill-roads. And P6 billion with irrigation within the next twelve months. And that is why I advise you to work for the department of agriculture to make sure that a large part of your needs are included in the detailed program for farm to market road and irrigation of the department of agriculture.

In turn, I ask you to use labor intensive methods to contribute to the one million jobs that we need to find in agriculture. We need to create one million jobs in agriculture over the next three years. Our growth rate so far is above average. But if you only use the same old method, this growth rate can result in jobless growth. That is why we need to specifically use labor enhancing technology rather than labor displacing technology.

The global and political environment has been harsh and trying in recent times. It has been pushing us to the limits of our capability and resources, but we will prevail. We will prevail because the mainstream of our society is united. Sugar belongs to the mainstream of our society, and let us all therefore be united. Let us remain united, that we can work together to alleviate the pressures bearing down on our people. With the increased production of sugar, I hope the trend towards the reduction of sugar import will continue. And I hope this will eventually lead to the attainment of self-sufficiency in sugar. If we continue our unity, better times will lie ahead for our people, not just for a few planters and millers and traders, but for the many workers in the industry and other industries as well.

Let us therefore be united. United in vision. United in perseverance. United in hard and honest labor. If we continue our unity, we can win the battle against poverty within the decade and find the rightful place for our beloved sugar industry in the new economy in the 21st century.

Thank you

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the 48th Annual Convention of the PHILSUTECH. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409213212/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8706&Itemid=38