Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines Before the Dubai Business Leaders

[ Delivered in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, January 27, 2008 ]

I want to thank each of you for taking time out of your very busy schedules to join us.

An aggressive foreign policy is essential to the lifeblood of the Philippines. I am here to meet with investors who have expressed willingness in investing in the Philippines.

This week’s global economic uncertainties underscore that business and government leaders around the world must all collaborate more closely. Being in Dubai with the business, economic and political leaders at this critical juncture is very helpful, given your rapid rise in the world of finance and economics.

Your skyscrapers and gleaming office blocks attest that your development has been well managed, demonstrating that the wealth of a nation, if well handled and channeled can change landscapes for best. The world’s tallest buildings, the world’s largest man-made islands, the world’s most luxurious hotels, shopping malls and ‘the world’ are but a few of these as examples.

Emirates is fearless of the global economy.

Further economic integration among Asian nations is imperative if we, as a region, are to take advantage of the expanding global trade and economic opportunities and face the challenges of the global economy.

The Philippines imports from the UAE petroleum oils, butane, propane, aluminum alloys and urea. We encourage the Emirates to consider purchasing from the Philippines garments, consumer electronics, footwear, beauty or make-up accessories, automotive parts and accessories, air-conditioning machines as well as furniture.

The Philippine economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability with some of the strongest macro-economic fundamentals in a generation. We have aimed high and we have met the challenge: seven years ago, no one thought we could get more revenues, crack down on tax cheats and smugglers, strengthen the peso and move the stock market. And no one thought we could bring our budget close to balance, lower our national debt and raise employment, but we have.

The single biggest act that led to the surge in our economy was the passage of our Value Added Tax, which in one bold stroke raised enormous amounts of new revenue. That act also sent an unmistakable signal that we are serious about moving the nation forward.

That isn’t all, though. Our complete focus on the economy, fiscal discipline, a balanced budget and the need for long overdue human and physical infrastructure improvements help round out our economic gains.

Our efforts are paying off. Today, the Philippines is on a path to permanent growth and stability. Investments are pouring in, the peso is strong, our stock market has reached historic heights, and we have created 7 million jobs in seven years. The peso has helped offset the impact of the rising cost of oil and has contributed to lowering the price of imports and in the process, inflation.

Our unemployment rate and poverty rate are the lowest in a generation. By continuing on our path of economic reform, we will be able to sustain this momentum.

The Philippines offers one of the best values in Asia for domestic and foreign investors today. We offer a strategic location in a fast-growing region, our workforce is well educated, productive and English speaking. We are cutting red tape to simplify the investments for investing in the Philippines.

We offer excellent opportunities in a range of sectors, particularly mining, technology, energy, various forms of tourism including medical and eco-tourism, bio fuels, infrastructure, and business process outsourcing.

The Philippines is ranked among the most attractive off-shoring destinations in the world because of cost-competitiveness and more importantly the country’s highly trainable, English-proficient, IT-enabled quality manpower.

We are certainly a leader in the outsourcing space, but we cannot underestimate the contribution of other high growth sectors to our economy, for instance manufacturing, technology, mining, energy, tourism and infrastructure.

Our reforms are succeeding in attracting more foreign investments. These industries will continue to grow as drivers of the economy. Billion dollar plus investments by various international companies including Texas Instruments, Hanjin, Marubeni and Mittal Global are validations that our strategy is working.

Texas Instruments’ choice of the Philippines over other destinations including China for its $1.6 billion wafer fabrication. The surge in investments has also been anchored by the two new shipyards of Korea’s Hanjin costing $3.7 billion and making us the fourth biggest shipbuilder in the world; Marubeni, Tokyo Electric and America’s AES have also invested in the power sector in the Philippines for some $6 billion; and Global Mittal has announced plans to put up a $1.6 billion integrated steel mill in Mindanao.

Our efforts to raise investor confidence through reforms and investments in infrastructure to improve the business environment are bearing fruit. Business confidence in the Philippines has been bolstered according to a recent survey conducted by the global audit and accounting firm grant Thornton International, which showed the Philippine businesses were the most optimistic and bullish about their prospects in 2008.

We have had plenty of interest and investment in the mining business. Mining is a key driver of our economy and an important sector that is bringing in significant levels of investments, creating jobs for the people and spurring exports. In 2007 alone, investments grew to than in the previous three years combined.

Our strongest competitive advantage – our people – is also opening doors for us in medical tourism. The Philippines is recognized internationally for the uniquely Filipino brand of hospitality, care and compassion that makes us a competitive player in this sector.

The global economic situation is clearly a prime issue for us because the more interconnected we become, the more we need to manage through the ups and downs of other nation’s economic bubbles. This is certainly true should the U.S. economy experience more volatility.

Clearly, there will be some impact of the U.S. uncertainty on all countries because of the global significance for the U.S. economy. However, while a slowdown in the U.S. economy could dampen the growth of emerging markets, we are confident that the Philippines will withstand most of the adverse aspects of such a development largely, because of our improving economic fundamentals.

Moody’s upgraded the Philippines to positive this week for very good reasons: we have the fastest growth in a generation – 7% for 2007. It was also a faster growth than our neighbors.

The good news for the Philippines is that we have matured and diversified our economy, so much the last few years that we are confident that our economic turnaround is permanent and our economy resilient to major economic disruptions.

We have one of the best central banks in the world. It has ably navigated our monetary policy and it has been a huge asset to our economic reform agenda. We trust the central bank team, who operate independently, to continue to manage our macro-economic fundamentals during a time of high oil prices and continued economic volatility.

The short answer to continuing the economic growth is summed in three words: invest, invest, invest. We must follow up the pain of tax raising measures with the gain that only comes from significant investment in people and projects. Only then will we truly ensure that progress cannot be reversed.

Our aim in the remainder of my term as president is to make our economic reforms permanent so that our nation is on a sustained path of economic growth and stability. We have turned the economy around. For the first time in a generation, we are investing hundreds of billions in human and physical infrastructure. Roads, bridges and airports as well as new schools and scholarships are the central building blocks that are necessary for the long term prospects of our citizens.

But of course, I am most interested in your investing in the Philippines. We are a good business environment getting even better. Thank you.

Source: Adamson University Library