Thank you very much Secretary Romulo for your introduction of me. And I will also introduce my colleagues here on our stage.

There are some Cabinet members here because we just came from the ASEAN Summit in Thailand. Our Secretary of Finance is Secretary Margarito Teves. Secretary Teves' role there in ASEAN, together with other finance ministers of ASEAN and Japan, China, and Korea, is to create a fund for those experiencing liquidity problems, so this is expected to begin next month.

He is here for his real purpose, he wasn't with us in Thailand, he met up here, Secretary Marianito Roque of DOLE, and I think most of you know what his purpose is here in Dubai; we will discuss that later. Our Secretary of Trade and Industry, Secretary Peter Favila, is also here. And Secretary Favila was with me here in Dubai and Abu Dhabi several months ago because it was time for the Philippines to get its share of the investments that could come from here in the Middle East, and that's what's happening. Earlier, we spoke with some investors, some with me, some without me, just Peter. And tomorrow, we will follow up on what I discussed with the Emir of Abu Dhabi, who is the president of the UAE, regarding the investments we are offering in the Philippines.

Secretary of Agrarian Reform Nasser Pangandaman is also here. One reason why he is here is because this is a Muslim country, Nasser is the Muslim member of our Cabinet. And earlier, I signed a proclamation because if Christmas and Easter and All Saint’s Day, Christian Feasts, are National Holidays in our country. I also signed earlier that Eid’l Fitr and Eid’l Adha will also be a National Holiday in our country.

Well, I won't introduce Ambassador Cabactulan and… and I will thank Consul General Valeriano for his welcome earlier. Our delegation from Congress is led by Deputy Speaker Girlie Villarosa, as well as Congressman Danny Suarez who took the opportunity of traveling with me to discuss how to create a fund to increase computer literacy in our schools, right, Danny? Congressman Munir Arbison of the second district of Sulu is also here because I invited the legislators and governors of the Muslim community so they could witness the signing of Eid’l Fitr/Eid’l Adha as a National Holiday. Congressman Dodo Mandanas from Batangas is also here, and Congressman Mandanas plays a big role in our trip. If Governor Mandanas' efforts for our country are successful, we will have something to add to the Billion Dollar Club from here in the Middle East. This Billion Dollar Club is those who invest in the Philippines at least one billion dollars like Texas Instruments, like Hanjin, like… and that… — who is that from… Tokyo Electric and Marubeni? What, Marubeni? — and several others and there will be, I think, a member from the Middle East in the Billion Dollar Club so let us hope that Congressman Mandanas will be successful in nurturing that investment.

Congressman Pangalian Balindong from Lanao del Sur is also here with our Muslim Legislators delegation. On the other side of Lanao del Sur is Congresswoman Faysah Dumarpa and I see her husband there, Mr. Salik Dumarpa. Congressman Martin Romualdez from Leyte is also here and he promised to introduce a prospective investor to me tonight, okay. And my fellow Kapampangan, Kapampangan here, Congressman Dong Gonzales. Also with our Muslim congressmen is Congressman Mujiv Hataman of Party List, Anak Mindanao. Another congressman from Christian Mindanao, Congressman Anton Lagdameo and the governor of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, Governor Zaldy Ampatuan. His father, the governor of Maguindanao, Governor Andal Ampatuan; governor of Lanao del Sur, Governor Adiong; governor of Basilan, Governor Akbar; governor of Tawi-Tawi, Governor Sahali. We have a shy secretary who doesn't want to sit with fellow Cabinet members, Secretary Mely Poblador. And the one I introduced, Mr. Dumarpa, husband of Congresswoman Dumarpa. Mrs. Lovely Romulo and Mrs. Favila are also here. Ah, who is Bert Romulo? Well, he's the one who introduced me. Then the one who took care of my guests at lunch earlier, the media and press and photographer of the UAE, Secretary Cerge Remonde. Hala, there! Yes, Cerge Remonde. Because you’re in between two absent Cabinet members. Okay, okay.

Anyway, I am happy that you are here now, Happy Easter to all of you! And to our fellow countrymen and relatives from Mindanao, good afternoon to all of you. Oh! Visayans also from Cebu and other provinces of the Visayas. Ilokano, good evening to all of you, Apo.

I remember when I went here to Dubai in January of last year, the St. Mary’s Choir sang, they were great then, they are still great now, congratulations! Back then our problem was the strength of the peso. Now there's a problem, not the strength of the peso, the problem of the whole world.

The world economy continues to challenge developed and developing nations alike. And I went here to Dubai because I know you are all very busy to promote the interests of our expatriate workers here. And I want to let you know, if last time we came, we were talking about how to alleviate the problems of a strong peso. Now, I’d like to tell you about a program of full reciprocity that is being carried out to help OFWs in host countries that are now being buffeted by the economic crisis.

The Department of Labor is leading the implementation of what we call the payback program because you OFWs, they say, are new heroes, we have to pay back to you what you have done for our country during a time when jobs are at risk, at least in your feeling that jobs are at risk here.

The first part of this reciprocity program is the Filipino Overseas Livelihood Support Fund amounting to one billion pesos, this comes from OWWA and government banks. OFWs who lose their jobs can use this fund for a new business or additional studies and training.

And earlier, during the luncheon with the Dubai-based media, the story was that some returned but did not register, did not have the opportunity to register with POLO after losing their jobs. So, when going to the Philippines and wanting to access this, they require certification, but there is no certification because their boss employer allegedly requested their registration instead of officially retrenching them. So, I told Nitoy Roque, “Nitoy, let’s make this hassle-free… the regulation should just show the passport that you were here in Dubai for several years.” It’s very obvious you worked here.

The second part of the government's complete support is to help returning OFWs find well-paying jobs. So there is free online information about available jobs in the Philippines and a Help Desk in the provinces to match your skills, training and experience with available jobs.

But as far as I know, most of you OFWs also plan not to return home unless to look for another job, either in another country or in another company in the same country. For that, for those who want to move to another country or another company that needs your skills and talent, the Philippine Overseas Employment Administration is doing a marketing blitz to expand the market for our OFWs.

So earlier, the Job Summit was part of that marketing blitz. I know that here, all you talk about, the stories of the workers I know here, work is difficult here in Dubai now, some are losing their jobs. And our media community here even said that there are those that are not being reported because they are just being sent home. So it’s important, as Engineer Deliso said, your connection with each other and your community spirit. In these times, volunteerism is needed, and a big volunteerism is if you know someone who has lost their job or has already lost their job and returned home without having the opportunity to report to POLO, hopefully the Philippine community will report it to POLO for them. This is a great service you can do, because if they don’t report to POLO, it won’t be known. But if you report them even if they have already returned home, even if you just heard it, it’s a big thing to help each other.

But we are grateful from what we have seen in the Job Summit that Philippine workers are still the most sought-after workers here in the Middle East. Earlier, the employers, recruitment agencies, and our labor attaches gave a manifesto, and it specified there are 200,000 new jobs available here in the Middle East.

The countries are there. The necessary skills are there. So, I hope that each one of you, if you have a problem or you have a friend who has a problem, can go to the POLO and to be able to help crossover to another job. And here we have also come to champion your cause before the governments and before those firms that are hiring workers in the Middle East.

Tomorrow, before leaving this country, I, along with some Cabinet members, will go to meet with the King of Abu Dhabi, who is the president of the UAE. And there, of course, we will discuss how to help Overseas Filipino Workers here in the UAE.

There are problems in some areas, you know more about that than I do. In fact, you need to inform our POLO about the problems that come to your attention. But while there are OFWs losing their jobs, we have seen that with the 200,000, there are also new jobs being created, so overall, work abroad remains stable.

Central to keeping our economy moving is keeping our workers employed at home and abroad. The central mission of the Philippine government is the health, security and safety of our people. Good jobs and good wages will continue to help achieve those goals.

But while we honor the value and contribution of our expatriate workers, we are very much focused on changing the opportunity paradigm. My vision is to help launch an economic revolution where one day soon going abroad will be a career choice and not the only option for our hardworking Filipino workers. This is exactly what our economic reform program is helping us to do.

Global engagement has been an essential component of what has kept the Philippines from getting pulled under the raging economic waves sweeping most countries. Abroad, our economy is increasingly diversified. When I first assumed the presidency, we had very high expectations for the American market — what was it, Peter, 28 percent? — now, the American market is about 17 percent. So our market is diversified and a large new market for us is the Middle Eastern market. For example, our bananas, right, when there are many bananas here, they go to the Middle East and others. And the halal, RFM Foods is now selling halal in Saudi Arabia and other parts of the Middle East that require halal. So, we have…

And overall, we have also… so, we have lessened reliance on one market alone. And we are relying now on many markets and that makes us more resilient. That's why what was affected in our country was our exports to America, our electronics. And earlier, Peter, because there are many openings for engineers — so there are many engineers here, right? — there are many openings for engineers, our electronics have many engineers there. So out of the 200,000 jobs available, Peter will look for ways for our electronics workers in the Philippines to perhaps find opportunities there.

But today, exports are a smaller component of our total production compared to when I started as President. Today, we are a very strong consumer-driven nation. We like to rely less and less on exports and more and more on our own domestic economy. That's why our GNP growth rate last year was still 6.0 percent even with the global economic crisis.

They say that those who survive this crisis are the large populations with high consumption, that's why China, India, the Philippines are included. Those who are struggling the most are the small populations that rely too much on exports, for example, Singapore. That's one good thing we've done, we’ve been able to strengthen our domestic demand. Not only through household spending but also because of the taxes we raised several years ago, although it was very unpopular, now the government has the ability to spend on infrastructure, healthcare, education, training so that domestic demand remains strong.

We need to immediately address the many challenges to keep our economy and way of life strong. In government, even though we have additional funds from the taxes imposed in recent years, we must still live within our means and run a frugal and efficient government. This includes continued fiscal prudence and efforts to work towards a balanced budget. That's a big job for Secretary Gary Teves. All the while, we must also simultaneously invest in key programs for our people, and one of these is training. In the past administrations, hundreds of millions were budgeted for training. Now in our administration, billions are budgeted for training. On the part of the people — as I said earlier, as Engineer said, your president — this is the time for us to unite. Fully face our family and community, your community is the OFW community here in Dubai and in the UAE.

We must start a new era that promotes volunteerism and the spirit of unity. We must come together in a movement, in this movement the government, the church and civic organizations like your 60 organizations to encourage every Filipino citizen, whether in the Philippines or here in the UAE, to participate in activities that align for charity.

In the Philippines, we are focusing initiatives on work such as cleaning up the environment, building parks, planting trees, providing relief to the poor through food distribution, teaching reading to the illiterate to give them dignity. Here I think what needs to be done is very obvious. Help each other, especially help those who have lost their jobs.

And what Father said earlier, I don't really know that history, the Filipino who deceived a Filipino, at least the good thing about it is that other Filipinos really helped those who became victims. So, that's what we need to do as volunteerism.

In these times when the whole world is going through trials, the Filipino's loving and caring nature stands out. As our reporters said earlier, many Filipinas are being courted by… Father said… and they are asking why, why do you like Filipinas so much? Because they are caring and loving. And this is very important not only to find an intelligent spouse but also to help each other in our Filipino community here.

So, let's use this to thank God for the blessings we enjoy and to share blessings with those who are more in need than us. Our country needs all of us now. Our country needs you now, not only for your remittances which continue, but also to find the fellow countrymen we need to help who are here in the UAE or returning home. The country needs you to unite and move together in one direction.

So, responding to this challenge by offering our time, skills and resources is a great endeavor that everyone should work together to fulfill. That's why I thank you for the opportunity to serve you. And I thank you for your concern for your country and for each other. Here in Dubai, I really expect you to help each other and help the government find those who need help.

Therefore, I am pleased to meet you all again. Nitoy Roque really chose Dubai for us to hold this meeting earlier because I know that this causes a great deal of inconvenience to the Filipino community. I hope that this visit of yours truly, of our colleagues, and the Jobs Fair earlier will help to provide some relief to your hardships.

Therefore, thank you for coming this afternoon. Thank you for spending Easter Sunday afternoon with all of us. And may our world economy have an Easter of recovery very soon for the benefit of us all.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). PGMA’s Speech during the meeting with the Filipino Community in Dubai. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412104110/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=23451&Itemid=38