Her Excellency Christy Kenney of the United States of America, His Excellency Ambassador Uichiro Yamasaki of Japan, Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps, the Honorable Governor Enrique Garcia, Congressman Carlos Garcia, and the Honorable Archbishop Socrates, the officials of the Veterans Federation of the Philippines, local officials, the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, General Hermogenes Esperon and the Commanders of the Major Services, General Romeo Tolentino of the Philippine Army, Admiral Calusag of the Navy and General Horacio Tolentino of the Philippine Air Force and the officials of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the officials of the Philippine National Police, the members of Couples for Christ, our beloved Veterans and their dear families, members of media, our foreign guests, other special guests, friends, Ladies and Gentlemen.

I stand as the representative of our beloved President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, sending her greetings to all of you Veterans and families of Veterans. President Arroyo regrets that she cannot attend today due to an unforeseen event, so I was tasked by President Arroyo to read her message to you this morning.

With great awe and reverence, we are gathered here today to honor the Filipino soldiers who give life and treasure that we may all leave in peace and freedom. This is just after we have commemorated the death and resurrection of the greatest martyr of all time, Jesus Christ in days of prayer and sacrifice. We pay homage to the fighters of Bataan, Corrigidor and the other battlegrounds of the Philippines in the second world war and their compatriots in other campaigns, Korea, Vietnam, in an unbroken tradition of valor that stretches to today’s war on terror and insurgency. Today, we are proud to be gathered with allies in the field of peace and development, in the fight against terror and poverty, in the liberation of peoples not only from tyranny but from ignorance, disease and injustice. The three nations that were the combatants of yesteryears, the Philippines, the United States and Japan are today’s partner standing shoulder to shoulders in the field of common dreams and aspirations in a region fraught with challenges and opportunities.

And for the Veterans, who are still with us today, here in front of us, I shall continue to serve you and your love ones with full understanding and a deep sympathy for your needs.

For years 2006 and 2007, the National Government has released a total of P19.57 Billion for regular pension and P1.6 Billion for pension arrears for the remaining months of this year, the Department of Budget and Management will release P9 Billion for regular pension.

I am instructing the Secretary of Budget to release another P1.8 Billion for pension arrears by 2008, next year we will be up to date in our pension’s payments.

In United States, the Senate Committee on Veterans Affairs is scheduled to conduct a hearing on Veterans issues and depending Veterans Equity Bill on April 11, a few days from now. This is the closest the United States Legislature has come towards the possible passage of the Equity Bill for the Veterans, given their contributions to preserving the democracy and given that our historic and strategic cooperation continues in fighting challenges to the values and ideals that we all share and hold dear. We hope that all the US officials will support all these efforts to past legislation that would allow our Filipino Veterans to obtain the benefits they have long sought for and truly deserve. And we pray, that the future of this region will continue to be defined by the same ideals that we fought for the end of war and conflict. The dawn of liberty and the ascendancy of free and fair trade across boarders. For our region, this means that holding on to the fights against terror and poverty, building alliances for vigilance and developments preserving the environment and protecting human rights. Our national agenda, is focused on creating good paying jobs, stable prices, bringing the benefits of a strong economy to every single Filipino. It is a pro-poor pro-growth and pro-modernization agenda.

We have worked tirelessly to build a modern nation that will one day take his rightful place besides first world economies. We see a day, when going abroad for a job is a career choice, not the only option for work.

Our government has made the tough but necessary decision strengthen our economy, this painful steps are paying off, now we have the money to invest in job creation, new roads, bridges and ports and more for education and health care and veterans pension and with the helps of our friends in the United States Congress and the US Government, we have a vision for the day when all Filipino Veterans can choose to live in the Philippines, close to family and friends, enjoying the veterans benefits that will give them a high quality of life.

Long live our Veterans!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Araw ng Kagitingan. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412150903/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2002&Itemid=38