I am pleased to be with the CLSU community once again, especially now that our country faces two great challenges: the poverty of many citizens and the inevitable globalization. And as a response to these challenges, we need to emphasize the very sensitive need for the development of agriculture and the countryside.

It is our duty to raise the level of production and the agricultural sector not only to have enough food but also to have the ability to compete with our exported products.

This is the only way we can strengthen our market economy in the countryside. First, improve the economic condition of the majority of the people who depend on agriculture. Second, escape the pressure of globalization, whether we like it or not, it is already here.

The challenges and tasks I have identified are the reason why my administration is allocating sufficient attention and energy to creating jobs in the agricultural and rural sectors, along with the modernization of agriculture – based on social equity, especially in the food sector.

I am pleased that in a short period of time, we are beginning to achieve important inroads, such as certified seeds, hybrid rice, and job fairs. But this is a massive undertaking. And the government cannot do this alone.

That is why I thank CLSU. CLSU has taken the first steps to support the programs we have started. In our fight against poverty, the first need is the availability of jobs. I commend CLSU because from my birthday on April 5th until today, CLSU has conducted continuous job fairs.

The second thing we need in the fight against poverty is the modernization of agriculture based on social equity because many of our poor are in the countryside.

I am also pleased with the cooperation of CLSU with Philrice to become a center for hybrid rice production. This will start in May on one hundred and fifty hectares of CLSU land. This land will earn P50,000 per hectare or P7.5 million per cropping, or P15 million per year, which will add to the financial needs of CLSU and also provide it with a thousand jobs.

This is a good example and model of self-reliance for other state colleges and universities. That is why I have instructed CHED Chair Ester Garcia to direct all state colleges and universities to utilize their land grants and emulate the good example of CLSU.

My call is for a collective effort from all sectors—government, industry, academia, and youth. You graduates of 2002, we must all strive to build our economy and country, especially since CLSU is the leading institution in agricultural education in our country.

My call to the graduates is to dedicate yourselves to rebuilding the strength of the agricultural sector and communities.

We understand that you need to consider your careers, the assurance of having a job for yourselves and your families.

But as Filipinos, I ask you graduating students to give special consideration to entering careers that will contribute, especially to the sectors of agriculture and communities.

You graduates are fortunate to have the privilege of receiving education from a leading institution like CLSU, which is well-known for its excellence, especially in agriculture and agricultural technology.

CHED recognizes CLSU as a center of excellence in agricultural and fisheries education. CLSU has a reputation for its graduates being topnotchers in the agricultural engineering board examination. As well as in the licensure examination for veterinary science and medicine. You were number one in 1998, 2000 and 2001.

Many CLSU students have already won awards such as Ten Outstanding Students of the Philippines and Ten Outstanding Marketing Students. Since 1984, in 34 outings in rodeo competitions participated in by the CLSU rodeo team in various parts of the country, they have won 27 championships. CLSU has also created many leaders in education from its graduates and teachers. There are also sixteen CLSU graduates who have become presidents of state colleges and universities, including Dr. Undan of CLSU.

CLSU has also produced other outstanding leaders in various fields, as evidenced by three TOYM awards; three outstanding engineers; three TOWNS outstanding women in the nation’s service; a Pantas award from PCARD as an outstanding administrator in the person of Dr. Bataviata; six awards in fisheries research; one award in animal science research; and one award in agricultural journalism. As an adviser of the Metro Bank Foundation, I know that your faculty members are formidable. Some had been selected as Metrobank’s most outstanding teachers. These teachers from CLSU have consistently carried the torch of effective and durable mentoring. Your president himself was a recipient of such national award as most outstanding agricultural engineer, most outstanding research administrator, the one holding the most outstanding Asian engineering achievement. You are blessed with leadership and excellence with all this, you deserve unremitting support. CLSU is truly excellent.

I am very proud that my family is a part of CLSU. CLSU evokes memories of my father. It was during my father’s presidency that this institution was elevated from a college to a university.

Like many of the students and graduates of CLSU, my father was born in a nipa hut in a rural barrio in Central Luzon. He descended from a humble tenant who tilled three fourth of a hectare of riceland that did not belong to them. My father, when he was in elementary school, suffered real hunger and deprivation as a child. He was the only man with truly peasant origins to rise to the position of presidency. And I am very proud of this.

To achieve the goals of addressing poverty, a poverty that he experienced first hand in his childhood, my father resolved to bring the country into a new era through a number of simple but meaningful mission. Among these were the attainment of self-sufficiency in the staple food of our people, mainly rice and corn. He, likewise, launched a bold but well formulated socio-economic program, the first medium term development plan of our country, to put our conutry on the road to prosperity.

To a large extent, the conditions of his time helped the conversion of Central Luzon Agricultural College to a university. This, in turn, spurred his programs of social amelioration which are indelibly etched in the socio-economic landscape of this region. Today, CLSU has become a leading state university in agricultural education, engineering, veterinary medicine, agri-business and entrepreneurship, as well as in environmental and ecological conservation. You have a campus that harbors, values state-of-the-art research and development facilities. It is a wellspring of knowledge and social responsibility.

Speaking of social responsibility, and going beyond the world of academia, I would like to emphasize the importance of applied research and technology. The productivity and efficiency of our countrymen are being left behind by our neighbors in Asia, China, Vietnam, and Malaysia. One of the fundamental ways we can catch up is by introducing and training our small farmers in new technologies.

I am very proud that CLSU has focused on development through continuous applied technologies, and by engaging in international programs that teach various technologies that can be used in the Philippines. For example, CLSU’s relationship with China, from which we source rice technology, not only hybrid rice, but also rice agricultural machinery. Also, our relationship with Israel, which is the source of greenhouse technology.

Today, I am proclaiming a 20-hectare area in the CLSU reservation to be used for employees’ housing and construction of dormitories for students. This is part of the continuing effort to strengthen the institutional and human resources of your university. This is indispensable to the sustained development and progress of your region. Let us fight poverty together, but we cannot rush into battle without weapons. I believe that the key to peaceful change is the emergence of a new love for the education of the new generation. I firmly believe that expanding education will be our weapon towards a higher standard of living, particularly by giving attention to the sciences, including agricultural science and engineering.

Currently, the Philippines is the home of the great Filipino worker, including the great farmer worker.

We truly have a competitive advantage in our human resource, skills intensive service sectors. Let us use the knowledge of our service sectors—math, science, engineering, information technology—to make our farmers even greater.

According to various studies, the great Filipino worker is the leading knowledge worker in the world. No one can compare to the great Filipino worker when it comes to efficiency, dedication, and loyalty to work. The whole world knows this, and we should be proud of it. Let us not leave our farmers without weapons so that they too can achieve greatness and also be said to be leading among the great farmers in the world. This should be a reason for us to strive even harder. Let us not be complacent. Let us not allow the world to lose its trust and admiration for the great Filipino worker. Let us use what we have learned here to prove that the Filipino farmer is also a great Filipino farmer who can face the challenges of the whole world. We must strengthen education for the future.

To my dear graduates, amidst the danger of a new war, terrorism, and globalization, the remarkable rise of the agricultural sector should serve as inspiration to us all to strive to achieve our dreams for our country. Let us work together on a new EDSA, the new movement in the first decade of the twenty-first century, EDSA will suppress poverty. I have great faith that through our tireless efforts and our continued prayers to God Almighty, we will also achieve the desired development for every Filipino. Let us continue to strengthen and reinforce our unity so that we can achieve more successes in the future. Let us work together to develop our country, the home of the great Filipino worker which should also be the home of the great farmer worker.

So to all of you graduating students, congratulations. I need you to develop our agriculture, develop our country, and eradicate poverty in our country.

Thank you very much and good luck to all of you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). Strong republic : selected speeches of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo . [Quezon City] : Philippine Information Agency.