Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the opening ceremony of the 3rd China-ASEAN Business and Investment Summit (CABIS)

[Delivered at the Auditorium, Grand Hall of the People’s Congress of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region Nanning, Guangxi, PROC, October 31, 2006]

His Excellency Premier Wen Jiabao; excellencies, the Asian heads of state and government; Mr. Liu Qibao, party secretary of Guangxi, thank you for your very kind remarks and welcome; Mr. Wan, thank you also for greeting the guests; to all the leaders and business personalities present here today, Ni Hao.

All of the Asian leaders are in China to celebrate the… The ASEAN leaders are in China to celebrate the 15th year of China’s partnership with ASEAN. As chair of ASEAN this year, I’m particularly proud of the role that ASEAN has played in China’s integration with the world economy and China’s becoming a powerhouse. Our trade is surging with China and we are seeing more Chinese investment in ASEAN. We hope to see more. That is why we welcome this China-ASEAN business and investment summit.

When ASEAN and China first began relations in 1991, the focus was on cooperation in economic and trade relations. Going forward, we should continue to strengthen the ASEAN-China partnership by promoting confidence-building measures, intensifying interactions, and allocating adequate resources to steer the relations and cooperation for mutual benefit. Thus, we congratulate the central government of China and the government of Guangxi and the communist party committee of Guangxi for generously allocating resources for the last three years for this annual confidence-building measure, the China-ASEAN Expo and Business Investment Summit.

In Cambodia in November 2002, at the ASEAN-China Summit, we, the leaders of our 11 nations, signed the framework agreement on our Comprehensive Economic Cooperation or CEC. Today’s events are a wonderful celebration of this ASEAN-China CEC.

The current engagement between China and ASEAN is true partnership. ASEAN relations with China are now more confident, mature and comprehensive. They are punctuated with substantial and important projects, like this one, aimed at deepening exchanges in a number of areas. These areas include economics, trade and investment, and even security. The parties to the comprehensive economic agreement respect one another as equals.

One of the most dynamic components of the comprehensive economic agreement is the ASEAN-China free trade area. The ASEAN region represents a market of over half a billion people for Chinese exports. In turn, we, the ASEAN countries can reduce our dependence on western markets such as the U.S. and Europe.

Aside from the ASEAN-China free trade agreement, the ASEAN-China CEC also embraces other matters such as today’s event. The China-ASEAN Business and Investment Summit is a marketplace where investors can enjoy fruitful business-matching meetings where they can make deals about strategic business partnership, and where they can therefore participate in an integral part of the larger marketplace of the world.

This is the third China-ASEAN business and investment summit, and the focus is on ASEAN and I am speaking today as chairman of ASEAN. But I want to close on the economic rebound underway in the Philippines. In the Philippines, the poverty rate is down, the per capita income is at an all-time high, and we are on track for a balanced budget in 2008.

Philippine-China relations are at an all-time high. Our nation’s relation with China is among the most important ties of our country. Thus, I take this opportunity to invite China to look at the Philippines as a destination for even greater Chinese investment, particularly in the areas of mining, infrastructure development, agriculture and fisheries, as well as housing.

Our workforce is well-educated, productive and English-speaking. The government has taken the difficult decisions to raise the additional revenues needed to invest in infrastructure and services to create an economic environment that is conducive to investment. This commitment shows how serious we are about competing for foreign investment and the jobs that it creates.

It is no secret how the Philippines is partnering with China. But the Philippines is not alone in doing this with China. Each ASEAN member can boast of its own success stories with regards to their business with China. Later on, in the course of this seminar, they will tell their stories in their respective investment promotions’ speeches in the course of this business and investment summit.

For the Philippines, it is an honor to co-chair the Commemorative ASEAN-China Summit and therefore to keynote this exciting event. This gathering bodes well for the theme, “One Future.” And we hope that “One Future” is a secure life in every home and community in East Asia. We hope that “One Future” will mean the eventual banishment of hunger and poverty. We hope that “One Future” will be a robust and vibrant regional community in one sharing and caring community made up of ASEAN and China.

Thank you, Premier Wen Jiabao. Thank you to the people and officers of Guangxi for a magnificent welcome and a meaningful summit.

Xie-xie.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the opening ceremony of the 3rd China-ASEAN Business and Investment Summit (CABIS). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409203653/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2995&Itemid=38