Thank you, Joe. Thank you so much for your inspiring words. Thank you for your leadership of our country and the legislature. Thank you for your leadership in the charter change that we are about to bring about.

Sonny Alvarez and the other officials of the Center for Christian-Muslim Democracy; Mr. Claus Presley, thank you very much for your kind words in behalf of the Konrad Adenauer Foundation; our hosts in Clark which is comprised of areas of Angeles and Mabalacat, Mayor Lazatin and Mayor Morales; members of Congress who are here today; our Cabinet members in attendance: Secretary Claudio, Pagdanganan and Rene Diaz; our local government officials who are here today; our members of the Constitutional Commission who are here today; our… The various participants in this seminar coming from Regions I, II, III, CAR, IV and V; ladies and gentlemen.

Fellow Christian-Muslim democrats, congratulations to all of you! Congratulations to all of us! Congratulations to the Center for Christian-Muslim democrats! Chaired by Sonny and also with Francis Manglapus as a great work horse.

Thank you to the Konrad Adenauer Foundation. Thank you both for conducting this timely seminar. And I really thank the Konrad Adenauer Foundation which is our link, aside from our institutional link, our other link with the Christian democrats of Europe and Germany. Indeed, we are altogether here in a national and international endeavor. We’re on the road to a new horizon because what we are going to do with the new system is to cast away the politics of personality. We will usher in instead the politics of ideology and performance.

I remember when as candidate for vice-president of the Philippines, as a new member of the Lakas — at that time, it’s called Lakas-NUCD — and I said that we should strengthen our CD portion and call it the Lakas Non-Christian-Muslim Democrats. I remember then that I took pains to study the philosophy of Christian democracy.

Nonetheless, over the past years since 1998 up to 2005, we have still not seen the politics of ideology. What we have continued to see is the politics of personality, and this politics of personality has bred an arena of governance peppered from day-to-day by insults, muckraking and petty partisan brawls. Partisan brawls become petty because they are not based on ideological debate, they are based instead on half-truths and personal attacks.

The politics of personality is part of what I described in my State of the Nation Address last July as a country divided. Almost as it where I said, two countries under the same name: one is the Philippines whose economy after long years of cumulative national endeavor is now poised for take-off. Our detractors are being rendered irrelevant and out of tune by the sturdy economic indicators, some of which were already mentioned by Speaker De Venecia: the new round of oil price reductions, the surge of direct foreign investment by 70 percent, the 2.5 billion dollars investment portfolio inflows, the strengthening of the peso hitting a 5-month high at 54.42 per dollar, and the robust capital stock market.

But on the other side of that is the Philippines whose political system after equally long years of degeneration has become a hindrance to progress, and that’s why the people are losing hope in the system. Our current system does not serve our nation best and certainly it will not bring us to the status of developed country in 20 years.

Economics is the primordial reason for political reforms. Our political system is bad for our economy and we must offer change. And we are offering change, we’re offering it to our people for their wise deliberation and vote. I created the Citizens’ Consultative Commission — and some of our leaders are here today — to hear all views, to listen to all studies, to make its recommendations to congress and to the people, in fairness to all beliefs and creeds, in fairness and respect for all Filipinos.

It’s time we gather the best ideas from the entire spectrum of political beliefs and bring them to a stable center. And that’s also the reason why we are seeking to forge a meeting of minds among centrist political parties.

That is in fact the essence of Christian democracy and all the Christian democratic parties in the world today. Centrism, not extreme left, not extreme right, but the stability of the center. Therefore, our ideology must be centrist. But it must not be just centrist, it must be an ideology of change. We must spin out investments, jobs and infrastructure into regional growth centers and hubs of people’s enterprise. Focus should be placed in maintaining sound business policy and infrastructure to unleash the full economic potentials of the country to benefit the poor.

We continue to push for added benefits for our workers and for the amendment of the law creating the regional tripartite wage boards to allow the raising of salaries more than once a year if warranted.

We are happy and gratified about the willingness of Malik Alimmudin, a member of the Rajah Solaiman Movement, to testify against his comrades. They should bolster our anti-terrorism drive even as we press our colleagues in congress to pass the anti-terror bill.

But beyond these measures that we seek to pass through Congress — and we have seen the great difficulty we have in passing legislation — we have to fuse the continuity of lawmaking and the execution of laws through a parliamentary system. People ask me why is the parliamentary system better than the presidential system. In the presidential system, you have separation of powers. It’s supposed to be because of check and balance, but instead it has resulted in gridlock.

There are legislators who are more interested in inquiries in aid of destabilization rather than in their intrinsic function of legislation. And so, it’s with great difficulty that the administration brings its legislative proposal through the legislative mill.

And there are bills passed by congress that are good, not all of them need to come from the executive at this point in time, but because of the separation of powers, the Cabinet members who have not internalized some of the philosophies behind these laws also do not execute some of the laws wholeheartedly.

So, there is half-hearted passage of administration measures; there is half-hearted execution of measures initiated by the legislative. We must wed the legislature and the executive, and that is through the parliamentary form of government.

And we have to awaken the latent and intrinsic energies of the regions and local governments by giving the parliament the mandate to enact a federal structure. The debate on federalism will be long and hard, because the local governments want to make sure that there is no reduction in their well-deserved power. That debate is something that can be done in Congress, in the parliament, except that today it is not allowed even to debate it by the constitution.

I remember when I was a senator, I was defending the Mindanao Development Authority Bill. And what killed it, they said that that is a constitutional issue rather than a legislative issue. The very idea of trying to pass bills to increase greater autonomy especially towards a federal structure of government is not allowed in the present constitution. So, whatever may be the right form of federalism, whatever may be the right form of greater autonomy, we cannot even take it up in the present constitutional system. And that’s another reason why we must change the system in the Constitution.

And of course, we have to align the rules of the economy to the global world of the 21st century. Again, there will be great debates on whether to lift restrictions on this and that sector, but we cannot lift restrictions through legislature. We have done what we can in bringing our rules of the economy to the 21st century under the present Constitution. We must therefore look at the constitution itself and give the parliament the mandate to change those antiquated economic provisions.

These are the ways to stabilize our political system. These are the ways by which our new constitution that we are fighting for will bring us a stable political system. And we must do this because only a stable political system begets a strong economy.

And so fellow members and officers and leaders of Lakas-CMD, I ask you to campaign for our people’s active participation in charter change. I ask you to lead this great debate. I ask you to galvanize your constituencies. Let’s not go for little changes here and there that can be done by administrative order or even by legislation, cause we’ve done practically all we can by administrative order and legislation.

Let’s go for the big stakes. Let’s all stand behind the quest of a more enduring, more stable political system that will serve the dreams of all generations. Let us go for charter change!

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Closing Ceremony of the Konrad Adenauer-Stiflung/Center for Christian-Muslim Democracy (KAS/CCMD) Seminar/Workshop. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092016/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5398&Itemid=38