Thank you very much Secretary Ermita, other officials of the national government, Governor Leonardo Roman, Congressman Antonino Roman, Mayor Abet Garcia of Balanga City, Mayor Estrella Santos of Pilar, Mayor Nelson David and the other mayors of the province of Bataan, Vice Governor Rogelio Roque. I would also like to greet the leaders of our veterans, Colonel De Ocampo, Colonel Estrada, Ambassador Guidaya, the members of the diplomatic corps headed by Joseph Musomelli of the United States, Akio Egawa of the Japanese Embassy and Ambassador whose people were also here during the war in Bataan. Members of the Cabinet, Monsignor Antonio Dumawal, General Garcia and the other major service commanders of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. I already greeted Balanga Mayor Abet Garcia, Mayor Estrella Santos and Limay Mayor Nelson David. I would also like to greet Dinalupihan Mayor Jose Payumo, Samal Mayor Teodorico Albelda and we also have SBMA Chairman Tong Payumo. Members of the visiting delegation from the United States and Japan and above all, our beloved veterans and their children and relatives, my dear countrymen.

This day, above all, Araw ng Kagitingan (Day of Valor) is a day for our veterans. The veterans of Bataan remain a beacon on the path we all take. Let us exalt this day. Our heroes. Thank you very much, Filipino veterans. Let us also praise the veterans’ organization led by Colonel Emmanuel de Ocampo. When he was young, he was the Deputy of the Emergency Employment Administration of my father. His job, the job of Adeveso another veteran in the Emergency Employment Administration, that was my inspiration for our “Kalsada Natin, Alagaan Natin” (Let's Take Care of Our Roads) and here are those who got jobs in that project. For so many years with Colonel Estrada, Ambassador Guidaya and various other veterans’ groups that are here now. Colonel De Ocampo has been a strong voice for veterans and their families. Because of him, the influence of former soldiers has increased in the policy making forum of my government. Because of this, under my administration, we have strongly begun to improve the system of the Philippine Veteran Affairs Office to speed up the sending of pensions to veterans. Now, more than 70 percent of pensions are received through direct bank remittances, faster and safer than by mail. We have instructed the PVAO to speed up the process and immediately complete the pending applications for veterans’ benefits. We have rebuilt the military service board to process more than 100,000 applications to verify their service during World War II. The PVAO was also tasked to clean up their list of veterans and ensure that only true veterans receive benefits and pensions. Due to their data cleansing, almost 7,000 names have been removed from the list. Even though our government is economizing to reduce our budget deficit, we have allocated a larger amount for the benefit of veterans. During the previous administration, only 31 billion was paid in pensions and other benefits. In my short Presidency, we have allocated almost 40 billion pesos for the payment of more than 260,000 pensioners. We have increased the old-aged pension, and we have also paid almost 20,000 educational benefits, 20,000 burial assistance and almost 4,000 hospitalization benefits. Likewise, just last year, the PVAO intensified the conduct of free dental and medical missions for veterans in the provinces. Here, almost 20,000 veterans and their families benefited. Our service to veterans is not only here in the Philippines. Even my foreign policy and friendship with America, I also used it to help our veterans. After my visit to the United States, President Bush gave medical equipment worth about more than R50 million to the Veterans Memorial Hospital to take care of our veterans here in the Philippines also. After my state visit to the United States, President Bush signed two laws increasing the health care benefits and other privileges of our Filipino veterans living in the United States to the tune of $20 million every year.

This is a result of our strong foreign policy that restores respect for our country. That same respect has not only expanded our benefits for our veterans. It also gave confidence to other countries to invest in our country, so we have created more than 1 million jobs each year. I looked at the study of economists like Congressman Joey Salceda. He was the highest earning financial analyst in our stock exchange before becoming a Congressman. In his analysis, he showed that my administration, with 1.1 million jobs a year created, is the most employment created in the entire history of the Philippines. Because only now have we reached 1 million jobs a year created. It is sad to say, but we need to compare this to the time of President Estrada where annually, the jobs he created were only 135,000. Let us not return to those times. Now, for our veterans, because our relationship with America has improved. I am also working with President Bush on a bill that would provide pensions to veterans living here in the Philippines. Here in the Philippines, when Congress opens, I will certify that a law be passed granting franking privileges to the Veterans Federation of the Philippines. This is part of my strong start to change from the chaos I inherited.

As said by the speakers earlier, as well as our prayer leader, Monsignor Dumawal, our enemy now is no longer foreigners. In fact, the Japanese who were once our enemy during the time of Bataan are now the largest source of foreign assistance and some investments that provide many jobs. Just recently, I opened another new investment from a Japanese company, Yasakitores, which expanded their investment in the Philippines to billions of pesos and expanded to thousands of workers who will be given jobs. Our enemy now is not foreigners. Our enemy now is ourselves. The enemy is not the stranger but the fellow Filipino who seeks self-interest, not national concern. They seek personal development, not the good of all. Help me face this new challenge and new danger around us. Help me in the change I am fighting for. Not only a change of society or government, but a change of self, of one’s spirit, of one’s heart, of one’s soul, especially this year, the true Day of Valor is also Holy Week. Let us together inspire our countrymen, even the heroes and martyrs. Heroes, not in war, but in life. Martyrs, not in shedding blood, but in shedding sweat for others. We have only one country. We have only one destiny. We have only one future. We will rise or fall together. So veterans and current generations, what I ask of you on the Day of Valor and in the Holy Week of our faith, help me have a new unity. Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Araw ng Kagitingan Rites. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090147/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5669&Itemid=38