Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Agnes, the first female Solicitor General in our country. (Applause)

Justice Nachura and the other very distinguished former solicitors general who are all here (Applause) in very prominent other positions in our society;

(Applause) General Ibrado, our host in this setting; members and officials of the Office of the Solicitor General; ladies and gentlemen.

Happy Anniversary to the OSG! (Applause)

The OSG has an important role in achieving our vision of a Strong Republic that’s ready for first-world status in 20 years. In our vision of a first-world country, we envision one where we will have dramatically reduced poverty, created a robust middle-class and have all the hallmarks of a modern society in strong, stable institutions.

And among the strong, stable institutions we refer to is an effective government, from the national to the local governments, with a professional and dedicated civil service, like the civil servants in the OSG. (Applause)

You not only help strengthen the civil service of our country by your own good work but also by the important decisions that you work for in court. For instance, the success of the OSG on the constitutionality of the Attrition Law, which was decided on last month, should strengthen the civil service of the revenue agencies to neutralize smugglers and tax cheats and increase our revenues. Another way of strengthening our Republic.

An effective government delivers basic services for everyone — the most important of which is an environment of peace and the rule of law and the necessary infrastructure.

Among the services that you have helped to deliver for an environment of peace is your success as mentioned earlier in the Writ of Amparo cases. Congratulations for that! (Applause)

You have also contributed to delivering an environment of peace by your clarification of the MOA-AD in Mindanao. And I think it’s a good time on the occasion of your anniversary to reiterate that no matter what the Supreme

Court ultimately decides, in the light of the recent violent incidents committed by MILF Lawless Groups, the government will not sign the MOA.

We are committed to doing everything possible to bring lasting peace to Mindanao and end 40 years of fighting that has killed more than 120,000 people. It is in the interest of all Filipinos, Muslims and Christians, to end the violence that has held that part of our country back and required an investment of hundreds of millions to support our military presence there.

As I said to the U.N. General Assembly last week: we will pursue the peace process in Mindanao. The recent violence has reminded all of us that peace is the only option for our country and for the people of Mindanao.

However, we have refocused all peace talks from one that is centered on dialogues with rebels to one of authentic dialogues with the communities, both Muslim and Christian. Those dialogues are directed at ending all forms of armed rebellion in the country. We must make all armed groups accountable to the people and the government for all their actions. Our people, together with the government, will be the primary force in defining and shaping the direction of societal change, not the force of arms.

Disarmament, demobilization and rehabilitation will be the overall framework governing our engagement with armed groups in all peace talks.

And I thank the Office of the Solicitor General for helping us pursue the peace process. (Applause)

An effective government rests on the rule of law. And Solicitor General is essential for the rule of law.

The Office of the Solicitor General is the law firm of the Philippine government, both here and abroad. Your office engages in a wide range of legal issues, from titling lands to defending the position of the Philippine government before our Supreme Court and international tribunals. The Solicitor General is probably the busiest among Filipino lawyers. And the work of the Solicitor General, as said in your video presentation, requires the range of knowledge, the depth of wisdom, and the integrity of no less than a member of the Highest Court of the land.

Witness — former OSG Nachura becoming now a justice of the Supreme Court. (Applause)

The success of the OSG in prominent cases filed before the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeals has indeed helped ensure the rule of law in our land. And we thank you for that.

The OSG helps in the task of a strong republic also to deliver the necessary infrastructure. For instance, your decisive action on properties along the NLEX and the SLEX from Calamba, Laguna to Sto. Tomas, Batangas enabled the completion of improvements in these crucial highways. Your success in the PIATCO case has provided the basis for opening NAIA 3. These improvements in turn eased the flow of goods and services and made the Philippines a better economy. Salamat. (Applause)

A strong republic must help not only in the decisions of the government, not only in providing infrastructure, not only in making sure that the rule of law prevails, not only in promoting peace but also must help its poorest and weakest citizens and empower them.

And again here, you have a role to play.

The function of land registration may appear merely ministerial to some, but your decisions of the OSG regarding land registration have given hope to thousands of small landowners and helped provide a good middle-class for our country. Salamat. (Applause)

If we want to be ready for a first-world in 20 years and be a strong republic, our justice system must be strengthened to become an efficient institution.

And so tonight, on this anniversary of the OSG, we celebrate RA 9417 or the Nachura Law, which strengthens the OSG system. It’s called the Nachura Law not because Congressman Nachura made it a law but because OSG Nachura had still so many friends in Congress from his term that he was able to get it passed into law. (Applause)

And this law from what has been described gives the OSG more teeth in resolving cases. It provides the executive branch effective and far-reaching legal advice. It grants the SolGen more latitude in selecting the best minds to assist in performing the work. Now, the pay of our very young lawyers in the SolGen is competitive with the pay in the private sector. So, we can have the best minds. (Applause)

So I congratulate everyone who comprises the OSG, because on this day, on the occasion of the OSG anniversary, RA 9417 will become effective now that the implementing rules have been passed. Now, salaries will be increased. Okay. (Applause)

Next to the rule of law, a second institution of a strong republic on its way to first-world is a vigorous economy. And I’ve mentioned earlier how you helped to give us a vigorous economy.

We came to office determined to change the strategic paradigm for the Philippine economy. A strong and growing economy has been the central pillar we have labored to create to help guarantee peace, order and stability in our country. And it’s paying off: we have created almost 7 million jobs in 7 years, investments continue to come — just witness all the cranes that are here in this area — despite the continued volatility in the global markets.

As a result of our economic turnaround, we are also able to invest in key sectors to cushion the harsh impact of the high prices of food and fuel on our poor that have hit the whole world this past year.

In addition, we are investing in modernizing infrastructure like those highways that you’re able to make us build because of your action, like the expressways, and we’re able to do these roads and bridges on an unprecedented scale.

We are also investing in expanded education, healthcare, and other social services. All the while, we are balancing these vital investments with a commitment to meet our fiscal obligations and balance the budget in 2010.

We have been working tirelessly to address the challenges arising from the slowdown in the global economy combined with the spike in oil and food prices. But the fact is this is a global phenomenon. We have been working hard on all fronts to manage inflationary pressures, provide a safety net to those hit hardest by these global developments and deliver the growth that will continue to generate jobs and the tax revenues we need to fuel our investment in our nation’s future including the things that we have to spend to make the OSG competitive with the private sector.

Most notably, on the part of our food problem in the whole world, we have been working hard to make sure that food supplies remain stable and we’re working hard to put food on the table for every Filipino. We have also been introducing measures to lift the burden of high fuel prices off our people.

On the same token, our economic team, in coordination with the Bangko Sentral, is closely monitoring developments in the global financial markets. Our economy is more resilient today than ever before. It is strong enough to withstand the external financial turmoil. The economic and fiscal reforms that we have implemented in recent years, through the cooperation of Congress, have resulted in the strengthening of our macroeconomic fundamentals and our banking system.

We are working hard to further strengthen the domestic economy by accelerated spending for infrastructure — that’s why we need your help in all those writs of possession — and agriculture; fast tracking financial reforms to further strengthen the banking system; improve our fiscal health by improved revenue collection through better tax administration. And we thank you again for the decision of the Attrition Law as well as legislative measures, and encouraging investment by such measures as reducing regulatory bottlenecks for strategic industries. All these to sustain our economic growth momentum and to insulate our economy from volatility in world markets. Continuing these efforts will ensure that we are able to weather the global storm, that we are able to achieve the economic rebound we are projecting for next year, and that we’re able to work for the strengthening of our Republic through the strengthening of institutions like the OSG.

The events in the U.S. and the slowdown in the global economy are really causing real difficulties for countries around the world. And like many countries around the world, we are not insulated from them. But the Philippine economy will remain resilient amid these challenges.

So, against the gale force winds of the global economy, we remain bullish on our country, optimistic about our future and deeply committed to being a force for good. And in being a force for good, I am very grateful that we have the Office of the Solicitor General to help us there.

I am grateful for the privilege of serving the Republic of the Philippines together with such fine men and women as we have in the Office of the Solicitor General. (Applause)

So to the hardworking and excellent members of the Office of the Solicitor General: Long live you all! Happy Anniversary! And thank you very much.

(Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 107th Anniversary of the Office of the Solicitor General. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135204/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1762&Itemid=38