A HOME FOR EVERY FILIPINO FAMILY

Finally, isn't it? Finally! The long-awaited bill has been approved, called the National Government Center (NGC) Housing and Land Utilization Act of 2003. They call it a local bill, but why are all the congressmen and senators here, including the leaders of the Senate and the House? Although it is a local bill, its significance is national.

Because if you remember when I was just starting as President, I went to the NGC? I said, you are not the problem, you are part of the solution. Let's find a solution to distribute it to you. But our first effort was complicated because it was illegal to distribute it to you. So this law removed the complications in the distribution of land here in the NGC.

So we gave it serious attention and with the diligent work of the brave legislators here on our stage, that is, the various congressmen and senators, even from Quezon City, Sorsogon, even from Parañaque; Leyte; or even from Ginebra. Because Bobby is the Chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources. Isn't that right Bobby? That's the one in charge of laws regarding titles. So thank you to him, thank you to all of them and the law has been passed and this will illuminate the aspiration, as Mike Defensor said – that was the problem because he was ahead of me, he used my line – you are no longer squatters in your own country. And this is a blessing for the thousands of families who have been living here in the NGC for a long time.

Because it's been a long time. Supposedly, you were already given power, right? But it turned out that what was given was fake because it was illegal. So now, we will repeat everything again but now it is certain that your situation is legal, your ownership of the land that was distributed in the past. This law provides stability for what is also being done here in the NGC and what will still be done here in the NGC.

For example, the construction of an economic zone or the housing that will be built.

Under this law, the National Government Center Administration Committee will be formed. It will manage and carry out the distribution of land. Who are on this committee? Leading it, Mike Defensor, there he is! Next to him is a person who worked hard for this law to become a reality, Verna Romulo-Puyat; included in the Committee is Percy, from the Commission for the Urban Poor; Sonny Belmonte, the Mayor of Quezon City; Ed Pamintuan, who heads the National Housing Authority; the DENR; and representatives of NGC Eastside and Westside, you are also involved in managing this.

The NHA, Ed, is the trustee of the housing program. The Commonwealth Enterprise Zone is under the Home Guaranty Zone so you already know the President, Bong Bongolan. These two agencies are both under the HUDCC, whose boss is Mike Defensor, but Mike Defensor's boss is you, from the NGC.

This law also confirms that there is no tax on the land being sold and distributed. That's why Sonny Belmonte said there is no tax. Because Quezon City is number one in tax collection in the entire Philippines. So, the distribution of land and housing is tax-exempted.

You know, we have been waiting for this law for a long time, but while we were waiting for the law, we were already doing the paperwork for its implementation, and for the distribution of titles. So while we were waiting for the law to be debated in the Committee in the House, in the Senate, we continued to support housing projects in the NGC Westside and Eastside. This includes Memorandum Order No. 83 which states that this project will run until 2005, to give enough time to implement the distributions.

And I remember, it was difficult to make titles because there was no survey. Because surveys are expensive. Documentation is expensive. That's why from my President’s Social Fund, I also allocated twelve million pesos for documentation. Because that is needed to be able to title the NGC Westside and Eastside.

So here in the NGC Westside, we have already distributed three thousand certificates of title reservation, and today, we will distribute another one thousand and one hundred certificates of lot reservation to qualified beneficiaries.

We have also distributed the remaining six hundred apartments, and today we have another one hundred apartments to distribute in the medium-rise building.

My administration also created the Commonwealth Market for you, right? This provides livelihood for the people here and because the rent is cheap, the goods are also cheap. So if someone complains that prices are high – those watching on television – shop at the Commonwealth Market, it's very cheap.

In the NGC Eastside, we have already distributed almost five thousand certificates of lot allocation and certificate of lot entitlement to beneficiaries who have a plan on how to develop the community, the development plan.

But for those who don't yet have land, we will distribute more than nine hundred certificates of project qualification. But the development plan should be done. Mike, who is in charge of the development plan? You? There! So, Mike Defensor will be doing something new.

Although, as I said, Mike Defensor has done so much – saying, all of this I'm saying, he's not running for senator. But it doesn't matter, I'll just tell you about it. When I first became President – no, in my first State of the Nation Address, I said, I want us to distribute, what Mike? 150,000 titles every year. When I said that, Mike had already completed his 150,000 for the year, so I said, he was already at the boundary. Well, now with what he has done here, this is way beyond the boundary, so – I also want to congratulate him and all those who are helping him – Percy, there in Caloocan, near the railroad and also there in Makati, near the railroad, the squatters are already leaving voluntarily because this team has convinced them. Joe de Venecia is clapping because Joe de Venecia is our father of the railroad that needs to be clarified, those areas need to be cleaned so that we have a railroad, north to south.

Let's go back to the NGC. Because of the preparations we have made here in the NGC, I think the implementation of the law signed today and worked on by these brave Senators and Congressmen on stage now is okay.

Included in your support for the speedy implementation of the new law is my Executive Order No. 153 which fights against squatter syndicates.

In fact – Mike, this should be shown on television - there are already cases filed against some members of large syndicates that are taking advantage of you here in the NGC.

You know, when I wasn't yet president, during my travels to urban poor communities, what I heard as your main desire was housing or security of tenure on the land you occupy. That's why when I became President, I made land and housing my main program for the urban poor. That's why this law, even if it's a local government… local bill, we pushed it because this law, the NGC Law, is a big part of implementing our main program for the urban poor.

We are working hard to put our various housing programs in order, despite the many problems our country is facing now, such as terrorism and SARS.

With regards to terrorism, I’m very happy to let the Philippines know, I’m very happy to let our senators and congressmen know, that the remaining hostage of Jehovah’s Witness was rescued early this morning.

There is progress in the fight against terrorism but it is not over. Let’s not take anything for granted in our vigilance against terrorist reprisals. Let’s watch over our communities together with the NGC community and be accountable for each other, just as we have done in the case of the SARS threat. Through the close cooperation of the LGUs and the National Government, through synergistic linkages among all involved government agencies, I ask our people to be calm but fully alert in your homes and in your places of work and livelihood. This is not a fight of the government alone. It is a fight of all our people and the whole world. It cannot be won overnight. It will demand the utmost sense of duty and concern for each and every Filipino.

Regarding SARS, especially since Principal Aceo is here, I also want to say, the opening of classes will demand among our people another round of alertness to protect the health of our students. We’ve already scored big against SARS and we must follow through. Principal, I want to express to you and all principals – all school-related sectors must be focused on cooperation and unified action. The DOH and the DepEd must work closely with school administrators, parents associations and student organizations. Our information drive among students must be comprehensive and penetrating. Extraordinary precautions are needed.

I believe that because we are facing our fight against terrorism and SARS thoroughly and bravely, we are preventing their spread and causing widespread damage. As I leave tonight for the United States with Senate President Frank Drilon and Speaker Joe de Venecia for a state visit there, this is the memory I will take with me: that in the face of severe crises, we all united and did our best for the NGC Law, so we have succeeded and will continue to succeed.

In my talks with high-ranking American officials, I will remind them that they should pay attention to the fight against poverty because that is where new recruits to terrorist groups come from. So if we want to finally suppress terrorism, we should not ignore the effort to lift many of our countrymen out of poverty.

Therefore, I ask you, new homeowners of the NGC, join me in praying for the success of our trip with Frank Drilon and Joe de Venecia. This is part of our journey towards a bright future.

Let us continue to unite and help each other, as we have united and helped each other to make the NGC law a reality.

Let us unite and help each other to achieve our dream of a good life and a stable Republic of the Philippines.

Thank you very much and congratulations to all of you!

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].