Thank you very much Secretary Braganza and thank you also for finally convening all the officers of the Department of Agrarian Reform in one place in the history of land reform. So welcome to all of you here.

Secretary Joey Lina; my son Mikey Arroyo who represents Pampanga; Mayor Moki Morales who represents our host municipality, Mabalacat; our very supportive Ambassadors from the countries that support land reform in the Philippines very heavily, Ambassador Van Remoortele of Belgium and Ambassador Ben Abba of Israel; other members of the diplomatic corps representing the countries and agencies that have been supporting Philippine land reform; our AFP Chief of Staff General Cimatu and the other officers of the armed forces of the Philippines who are here today; PNP Chief Larry Mendoza and the other officers of the police who are also here with us today; and our host here in this place, President Manny Angeles of the Clark Development Corporation; PARCOM Chairperson and private sector representatives; the CARP implementing agencies; beneficiaries of land reform; guests; friends:

Good morning to all of you and Happy Land Reform Day to all of you.

When I delivered my State of the Nation Address last year, I said that one of the four main programs of our fight against poverty is agricultural modernization founded on social equity. That part, founded on social equity, the essence of social equity in our agricultural modernization is this land reform. So land reform is a key part of our administration's program.

Even when I was still vice president, and I was articulating the four components of what i believe a program to fight poverty should have, I said many times that the promise of land reform, a commitment that spans several presidents, must finally be redeemed. I said that without equity and modernization, we will never win the struggle against poverty in our rural countryside.

Indeed, I know, many presidents, this is what they really desired to have and fulfill – land reform. In fact, my father, former President Diosdado Macapagal, considered as his main achievement in his administration was the start of land reform by declaring tenancy illegal. That’s why I am continuing what he started. And I am happy that if last year we held the Land Reform Day in Malacañang, now we are holding it in the province where my father, in his youth, experienced the difficult experience of farmers who did not own the land they worked on. Because Diosdado Macapagal was the son of tenant farmers. That was his main goal when he became president.

In my State of the Nation Address last year, I said our goal is to distribute one hundred hectares of agricultural land annually under the DAR.

Earlier, Nani Braganza unveiled his program — “Bayan, Anihan.” And he said that land distribution will not be enough unless there is an increase in productivity, so he has all the components of “bayan, anihan.” But I also want to emphasize, an increase in land productivity without land distribution is not social equity.

So, for me, the main objective of the DAR is really land distribution. And all other parts of “bayan, anihan” are support for land distribution to be successful. So today – I told Nani, “we both have seven-minute speeches.” Because I will only give one message – my only message is this: I congratulate Nani, I congratulate all of you, I congratulate the DAR officials responsible for private land distribution because last year, you distributed 104,261 hectares of land to 72,188 farmer-beneficiaries throughout the archipelago. In other words, you exceeded the target I gave you.

Some say, where? Macro figures. No. So don't sleep, but today I will give the breakdown of the land we distributed last year.

Are our Abra delegation here? Abra, thank you for all your help, everyone. I thank you because you distributed more than 1,000 hectares for land reform; are there officials from DAR Benguet? Congratulations! Because in Benguet, more than 600 hectares were distributed for land reform; officials from Apayao, Ifugao and Kalinga, are they here? Congratulations to all of you because your three provinces distributed 300 hectares each, for a total of 900 hectares; and the province of Mountain Province, where are the officials? That's a mountainous province, that's why it's called Mountain Province, it provided more than 50 hectares in Mountain Province; from La Union, where is the delegation from La Union? Okay, congratulations, almost 300 hectares in La Union. The province of Nani and mine, Ilocos. Ah, no. Pangasinan and Ilocos Norte. Where are Pangasinan and Ilocos Norte? You distributed 200 hectares each, congratulations; and in Ilocos Sur? Seven hectares; Isabela, okay, more than 3,000 hectares in Isabela; Cagayan province, almost 20 hectares; Nueva Vizcaya, who is from Nueva Vizcaya? Almost 400 hectares; Quirino, more than 100 hectares; and Nueva Ecija, more than three thousand hectares.

Tarlac, Pampanga and Bulacan, where are you? That's right. The three of you, 1,000 hectares each, so 3,000 hectares for the three provinces; Zambales and Bataan, 500 hectares each, so 1,000 for the two provinces; Aurora? More than 100 hectares, congratulations; Quezon and Mindoro Oriental, are they here? 2,000 hectares each, so 4,000 hectares for the two of you; Occidental Mindoro, Palawan, Marinduque, Romblon, Batangas, it seems like you each have 1,000 hectares, so 5,000 hectares; Laguna, Joey’s province, is it here? More than 400 hectares; Cavite, are you here? More than 200 hectares; Rizal, Rizal? None. There you are, you're there. Rizal is almost a city now, so there were still forty hectares distributed; Camarines Sur? Thank you, good morning, and thank you for the more than 3,000 hectares you distributed; Albay, someone greeted me here, from Albay, Masbate, Camarines Norte, 2,000 hectares each, so the three provinces are 6,000 hectares, congratulations; in Sorsogon, where is Sorsogon here? Almost one hundred thousand hectares, congratulations to you too; and in Catanduanes, almost one hundred hectares also in Catanduanes.

Negros Occidental, this is one of the special mentions, it used to be at the bottom, said Nani Braganza, but now more than 7,000 hectares in Negros Occidental; in Iloilo, where are the people from Iloilo here? Okay, more than 2,000 hectares; Capiz? More than 1,000 hectares; Guimaras and Aklan, where are they? Okay, each of them almost 500 hectares, so almost 1,000 for the two; Antique, more than 400 hectares in Antique; in Negros Oriental, Negros Oriental? The place of the president of the Land Bank of the Philippines, so he shouldn't have been arrested because Negros Oriental distributed almost four thousand hectares; Bohol and Cebu, more than 1,000 hectares each more or less, so 2,000 hectares for the two; and in the small island of Siquijor, there, eight hectares, congratulations; Siquijor is a small island, very small. Siquijor, Siquijor is smaller than our Mikey’s and my hometown of Lubao, so thank you for that. Eight hectares is okay; Leyte, almost six thousand hectares in Leyte, where is Leyte? It was mentioned earlier, right? That was also at the bottom but caught up, almost 6,000 hectares, congratulations; Northern Samar, are they here? Good morning Northern Samar, congratulations on the almost 3,000 hectares you distributed; in Western Samar. Western Samar, more than 2,000 hectares, congratulations. Ah! Yes. And in Eastern Samar and Biliran, none? There. Each of you 1,000 hectares each so 2,000 hectares for the two provinces; and Southern Leyte, almost 500 hectares in Southern Leyte.

In Zamboanga Del Sur, our outstanding landowner comes from Zamboanga Del Sur, so… I think, this includes Zamboanga Sibugay, more than 2,000 from Zamboanga Del Sur; in Zamboanga Del Norte, where is Zamboanga Del…? Okay, almost six hundred in Zamboanga del Norte; in Basilan? Hey, even though we have Abu Sayyaf, more than two hundred were still distributed; in Lanao del Norte? More than three thousand hectares, congratulations; in Bukidnon, more than 2,000 hectares; and the two Misamis, Oriental and Occidental, 700 each for 1,400 hectares; and in the little island of Camiguin which was hit by a typhoon, more than 20 hectares. Camiguin, the same, it is also smaller than our Mikey’s and my hometown of Lubao.

In Davao del Norte, almost 3,000 hectares; in Davao Oriental, the number one coconut province in the country, 2,000 hectares; In Davao del Sur, more than 1,000 hectares; and in the city of Davao, city of Davao, even though it's a city, almost seven hundred hectares were distributed in the city of Davao; this one, another former bottom-dweller and became valedictorian together with Negros Occidental, Sultan Kudarat, more than seven thousand; in Cotabato Province, more than five thousand; South Cotabato and Sarangani, 2,000 each to make 4,000 hectares; Agusan del Sur, almost 2,000; Surigao del Sur, almost 1,000; Agusan del Norte, none? There. Almost 400; Surigao del Norte, almost 100. Because Surigao del Norte is all beaches, including the Siargao surfing beach which we shall visit in September; and our sole land reform area in the Autonomous Region, Lanao del Sur? They are not here because they have moved to ARMM, anyway, they have moved to ARMM but we congratulate them because even in Lanao Del Sur, more than 2,000 hectares were distributed for land reform.

So that's it. Land reform happened in those places and according to Nani Braganza – isn't that right Nani, is this true? – it's not just now that the DAR officers have met in one place, but it's also the first time that this many agricultural lands have been distributed in one year, the biggest in history. And one reason why I am so impressed with Nani and you is that you did this without taking extra budget from me, right? And I would like to congratulate you, I would like to thank our official development assistance partners because they help us meet these targets without Nani getting additional budget from the general appropriations act but one reason why he was able to do this also was that Nani was able to have a very, very high absorption rate for official development assistance. congratulations to all of you there. because maybe some of your regional directors are already in our various regional development council meetings, and maybe you see how strict I am. I look at each of the projects of different departments, what is the delay? Why is it delayed? That's how it is. But almost every time DAR is the project, it's on time, not delayed, so congratulations.

Land reform, there are two of them. The main land reform is for private agricultural land, so our project, our goal, is 100,000 hectares a year. There are also lands available from… owned by the national government or public domain that can be alienable and this is also another hundred thousand hectares that we want to distribute every year. That’s why the partner of DAR is the DENR for the public lands.

The DENR, which manages government lands, also has a target like DAR, of 100,000 hectares per year, and this year, they signed patents for almost 6,000 hectares from July to March, so their accounting isn’t finished yet. And the DENR also issued certificates of allocation within this period for about 76,000 hectares of land, or a total of 82,000 hectares of public land. So I expect that by July they will also be able to say that, like DAR, they have achieved their target.

So I told Nani, we are both limited to seven minutes. Because I don’t want the message to be mixed with anything else. Because for me, it is very important that we achieve our target in the State of the Nation Address, the 100,000 hectares. This is what you should emphasize as your accomplishment, and because you have accomplished it, for me, you have succeeded.

So thank you very much and congratulations! Happy Anniversary to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during 14th Anniversary Convention of the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program (CARP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225111/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8331&Itemid=38