Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the Annual Meeting of the Philippine Economic Society

[Delivered at the Dusit Hotel Nikko, Makati City, March 26, 2001]

PUSHING FOR ECONOMIC REFORMS AND GOOD GOVERNANCE

On our 40th anniversary, I feel at home in this gathering as a fish in water, because I am a bonafide economist and I do treasure those years between 1987 and 1992 when I was a member of the Board of Directors of this professional group, whose membership is a list of who’s who among the country’s economists. It is only when I was elected senator that I discontinued sitting in the Board. But even in the Senate, my main legislative work was economic legislation. And now that I am President, you and I understand each other on the economic imperative that we must confront in this new government and in this new millennium.

When I took my oath of office as President of the Philippines, I said that we must be bold in our national ambitions so that our challenge must be within this decade. We will win the fight against poverty. To make this happen, we must recognize that the world that I inherited is truly the new economy, where capital market and information technology are forces that create both peril and opportunity.

To tap opportunities we must adopt an economic philosophy of transparency and free enterprise, for these create the entrepreneurial spirit to be globally competitive. To extend the opportunities to our rural countryside, we must create a modernized and socially equitable agricultural sector. To address the perils, we must give a social bias to balance economic development in the form of structural reforms, safety nets for globalization and safeguards for our environment. Finally, to preserve our gains against corruption and waste, we must improve moral standards in government and in society. In doing so, we promote good governance based on a sound moral foundation, a philosophy of transparency and ethics of effective implementation. Thus, we shall make market reliance and good governance, the twin pillars of our social and economic policy strategy. We will adhere to policies and institutions that work and discard those that had failed.

A quick look at the past offers many useful lessons. The last half of the past centuries have many fundamental changes. Many of the former colonies won their political independence from the large industrial countries after the Second World War.

Winning economic independence, however, was elusive for many. The exceptions are, setting aside Japan, the four Asian tigers: Hongkong, Singapore, Taiwan and South Korea. They became exporters of manufactured products on a global scale, beginning in the sixties. They achieved full employment and caught up with the real per capita income level of the industrial country. The Asian Tigers became models of successful outward-looking and export-led industrialization.

The 20th century also witnessed the collapse of central planning. At the start of the nineties, the former Soviet Union broke up, politically, that meant the end of the Cold War. On the economic side, it proved that qualities based on free enterprise and market reliance were superior to central planning. Then came the latter part of the nineties. In May of 1997, Thailand’s baht was devalued. That ignited the contagion which resulted in shock devaluation of currencies in East and Southeast Asia. The peso, over a period of three months after the crisis erupted, lost about forty percent of its value as against the US dollar. As exchange rate volatility in the region continued, economic contraction set in.

The Asian crisis brought out many helpful but painful lessons. It cannot he denied that the crisis was a question of governance, too. Political factors, greatly influenced the channeling of bank loans to large enterprises. When the crisis simmered down, the investigation removed cronies and behest loans written all over the ledgers of the failed banks.

Many observers agreed that the Philippines, along with Taiwan and Singapore, was not as hardly hit by the Asian crisis as others. The non-performing loans of the Philippine banks for example were nothing compared to those in Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and South Korea. And so, it proved disappointing to many that when the recovery emerged in the region, the Philippines own turned out to be mild.

In the aftermath of EDS A, the reasons are becoming quite clear, the reasons pertain to governance. That governance was not consistent and orderly. That, actions did not match rhetoric. That public favor is largely flowed not to the poor and helpless, but rather to the powerful and influential. That was the wrong way to confront the challenges of the 21st century. We cannot raise the quality of life of our citizens if we do not reject plunderous governance. We are committed to addressing the social and economic challenges of our country, and let me therefore, spell out our Administration’s policy directions for the immediate and distant future.

Starting with our fiscal policy choices, we are committed to balancing the financial position of the public sector by the year 2004. At the center of these efforts is reducing the budget deficit of the national government to 3.8% of the GNP this year, from four percent last year. The past administration, in two years of large deficit spending, left government finances in a precarious state. When the government borrows from the public to finance its deficit, it absorbs funds that otherwise should go to private investments. This is not sustainable. It is private investments and equipment that raise productivity and create jobs.

In pursuit of a goal for a balanced budget, I have issued an executive order that mandates pending cuts in government. Luxury vehicles are the first to go. In addition, I have ordered the review of major capital projects of government agencies. The past administration left another unwanted legacy… government projects assisted by the Official Development Assistance were poorly implemented. The disbursements created new laws on joint and other unnecessary tie-ups that could have been released to other valuable uses. We will correct this situation with the ongoing review by inter-agency committees of the NEDA Board which I chair.

On the revenue side, we are starting with improving the tax collection machinery of the government, the Bureau of Internal Revenue and the Bureau of Customs. The current state of our tax administration needs fixing. Potential tax revenues are not being realized, instead, we see that small fixed income earners carry a disproportionate share of the burden of taxation. We also need a comprehensive review of our tax system, including special fiscal incentives. Studies indicated a sizeable amount of taxes being foregone as a result of tax breaks, tax holidays and exemptions from customs duties. These foregone revenues must be cut and reduced over time. Only by correcting the deficiencies in our tax system can we make adequate investments and improve on infrastructure like roads, bridges, schools and hospitals which are all in need of support.

In the near term, the most effective way of addressing the needs of the disadvantaged Filipinos is the tax and spending policies of the government. In this regard, we will be a prudent steward of public funds to obtain a peso worth of results for every peso that is spent. We will not use fiscal policy for short term, pump-priming measures. We will use it to protect our core values. To name a few, these are in information and communications technology; skilled intensive service industries like tourism; safety nets for sectors affected by globalization; safeguards for our environment; agricultural modernization and, land reform. In short, our budget deficit program will be a responsible one. As we will try to balance the budget, we protect our fundamental’s priority. We will resist shortsighted solutions that will impair our long-term goal of growth of equity.

I am asking you to support our budget deficit program, fellow economists. With this, interest rates should decline. This is already happening as seen in the recent behavior of treasury bill rates. Cash decline will unleash forces in the private sector for investment which will ignite productivity improvements. In consequence, income and employment will grow. As for monetary policy, we respect the independence of the Central Bank. We will not compromise the Central Bank’s efforts to reduce interest rates and exchange rate volatility. We will support Central Bank’s efforts by not allowing large deficit in the government budget to persist. We will also assist the Central Bank in securing efficient finances intermediation. We must get out of the watch-list of money laundering countries as soon as possible. We can do this by ensuring the passage of amendments to the Central Bank Act and the General Banking Act. With strong banks and a developed capital market, we can expect new savings instruments to emerge. Families are encouraged to raise their savings, enabling enterprises to fund increasingly their investment projects.

The best means for reducing poverty and providing safety nets for sectors affected by globalization is through investments, education and trainings. To begin with, we will invest in the increasing quality of basic education, especially in science and mathematics. But what we have learned in the lower grades is not enough. Rapid technological changes and globalization compel us to prepare workers for the long-term through lifelong education and training. As we do so, we must equalize access and expand the opportunities of the poor, to acquire the kind of education they want. We have piloted early childhood development, so that children from poor families are not disadvantaged, when they enter first grade. We will find the means, or at least pilot projects, that can be expanded and eventually implemented in a national scale. As for higher education, this must be led by the private sector. Instead of government subsidies which will remain modest, we must start thinking in terms of educational loan programs, so that entry into colleges and universities is not determined solely by family incomes. But we will increase government support to research and development, and science and technology. Our current level of growth and development is the result of fast technological choices. Technological developments have not been actively pursued. Our Administration intends to correct this. As a starter, I formed a Cabinet cluster on information and communications technology. This, I believe will help spur public and private investments in advanced technology. It is advanced technology, especially information and communications technology, as it creates high-paying jobs of the future and raise the quality of life of every Filipino.

World technological progress and productivity rises will be a boom to our exports. To sustain exports growth, we will be firm in our support for international trade based on fair and predictable rules. We will continue to take advantage of existing and emerging regional trading arrangements, to achieve our goals of export diversification, and opening new market destinations for Filipino exporters. The value added from our manufactured exports must be increased, and we should reduce our heavy dependence on a few country destinations. Through trade reforms, our micro-enterprises and small and medium enterprises will be able to purchase least cost capital equipment, raw materials, and components that are available in the world market. This would bring us near to full employment since small and medium enterprises (SMEs) have immense potentials for job generation.

All these efforts are meant to promote economic and social security. But we must do more, specifically with regards to our systems of social protection and help in medical insurance. The vision of universal coverage remains. In this regard, we will assist households to raise their savings so that they can share in the cost of expanding the coverage and benefits, from this social protection scheme. One way to do this is to help families especially the poor, exercise responsible parenthood consistent with our cultural and religious values. We must equip the poor couples with the means to equip their children with the education and help needed to be productive. If this is not done, poverty will continue to be transmitted across generation.

Moreover, we will carry out targeted poverty alleviation programs as safety nets. We will pursue food security for the poor. And as our budget resources improve, we will be able to provide temporary subsidies to some of their non-food basic needs. As we do so, we will open up opportunities for the poor to acquire employable skills and carry out livelihood activities. This is meant to reduce their dependence on government subsidies and ultimately be made responsible for their own well-being. Furthermore, we will pursue sustainable development, anchored on sound natural resource management and safeguards for our environment. We will make sure that the standards of living of unborn, unrepresented generations are not diminished by the financial requirements of mending a damaged environment. These commitments demand a new kind of governance.

A highly-centralized government which act as a provider of all services is no longer appropriate. We will forge new partnership with the local government units and with organizations outside the government. We are committed to a full flowering of decentralization and devolution. Local governments are in most instances well positioned to respond to the diverse needs of their constituents. We shall also seek the support of the civil society in monitoring implementation of government projects. Meanwhile private businesses, guided by the price system are capable of providing the many goods and services, that individuals and families demand.

We are conscious of the fact that private enterprises lie at the heart of all modern economy. But the national government will be there to regulate and protect consumer interests when competition by many small firms is not viable. For example, this is true in the electric and water utilities. We will cut bureaucratic red tape and engage in market-friendly regulations. But we also expect private concessionaires to heed their contractor’s obligations and not throw unreasonable demands at government. In addition, we will send in the legal division and administrative system to minimize corruption and ensure contractor performance.

Peace and order is the responsibility of government. It is a public good. Development will not take root if this public good is not delivered. I have thus called for a reconstruction of the peace process of the MILF and NDF and I ordered a suspension of offensive military operations in Mindanao and Southern Tagalog, so that peace talks can proceed. Since the guns are silent in Mindanao and Southern Tagalog, I have asked the military to mobilize their assets instead co help the PNP in the war against crime.

We are fortunate that the people as a whole are now more enlightened; that we have a broader middle class, and that People Power II provided fertile ground for the development of a national consensus. In national consensus, we have to be more socially progressive, to keep pace with the rest of the world. Thus, I remain hopeful of this time around, we have the right condition in place, and finally, to win the struggle against poverty if we work at it as a united, unified nation. In this connection, I enjoin all economists, all members of the Philippine Economic Society, to be a part of nation building. This is a moment of great responsibilities and of great possibilities that must not be taken lightly. Since we took office, we have seen positive movements in stocks, foreign exchange and treasury bills market, interest rates are declining, the peso is stabilizing, inflation rate is slowing down.

Moreover, the Supreme Court has ruled in my favor on the legitimacy of my assumption to the Presidency promoting political stability. This development benefits us all. Therefore, I ask you to support our twin strategies of market reliance and good governance starting with our austerity measures. Compliance of stock obligation is a good start on the part of private sector. If we continue to save and invest for the future we will be rewarded with expanding economic and social opportunities and continuing improvement in the quality of our lives. Filipinos have stood up against dictatorship and against immorality in government. Let us continue to do this in the forthcoming elections by voting for candidates who championed core Filipino values like democratic, honest and good governance. Go for the champions of good governance. Vote for the champs.

Thank you.

Source : University of the Philippines Main Library