Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Year-End Media Economic Briefing

[Delivered at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, December 20, 2001]

I am happy to be here with you. The presentations given by Secretary Canlas, Governor Buenaventura, Secretary Camacho, Secretary Boncodin and Secretary Roxas underscore the fact that our country is back on the track of sustainable development.

The resilience that our economy showed this year is remarkable given the global economic slowdown. I therefore congratulate the economic team for doing a superb job. I congratulate them too, because the U.S. business communities tells me that I have the dream economic team.

It has been almost a year since I took up the challenge to restore our country’s fortunes. It was a daunting challenge. We had inherited a fiscal deficit, that as secretary Camacho said, had threatened to balloon to P225 billion. Government revenues had fallen well below targets, thanks to massive leakages especially smuggling and uncut expenditures that truly just went out of control.

Borrowings that nearly tripled. And the loss of moral ascendancy of the government had destabilized the exchange rate. Investment confidence had plummeted. Thank god that these concerns have eased. We have a stable economy.

My economic plan for the Philippines starts with the goal of winning the battle against poverty within the decade. The plan, as you all probably know by now, revolves around four components. The first is the economic philosophy of free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century. The second is a modernized agricultural sector founded on social equity. The third is a social bias toward the disadvantaged to balance our economic development plan. And the fourth component is to raise the moral standards of government and society.

Our discussions here today is of the first component of the plan, the economic philosophy of free enterprise. Because this component is premised on stable macro-economic fundamentals. The macro-economic plan that we have integrates a well coordinated set of fiscal and monetary policies that support a sound fiscal and debt position, stable prices, healthy balance of payments levels and steady flow of investments for job creation and further economic stimulation.

In implementing our plans, we have stood by our fiscal deficit ceiling. We held down the inflation and interest rates. We stamped out speculation against the peso. And we achieved a respectable economic growth in the midst of the global economy still reeling from the implosion of the information technology sector followed by the attack of September 11 on a key symbol and center of international finance. This event gravely increased the volatility of financial markets. And the attacks would have toppled our economy had we not so firmly anchored it to some fundamentals.

Leading international credit rating agencies and multilateral bodies recognize our efforts. Institutions such as Necsy, JBIC, the World Bank and the Asian development bank have endorsed our credit worthiness. J.b. Morgan chase reports that the prevailing decline in risk aversion has allowed the continuous improvement in economic fundamentals in the Philippines to finally shine through.

The market environment is ripe for repricing of Philippine asset prices based on improving fundamentals. President Macapagal-Arroyo is leading economic policy on a fundamentally better path. The Philippines has kept the budget deficit reined in. Economic growth has exceeded expectations. All these from J.P. Morgan.

But whatever is subjectively said by these different institutions, the most objective measure is the spreads that we have in the international capital market. And they are growing narrower and narrower by the day.

We had the audacity to make significant deficit reduction a cornerstone of our economic development plan. Audacity, indeed, in a global atmosphere of slower capital infusions, smaller appetite for emerging market issues and more insistent demands for budgetary support. But, we stuck by our plan, and are now pleased to report that the combination of revenue enhancement measures and a disciplined expenditure program has positioned us to stay within our deficit ceiling of P145 billion for the year 2001.

This is a major step towards what Lito Camacho said he wants to achieve by 2006, a balanced budget, an objective that is key to our goal of reducing poverty and promoting economic development.

Another factor in this equation is our success in exceeding our revenue targets. BIR exceeded its targets from January to November by 400 million. And now the latest figures, 4.4 billion, is the head room we have overall as far as our budget deficit ceiling is concerned.

How did BIR exceed its target? As a result of its anti-corruption reforms. Our efforts to achieve of a balance budget also includes new approaches to revenue collection such as the documentary stamp tax metering and tax audit acceleration.

Prudent management of the government’s debt portfolio, which you have seen, also helped to achieve our deficit target. Resourceful credit initiative markets stood open to Philippine sovereign risk. These initiatives reduced our borrowing costs and maintained a manageable debt mix in terms of both maturity and creditor base.

For example, as part of our commitment to prudent debt management, we helped NAPOCOR source funds to carry out it’s privatization program with a recent euro-500 million bond issue, an issue that is being praised in the international capital markets. And it should be because it follows the act of the bill that was mentioned by Lito Camacho earlier, the $220 million debt bill of Hong Kong and Shanghai banking corporation which was cited by finance Asia as the most innovative sovereign debt bill of 2001., This bill also got special mention in the best domestic currency bond bill category as the first ever derivative transaction for the Philippines. And, as I said, the Euro bond for NAPOCOR is reaping laurels as well.

Our economic managers have also gone ahead and pre funded some of next year requirements, again, through innovative measures. They have sought credit enhancement from financial institutions that support our overall economic program, and have again fetched lower interest rates and longer maturities. You saw this in the charts. This is a well-timed move given the expectation of tighter international credit in the next 12 to 18 months.

In the light of this expected development, we are building our reserves to weather a long downturn in the global economic environment next year even though the optimistic projection say that it’s not going to be a very long downturn. It’s about another six months to go.

Inflation is insidious, and has a disproportionate impact on the poorer people of our nation. And early in my term, I told my economic managers that we must keep inflation down. And to keep inflation down, we must address both the supply side and the demand side. I see my former professor of macro-economics in international trade and public finance, Vin Valdepenas nodding his head. Well, you gave me an A in class.

On the supply side, I said we must address the cost to the poor of rice, transportation and medicine. And we succeeded to the point that our inflation rate of 4 percent is at its lowest in the last 16 months — or even more.

On the demand side, responsible fiscal and monetary management also helped to reduce inflation, bringing down the cost of money, stamping out speculation against the peso and stabilizing it.

Our strong reserve position combined with projected dollar value should hold up the current value of the peso. A dynamic service sector, a large agricultural base, remittances from overseas Filipinos to their relatives in the Philippines, these are what have kept domestic consumption healthy. These have softened the impact of the plunge in exports and they explain the resilience of our economy.

I am also pleased to report that foreign direct investment levels, as Mar Roxas has pointed out, have exceeded targets despite the global slowdown. As mar pointed out, investments reached P132 billion by the end of November against a projection of 100 billion for the entire year. These investments went mostly in telecommunications and manufacturing.

Given all that, I think we can approach the coming year with a reasonable expectation of achieving reasonable growth, maybe even higher growth.

Times will still be tough, but the stage has been set for them to get better. Given our country’s potential, the 4 to 4.5 percent GDP growth projection set by Secretary Canlas would seem modest during normal times. But given the global slowdown, a 9-11, we would rather err on the side of conservatism rather than wild promise. There is good ground to hope for a better year, but equally compelling reason to try even harder in the year to come.

Our reforms will seek to strengthen the banking sector, address corporate governance deficiencies and expand our revenue sources and GDP base. As we improve public service, we call on the private sector to strengthen its role as the engine of the economy. Government will continue to do its part to make the environment more congenial to business as we continue to provide more public infrastructure, more rational power costs and competitive investment incentive packages.

If we are to achieve our economic development goals, we must not limit our focus to external sources of growth. Domestic demand will continue to play an important role in delivering economic performances.

To encourage strength in the domestic economy, we are looking at bringing new financing vehicles to small-and- medium scale enterprises and the housing sector. Small-and-medium scale enterprises are too small for the attention of many traditional banks. Thus, we recently approved the proposal by the development bank of the Philippines to use Japanese ODA funds worth $200 million for credit schemes for SMEs.

As for housing, private asset management initiatives will take on its non-performing loans and unlock its bottlenecks.

Let me mention other sources of domestic growth that we are developing. Agriculture, agricultural modernization especially with the hybrid coming from china and developed for Philippine conditions by Philrice, will hopefully increase the yield in the farms that will adopt the seeds by two and a half times. Then, there is the major infrastructure and investment big ticket items that have experienced bottlenecks in the past several years. And we are now unlocking these bottlenecks so that there will be more demand coming out of investment activity without having to increase budgetary allocations.

Among these major big ticket items that we are unlocking bottlenecks now in are: the PNB, and I am very happy to note that last night, the term sheet between the PDIC and the Philippine National Bank was finally signed. So we now see the rehabilitation of the PNB underway.

Another big ticket item that will increase domestic demand is the operation of the national steel corporation. Mar Roxas did some innovative ways of seeking to have interim operations. But now , it seems that the solutions will not just be interim but permanent operation as well.

Then, we have the housing sector which I have mentioned. We also have the MRT portion that will close the loop so that we can have an entire loop of MRT around Metro Manila. And I am happy to say that DOTC and the proponent have already come up with the appropriate, understanding so that the one who held previous contract can exercise its option and go on.

Another bottleneck has been the Batangas port. Finally, JBIC, after many years of delay because of disputes among bidders, because of disputes on land valuation, finally, the award has been confirmed by JBIC. And I have already my invitation for the groundbreaking. So that’s going to push through.

Another bottleneck is with regard to the garbage. And I am very happy to note — I’m surprised it hasn’t leaked out, so I might as well tell you about — I was hoping that it would leak out. Finally the award has been granted and approved by the NEDA board to pro-environment. So therefore, I said, we would solve the problem come Christmas time. And it has been solved in terms of the long term solution. But even in terms of the short term solution, please let me know where you still see piles and piles of garbage in metro manila.

And far from Metro Manila, another bottleneck that we have to address. And if we address this too we will add to consumer demand, and solve a long term problem that we foresee, is the water system of Cebu. So therefore, if we unlock all these bottlenecks, then we will be having an additional source of domestic demand.

To make many of these moves possible, as Governor Buenaventura said, the Central Bank is now going into inflation targeting. And, indeed, it is right to add inflation targeting to employment targeting as the focus of our strategy.

And for a good economy, you need good government and vice versa. So both in the national and local governments, we have been cutting down the red tape, that according to business, encourages corruption and discourages investments.

For example, as Emy Boncodin said, we have computerized bidding in public works so as to take out the human element and substitute it with fairly incorruptible artificial intelligence. The result has been not just honest but faster contract awards.

We took an important step in the promotion of good governance by penalizing money laundering, sought to discourage international crimes by the drug trade abroad but also graft and corruption at home.

You have press a release in your kit of what we are supposed to have said in our speeches. But all press releases should be checked against delivery. And so, my apologies to the central bank, who I think wrote the first draft of my speech, and therefore wrote the press release based on the first draft. Check against delivery in the last paragraph of the press release.

Looking at 2002, the resiliency that we demonstrated for our economy in the face of a global economic crisis provides the fundamental setting in which we can work out a better life for the poor.

Now that your government has steered the Philippines economy towards calmer waters, allow me to call on all Filipinos to push our economy to greater heights. I call once again for a moratorium of politicking to safeguard the gains we have achieved so far and to translate these gains into blessings that the people can finally feel.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the Year-End Media Economic Briefing. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409211952/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8764&Itemid=38