Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 30th General Assembly and 10th Foundation Anniversary Closing Program of the Bishops-Ulama Conference

[Delivered at Ballrooms 1 & 2, The Marco Polo Hotel, Davao City, Davao del Sur, November 29, 2006]

Thank you, Archbishop Capalla.

Other archbishops and bishops. I’d like to greet also Dr. Mahid Mutilan, the other Ulamas, Bishop Gomez, the other bishops of the Christian churches, Ambassador Beckingham and the other guests, Jess Dureza and the other government officials, ladies and gentlemen.

Assalamu Alaikum! May God’s peace be upon us all!

I’m sorry that I have to be the first number of the program, because I just got a call when I was coming down, it’s going to be signal number 2 at ten o’clock tonight in Manila and signal number 4 in Catanduanes. So either I have to go there now or I stay here for two days, and that would be difficult because I have to oversee other response to the super typhoons in Manila so I have to go there tonight. But thank you very much for this opportunity to be here with you today.

We are gathered here once more to celebrate interfaith dialogue and solidarity at this crucial time in our national life. I’m proud to say that it was the Bishops-Ulama Conference who pioneered interfaith dialogue as an instrument in defending the national community against extremism.

At a time when nobody in the world was giving much attention to interfaith dialogue, the Bishops-Ulama Conference was already doing pioneering work in building interfaith dialogues in the communities all over Mindanao, from urban centers of Davao to the farthest villages of the island provinces like Tawi-Tawi.

After the gathering of Asia’s Ulamas and Bishops in Manila in 2003 — many of you were there — interfaith dialogue appeared in the agenda of major regional and international bodies such as the United Nations and ASEAN. And it will again be a subject matter when we hold the ASEAN Summit in Cebu next month, which will also be an occasion to show the world a new Philippines.

The new Philippines we will show those who will go to Cebu are… Those that are reflected in our economic indicators which are rosy indeed: inflation is easing; we have higher dollar reserves; the market is bullish; we have a strong peso; OFW remittances are increasing. They say it’s because Christmas, but then that means we’ve had Christmas all year long; the interest rate is low, and I hope that the cooperatives have been feeling it; investment inflows are increasing; the image of the country as investment destination is improving, as evidenced by rising Makati rentals on strong demand.

But that’s not the totality of it all, those are rosy macro-economic indicators. But what we must do — and we are doing is – we’re increasing the social payback of economic reforms in terms of more infrastructure, schools, health facilities, food security, and broader access to small enterprise loans.

Your cooperation and understanding are key in moving our country forward in strengthening the spiritual and moral fiber of our society, in sustaining the spirit of enterprise among our people, in keeping up our guard against terror and destabilization, in bringing peace to Mindanao, and in guiding us towards the preferential option for the poor.

And so we count on your support and understanding as the officials of the different agencies reach out to the grassroots. To deliver government service to indigent Filipinos, we have established rolling stores and ‘Tindahan Natin’ that specializes in low-priced rice and noodles; rolling drug stores and the Botika ng Bayan that sells medicines at half the price of what they were in 2001; and rolling hospitals and medical missions. We want to partner with the Bishops and the Ulamas in the roll-out of these services so that they can reach the people especially the people in Mindanao.

When we had the recent problems in our negotiations with our rebel groups among the MILF, and some sectors in Mindanao and the country expressed concern, you, the Bishops and the Ulamas not only lent your voice of confidence that there is a way forward but you also consulted the Mindanaoans and proposed specific avenues for peace. Thank you.

So, if we can say that the Philippines has never seen a religious war, it is due to the great interfaith solidarity of our people with the Bishops-Ulama Conference in the lead. With some bright prospects of our peace efforts today, to a large extent because of the efforts of the Bishops and the Ulamas, I trust that you will continue to be with us in the various ways of peace building. And we hope that with understanding and enlightenment, commensurate actions will follow to safeguard the perimeters of peace.

You are the sentinels of trust, understanding and goodwill among the tri-peoples of Mindanao — the Muslims, Christians and Lumads.

May God’s grace be with all of us, with all of you, with all the peoples of the world.

Maraming salamat. Daghan salamat kaninyong tanan.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 30th General Assembly and 10th Foundation Anniversary Closing Program of the Bishops-Ulama Conference. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615141935/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3027&Itemid=38