Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Economist Conferences Business Roundtable with the Government of the Philippines

[Delivered at the Grand Ballroom, Dusit Tthani Hotel, Makati City, October 10, 2008]

Thank you.

Thank you, Mr. Goddard.

Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.

There is no doubt that we live in unsettled times today.

The world is at a tipping point.

The U.S. financial crisis appears deeper than most anticipated.

Just a week ago, the U.S. government approved an unprecedented bailout worth 700 billion dollars for a large section of its financial services industry. But despite the obvious concern and commitment showed by the U.S. Congress, the markets barely reacted.

The setbacks from the global shocks of the past year and the past weeks are real and profound. It will take time and perseverance to put the pieces back together.

Against this backdrop, the Philippines is in relatively good shape. Thanks to our fiscal reforms that manifested in the more than 7.0 percent GDP growth last year.

The potential exposure of our banks to the asset inflation triggered by sub-prime mortgage losses account for less than one percent of total system assets. This exposure is fully reserved, our banks are well-capitalized, and the innate conservatism of our bankers is matched by the prudential foresight of our regulators.

Our Central Bank governor who is independent of the Philippine government, is in Washington together with our secretaries of finance and budget and our planning secretary for the IMF World Bank Meeting, but we have with us our secretary of Trade and Industry, who is the national government’s representative to the Monetary Board.

We are proving the value of a new paradigm for self-reliance through the use of: first, a targeted strategy with a set of precise prescriptions to ease the price challenges we are facing; second, rice self-sufficiency and more energy independence; and third, long-term reforms.

To ease our price challenges, since the volatile global economic situation became apparent many months ago, we have increased and stabilized the supply of rice. We’ve delivered targeted subsidies to the poor. We have reached out to our neighbors in the Mekong region to ensure a stable supply. We’ve clamped down on price gouging and corruption in the rice trade, and invested more and more billions in planting and agricultural modernization.

The Central Bank, through all these periods in several tranches increased the rate base’s points by 100 base’s points. And this is an example of what our economic team has been doing to work tirelessly on all fronts to manage inflationary pressures, provide a safety net to those members of our society who are hit hardest by these global developments, and deliver the economic growth that will continue to generate jobs and the tax revenues that are fueling the investment in our future, including the infrastructure that can visibly be seen and that was referred to by Mr. Goddard.

I am pleased at the downturn in the consumer price growth last month. While no one can predict the future during these uncertain global economic times, it seems that our measures at home are seeing us through the toughest times. We hope the worst is behind us in the Philippines and that we have weathered the worst of the global storm.

On rice self-sufficiency, from the day we took office, we have been focused on modernizing our economy, modernizing every aspect of the economic underpinnings of the economy. This includes agriculture, from development of new hybrids, to unprecedented investments in irrigation, to dramatic increases in loans to help our farmers, among other activities.

But while we have achieved a high productivity of rice per hectare, nature did not gift us with a mighty Mekong and a vast and naturally-fertile plain. Nature instead, as we can see today from the rain, put our islands ahead of our neighbors in the path of typhoons from the Pacific. Therefore, it had been more economical to import 10 percent of the rice that we consume rather than produce that 10 percent on marginal lands.

But with what happened this year with the rice and global prices notwithstanding our preparation, we reached a consensus with the Legislature — and I’m glad that we have two members of the Legislature here with us, Congressman Puentevella and Congressman Mercado — and with the business community — and I’m glad we have members of the business community here with us — we reached a consensus altogether that even if the Philippines is a densely-populated, rocky archipelago with relatively few sources of fresh water, it has become desirable to be self-sufficient in rice.

The centerpiece of our drive towards self-sufficiency in rice is a multi-billion package for agricultural modernization that we have nicknamed F.I.E.L.D.S. — an acronym that stands for Fertilizers; Irrigation and farm infrastructure; Education and agricultural extension work; Loans; Dryers and other post-harvest facilities; and Seeds, especially hybrid and certified seeds.

On energy independence. It’s auspicious that we have this meeting today because yesterday, our new Galoc Oil Field started pumping oil to what we believe will redouble our crude oil production in our country. This is part of what we have done to increase energy independence during our administration from 41 percent to 58 percent — the highest in our history – through the greater use not only of oil exploration but of geothermal, biofuels and renewables. And with the Galoc Oil Field starting its production yesterday we expect to attain 60 percent energy independence in two years. But you will hear more about that this afternoon, I understand, at 4:00 o’clock p.m., because as I was coming here in my car, I was talking to our Secretary of Energy, getting the figures correct. And he told me that he is on board to speak before you at 4:00 o’clock this afternoon.

On long-term reforms. I came to office determined to change the strategic paradigm for the Philippine economy. A strong and growing economy has been the central pillar we have labored to create to help guarantee peace, order and stability.

Our gains in the last seven years were hard-earned. We made tough and sometimes painful reforms to reset our economy: tax increases — again, I thank Congress for helping me do those very painful measures, banking reforms — that’s why our exposure to the sub-prime crisis is minimal; crackdown on smugglers and tough fiscal discipline, to name a few as part of our anti-corruption efforts.

It is paying off. Our economy is more resilient today than ever before. We have created almost 7 million jobs in 7 years. Our international reserves cover six months of imports. And the reforms have given us some running room to weather the wave of global price shocks that reverberated across the world this year.

It hasn’t been easy, but Filipinos are tough and resilient and that is one of our sources of competitiveness. We have pulled together. We have been able to draw on additional revenues to provide targeted investments in food and fuel to keep our poor afloat until a better day.

We are doing everything in our power to focus on the fundamentals, keep the economy steady, and to provide relief for those most in need.

In addition, as has been mentioned earlier, we are investing in modernizing infrastructure like roads and bridges but what makes it different is that it is now on an unprecedented scale because now we can afford it with our tax reforms. Incidentally, our secretary of education was the chairman of the House Committee on Ways and Means that led us through these tax reforms.

We are also investing in expanded education, healthcare, and other social services. ICT is a major element of our education reform program. We expect it to continue taking on an increasingly significant role in improving the access and quality of education to the people. And that’s why I’ve asked our Secretary of Education Jesli Lapus to join us here not only to banner him as the author of our tax reforms but also that he can talk more about ICT in education later on in our open forum.

We encourage continued activity by business groups such as those represented in this audience today. And business groups such as those who read your very prestigious publication. This also means the government continues to promote privatization as a counterpoint to our own pump priming.

Privatizing our economy is a top priority. It is moving forward well, from power and energy to our stake in jointly owned assets with private investors. Our philosophy is that, “the marketplace performs better than government”. We want to reap the rewards of our investment and use these rewards when we divest to invest in the people of the nation.

And notwithstanding some of the constraints mentioned by Mr. Goddard, I’m glad that investments continue to come despite continued volatility in the global markets. Mr. Goddard talked about our neighbors.

We view the ASEAN community and our other neighbors like China and India as partners in economic development. We are working together to build a more cohesive regional community that will strengthen the economic clout of all our nations in our rapidly growing region. Intra-ASEAN trade has already become one of the major drivers of our respective economies. And to ensure that we remain a competitive player within the region and are able to attract investment not only from outside ASEAN but also within. We have invested heavily in improving the quality of the country’s human resources, lowering transaction flows and the cost of doing business — which includes fighting corruption. And we have Secretary Favila here as the chairman of our Anti-Red Tape Task Force — developing efficient access to financing. In a few days time, I will be signing a bill into law on a Credit Information System that will reduce the paper requirements for accessing financing — and building a seamless infrastructure network, as you are seeing, from the expressways to the North, all the way up to Clark-Subic; beyond that, to Tarlac, and our expressways to the South, all the way to Batangas Port. We are also focusing on developing our strongest sectors, including commodities, business process outsourcing and niche tourism, where we have, as Mr. Goddard says, unique competitive advantages, and where we can offer significant value for foreign investors. These and other measures we are taking will ensure that we will continue to attract the investments that we need to create jobs.

And so we are glad that efforts to improve our competitiveness have been recognized globally, with the Philippines moving up five notches this year in the World Competitiveness Rankings.

We will continue on the path of economic reform, including reforms to improve transparency in our governance system. Our reforms have helped us in this time of global economic upheaval. Without them, we would not be as confident as we are that our economy will withstand these external shocks. We will continue to be vigilant against further challenges to our economy. We will maintain the fiscally prudent policies that have given us the strength to weather this global storm.

Even as some external challenges are letting up, we will continue to focus on reining in inflation, bringing down prices of the basic commodities including rice and oil and power, increasing targeted investments to our poor, taking care of our environment — and we have our secretary of Environment and Natural Resources here also to answer questions regarding mining — and getting our economic engine moving in a higher gear. We will also work hard to further strengthen the banking system which has shown itself to be quite strong during this crisis of the world so far. Encourage investment again as I said in our most promising growth sectors that was mentioned earlier but also expand the field of our potential sectors.

So we can see that all these measures do require strong actions internally even if the challenge we face are broadly external. They require decisive and targeted action internally, and we have done that. We repeat that the best buffer we have to external vulnerability is our own domestic internal strength. Building a stronger, healthier economy driven by domestic consumption and investment and relying less on external markets for things like food, things like energy is what our reform agenda is all about. Also things like foreign loans that we used to need to finance our infrastructure, not anymore now, we can finance it by our own resources.

These are the things that are keeping our economy on the path to long-term sustainable growth.

To the fiscally strong, the global credit crunch is a time of opportunity, not crisis. To the likes of oil-producing countries, the Singapores of the world and others of such fiscal strength, this has been a time to exploit the financial vacuum, as we have seen there purchases into the world financial institutions earlier this year. Similarly, in the private sector, this is the time for the businessmen who have the financial liquidity to expand their role in their respective markets. And in the Philippines, we have quite a few of those businessmen who have that financial clout.

Of equal importance to sheer financial capacity is the ability to decide and move quickly — the road between a decision to invest and the actual writing of the check is fraught with uncertainty. And from my experience, the bastions of wealth with both financial capacity and quick execution are the Middle East powers, given their oil-driven wealth and their unitary government status. The fact that the Philippines has a Mindanao close to the hearts of Middle East powers opens up such opportunities for us, and we have been mobilizing these opportunities not only in Mindanao but in our urban beltway as well.

Our investment offer is excellent. It includes a government committed not only to continuing infrastructure expansion – and, as I said, we can afford it now on our own steam — but also to working with individual companies to ensure that their needs are met. It includes one of the most productive and competitive work forces in the region, and a strong macroeconomic environment. If there is any doubt that we don’t value any particular company’s investment, including a company experiencing some attempts to make illegal money out of them, we want to know about it. Secretary Favila will take care of your problems and crack the whip. We can assure you that we will do anything we can to address your concerns.

So, we thank you for your interest in the Philippines.

We will work hard to help you expand your presence in what we are determined to be the best investment location in Asia.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Economist Conferences Business Roundtable with the Government of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135109/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1756&Itemid=38