Thank you very much Secretary Puno for your introduction.

Former President Ramos, not only former president of the Philippines but also former Chief of the Philippine Constabulary; General Razon and the other officers and men and women of the Philippine National Police; members of the diplomatic corps; colleagues in the Armed Forces and the civilian government agencies; benefactors and friends of the Philippine National Police; awardees; ladies and gentlemen.

To our police officers, both men and women, happy anniversary to all of you! (Applause)

And heartfelt congratulations to everyone who received an award earlier. First of all, we awarded a widow of a police officer who sacrificed his life to save others. (Applause) We also gave awards to those who solved the case and arrested those who bombed the Batasan and those who rescued Father Bossi from the hands of terrorist kidnappers. (Applause) And we gave the highest award to those who demonstrated competence and integrity in their duty during the Manila Pen incident. (Applause)

Yung nangyari sa Manila Pen pinapakita that people want political stability, a bright economic future and social justice. Those who dream of doing things to disrupt our progress are out of touch with the hopes and dreams of the average Filipino. We have been through many upheavals and time and again, the people have indicated they want a stable government and economic progress — that is what they are getting now. And thanks in no small measure to mamang pulis and aling pulis. (Applause)

It was also fitting that the Human Rights Office received a special award because the theme of your anniversary is, “Police Officer: Champion of Human Rights Towards the Peace of Mind of the Citizens.”

And together with you, in fact, you have made it easy for us to follow the roadmap laid out by the Melo Commission to get at the bottom of unexplained political killings. Thanks to Mamang Pulis and we should say Aling Pulis because the head of the Human Rights Office is a woman. We have been meeting with success in the fight to put an end to the legacy of political violence in the Philippines.

And with the priority you have given that legacy, we will continue to bring perpetrators to justice, jail criminals, and exhort the nation to leave behind its terrible legacy of political violence. And thanks to your investigations and the building-up of evidence and arresting perpetrators, political killings were down 83 percent last year. Congratulations! (Applause) But we must not rest until we reach zero.

I commend the work of the PNP’s human rights office. The seminars and proposals of the PNP to strengthen your regulations and traditions in defending the rights of every citizen.

And congratulations as well for decreasing last year’s total crime volume by 7.4 percent. And especially, I’m sure the Chinese community — Don Emilio and the other members of the federation and the business club — will thank you especially, the kidnapping went down by half. Congratulations also for that! (Applause)

And congratulations for your neighborhood partnership program which was cited by the U.N. Agency for Asia and Far East Institute for Crime Prevention and Treatment of Offenders as a model for community participation in crime prevention. That institute also noted the PNP’s achievements against the trafficking of persons, particularly child sexual exploitation.

And so you have devoted yourselves to the protection of human rights not only in the political sphere but in the sphere of women and children’s welfare. Children’s Month is coming up soon. Before, we celebrated the PNP anniversary in January but we made it February now, early February, because we didn’t know when I would return from Davos and Dubai when you were preparing this. It’s good that we are in the runup to the celebration of Women’s Month and it’s a good opportunity especially because of the awards you gave regarding child protection against sexual abuse, about… we can highlight now what the police are doing to protect children and women.

Ang Women and Children’s Concerns Division ay pinalakas natin, pinalakas ninyo bilang Women and Children’s Protection Center. And I am glad that after ordering the hiring of 2,000 policewomen in 2006, equivalent to four battalions, now we can unveil the center as the country’s first all-woman police outpost. (Applause) And I was saying that this center should also serve as a prototype station women’s desk. Not that all the other stations should be all women but that woman’s desk or the cubicle should showcase a woman’s touch. It should be in cool pastel colors or feminist purple. It should have victim-friendly reception rooms. It should have shelves that will display ‘help’ literature on domestic violence, and it should have a clean comfort room.

But we also have an all-women SWAT team and CDM team from the regional special actions units of NCRPO and the Quezon City Police District. Hopefully, this helped Police District Director Gatdula to receive an Outstanding Police District Office here in Metro Manila. We will meet the all-women swat team later. We will present them to the media. And they should be able to respond to extreme cases of domestic violence when hostage taking is involved. We want to show that police girl power is not limited to sisterly counseling. It packs a mean firepower as well. (Applause)

We need today as much as ever all the hallmarks of our police forces, male and female — patriotism, loyalty and professionalism which you have all shown as epitomized by our awardees but also the entire organization. With the support of our policemen and policewomen, we will leave this nation stronger and more secure for all. With your support, we will continue to provide increased stability, economic growth and peace and order.

Let us continue to unite. The PNP, above the qualities you have shown this past year. You have shown unity. Let us continue this towards a safer, more peaceful and progressive society.

So to all of you, on your anniversary, I will not repeat the benefits reported by General Sonny Razon. I will just say, congratulations on your good work!

Long live the PNP!

Thank you all very much. (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during The 17th Anniversary Celebration of the Philippine National Police (PNP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123606/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1001&Itemid=38