Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the welcome reception for the 9th International Association for Volunteer Effort (IAVE) Asia-Pacific Regional Conference

[Delivered at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang, November 7, 2003]

Thank you very much, Secretary Dick Gordon. It’s very appropriate that you’re the honorary chairman of this conference because you are one of the great volunteer examples.

Mrs. Virginia Davide, who was doing volunteer work when she was in government and continuously do volunteer work now that she’s out of government. I greet you and please send my best regards and my best respects to his Excellency Chief Justice Davide.

Miss Lizburns, other leaders of the world of volunteers in the Asia-Pacific, both those from the NGOs and the private sector, and those from the government who deal with them, ladies and gentlemen.

The Philippines is proud to host this important event. When Mrs. Davide invited me to speak before you, she said, I can speak in your conference site or I can ask you to come to Malacañang. She said, “but I think they would rather that you ask them to come to Malacañang.” and so, I have invited you here today.

I’d like to great the excellencies of the diplomatic corps for being here with the volunteers of their country. This event affirms our country’s active involvement in volunteerism as a tool for national and international development and cooperation. This is also a reflection of our government’s deep commitment to the alliance forged with the international volunteer community.

Volunteerism is part of every nation’s history. Volunteerism and solidarity are both sides of the same coin of community and nationhood. Those of you who came here to attend the 5th IAVE Asia-Pacific Regional Conference in 1995, the first in the Philippines which was held in Subic in Dick Gordon’s time, probably had the chance to know how volunteerism converted that former U.S. base into a showcase of Philippine commerce, trade and tourism. At that time, challenged with the need to lift themselves from disaster, the volunteers of Subic built a freeport. The success of Subic is a testament to all Filipinos who believe that anything can be accomplished through volunteerism.

Traditionally, Philippine volunteerism has been associated with non-government organizations engaged in relief and rehabilitation work. And many of you are doing that, that’s why my friends from DSWD are here. Today, however, volunteerism has added many other facets to itself that involve individuals, groups and institutions in addressing a common development agenda, whether in the area of social services – the traditional field of volunteers — or technical support, humanitarian assistance, capacity building and governance.

Academic institutions, the business community, socio-civic organizations and the government have benefited from volunteer services not only in terms of development programs and projects, but also in terms of enabling the personal and professional growth of individuals and institutions.

A significant feature of this multi-sectoral and multi-disciplinary participation is the partnership between and among the volunteers and volunteer organizations, and the government and the private sector to share their best efforts towards a common goal.

Our medium-term Philippine development plan identifies volunteerism as a convergence strategy in the delivery of social services, right Nelia? In winning the battle against poverty, and in strengthening the tourism industry.

With the volunteer 12 program where Dick Gordon gets Filipino Americans, overseas Filipinos in other countries to bring over to be the volunteer tourism marketing promoters of our country.

My administration, as Mrs. Davide said, upholds the ideals of volunteerism and the important role of government in promoting volunteer service in nation-building and international understanding.

I consider these to be important legacies of my father as well, Former President Diosdado Macapagal. Because he was the one who created the Philippine National Volunteer Service committee in 1964. That became the forerunner of the present Philippine National Volunteer Service Coordinating Agency, which was headed by Mrs. Davide before her retirement from public service, and that agency is a co-organizer of this conference.

Despite the conveniences offered by modern science and technology, humankind is still plagued with poverty, illiteracy, political conflict, disease, and environmental degradation, among others. And this is where volunteers can do so much.

Regardless of our standing in society, each of us is called upon to responsibly act and contribute towards the greater good of all.

Some do this volunteer work by themselves, unofficially. Some do it in an organized way, such as those who are participating in this conference, because the calling to improve our society which each one of us must do is a calling we volunteers cannot ignore.

We must continue to close ranks. That’s the beauty of organized volunteer work. We must continue to close ranks in creating a culture of cooperation, solidarity. And when we do that, we can create a culture of peace which is what we need so much in this world.

And so, to all of you, thank you for coming to the Philippines. Let’s all join hands in friendship and understanding to create a better world for all of mankind.

May I particularly express my appreciation to the Philippine association for volunteer effort or PA-VE or PAVE and the Philippine National Volunteer Service Coordinating Agency for organizing this conference which is another milestone in the country’s volunteer service program.

I look forward to your having a successful conference because the communities and the institutions of the Philippines look forward to benefiting from the fruits of your interacting together. Thank you and good day.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Welcome Reception for the 9th International Association for Volunteer Effort (IAVE) Asia-Pacific Regional Conference. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615141104/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7520&Itemid=38