Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the National Summit on Housing and Urban Development

[Delivered at the Heroes Hall, Malacañang, October 24, 2001]

Thank you very much, Secretary Romulo.

Senator Francis Pangilinan; Congressman Prospero Nograles; Secretary Defensor; Mr. Ric Domingo from the Luzon CMP-PO Network; Ms. De Leon-Yuson, the National Coordinator of the Urban Poor Colloquium; Mr. Fernando Zobel de Ayala; Mr. Thaddeus Liamzon; Mr. Terence Jones; Mr. Jan Meeuwissen; members of the Cabinet; Local Government officials, several of whom I see today; officials; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen:

I wish to thank each one of you for participating in this first housing summit under my administration.

This summit is the culmination of a series of regional housing workshops which were conducted in Metro Manila and in the cities of Cebu, Baguio and Davao from September 20th to October 17th this year in preparation for the mapping out of an action agenda for housing for the years 2001 to 2004.

I would like to acknowledge the efforts of the HUDCC — the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council — and its attached agencies; the different departments of government such as the Department of Finance, Department of Budget and Management and the National Economic and Development Authority; the housing developers; the business and private sector groups such as the Shelter and Housing Advisory Group of the Makati Business Club; SHDA and CREBA — whom I understand from Mike have already united. That is a very big development in the housing industry, congratulations! — The urban poor colloquium and other representatives of civil society for making this summit possible.

I listened to all of the output of the summit — it sounds like a very long laundry list — and I think what we should do is to vet this some more, put timetables, put judgments and doabilities, so that this will be part of the inputs of the National Economic Summit that was proposed by Senator Ople that we will be doing. Where the summit will be on November 26th but prior to that, there will be activities leading up to that summit.

In that summit there were supposed to be 10 areas, and housing and infrastructure were in one area. I said, I don’t want housing just part of infrastructure. Housing must be its own area because it is a major sector of the government, so therefore, we’re 11 — 11th workshop in the housing.

Well, why do I say this? When I became President, I realized that I was entering the administration in a period of a world economic slowdown. In fact, I was telling the Lord, why did you make me President in a time like this when things are going down, looking bad? And in my prayer time he said, well that’s why I put you there. You are an economist, you have extensive experience in the bureaucracy, you have experience in the legislature so this is the time to put all your experience together to help the country survive this slowdown.

And so, I started to discuss with the Cabinet Members and my fellow economists and the business sector — how do we survive this world slowdown? For sure our exports will plunge as they’re already plunging. Therefore, we have to develop the domestic market; we have to build up domestic demand; and we have to do this while still maintaining a 145-billion peso budget deficit. So it is not unlimited pump-priming, it is pump-priming within our means.

And so we decided, first and foremost, Small and Medium Enterprises — and that’s why we have Mel Alonzo here, who’s going to do the miracles for the small and medium enterprises. Because when I was discussing with Mar, what’s the most important thing that the SMEs need? And he said, what they need is a guarantee for their financing.

And so we removed the executive order that prohibits government guarantees because the purpose of that executive order on government guarantees was to avoid all the surprises that we got when the administration came in. We thought we had this amount of obligations but it turned out that the previous administration had so many government guarantees and B-O-T projects — continued liabilities that were becoming actual liabilities — so we said, let’s put a stop to all of these. It was never meant to prevent SMEs from having access to guarantees so therefore we corrected the E.O.

And then the other matter, my fellow economists said I did right in saying that even if as a whole we must stay under deficit ceiling — which means keeping with the budget — for agriculture, I said, while we sacrifice and scrimp and save on the others, for agriculture, we must overspend. We must put that 20 billion pesos a year in agricultural modernization that had been promised by the law but for the budget only provided for what 14, 16 billion. So we did that and we put money in the countryside for agricultural modernization. And the business sector, I remember very well, a meeting with the Makati Business Club where they said another very important… They reminded of another very important source of domestic demand is the housing sector because the housing sector is very well known for the very big multiplier effect.

And so I said, yes that’s very good. Problem is that Mike Defensor is complaining that while there’s money available, the banks are not using the money for financing housing. So I asked Fernando, maybe you could help Mike Defensor work out a program on how the banks can use the financing that’s available so that the money available lying in the vaults of SSS, GSIS, Landbank and DBP can be transformed into our housing targets. And he said, not only, not only in financing, we’ll help mike work out a holistic program in order to make the housing industry viable. And I believe that the private housing sector has indeed been assisting Mike Defensor and the government housing sector in this regard.

I will not dwell specifically on the problems of the housing sector, I’m sure that in the consultations prior to the summit you already had enough dose of those housing problems, proof is the very long laundry list that mike read out. But let me summarize what I think… What I would like to do with the housing sector, and I have already told you earlier what I wanted to do and how the housing sector fitted into our program:

First, when I made my State of the Nation Address I was very clear, concrete and quantified in my targets, and I talked about four things the administration wants to do:

Number one, use the free enterprise system to create jobs. That means a good investment climate;

Number two, agricultural modernization founded on social equity, which is why we spent a lot of money on agriculture during this past several months;

And incidentally, indeed, I believe that our focus on building up domestic demand worked because when the statistics were out for the first semester, many other countries around the world, among our neighbors, among our major markets were entering recession or having their first quarter of negative growth or were having barely zero growth or flat growth, we grew at 3.4 percent. So therefore, we were an island together with China and, I believe, Indonesia — who was coming from way below — in having a good positive growth rate. So when I went to APEC it was really a source of pride. When they go around the table, how are you doing? And Hong Kong says, negative. Singapore says, negative. All these big economic giants say, negative. They go the Philippines, how are you doing?

So, but then, we can’t rest on our laurels because September 11 happened, and September 11 has brought on more uncertainty. But not to go beyond that — first, the third item that I said in the State of the Nation Address was, that we must have a social bias in our development plan;

And the fourth being improvement of moral standards in government and in society.

When I talk about the social bias, this is where I talked about the rural poor and the urban poor. And the urban poor, of course, in all of my consultations — Senators, Vice President, President — everytime I go to a squatter area, to an urban poor area — alone or with others — whenever I ask them, what do you need first and foremost? And the first thing they always say is shelter security. So therefore, that’s my number one goal for the urban poor — shelter security. And after looking at the finances available — because I don’t want to set targets beyond our means — then that’s where Mike Defensor’s 300,000 shelter units came in. And these are divided into a 150,000 families who will have access to the land that they occupy or some other land in exchange for the land they occupy basically using the de Soto method. And I’m very glad that Hernando de Soto, who has heard about what we’re doing, will be coming on November 13th and 14th at his own expense just to give us some of his expert advice on how to proceed. Then a 100,000 units a year for economic housing and 50,000 units a year for socialized housing.

This is the way I would want our 300,000 to be divided. And I hope that if we have a common goal and common quantitative targets, each one in the housing sector can figure out how he or she can contribute to these common goals.

Now, as I said, September 11 happened — and while housing… We looked at it, it’s good for a multiplier, good and number one for having a social bias as far as the urban poor are concerned in our development plan — when September 11 happened, I said it is very important, even more important now to be focused. We survived the first half of the year, we dodged the bullet of the economic slowdown, but there’s another bigger bullet coming our way, and this is the uncertainty that stems from the September 11 attacks and so we must be even more focused. And if we’ve already spent money on agriculture and is still being spent, and if we’ve already worked on unlocking the bottlenecks for the SMEs with regard to their guarantee funding, what we must do now — where do we get our additional new domestic demand to get into the economy and yet still maintain our 145-billion peso deficit ceiling? And I said, that what we must do is to unlock major infrastructure projects, major investment projects that have been tied up with bottlenecks in some way or another. And if you unlock those bottlenecks then these projects will move and then they will be the new spur to our economy. Among the major infrastructure bottlenecks that I would point out would be the Batangas port that’s been there for so long. And one of the bottlenecks was that the landowners in the right of way wanted 6,000 pesos per hectare and the government’s budget to make it viable was 600 pesos per hectare. Finally, we got a court ruling which we used as a basis to expropriate. And therefore now that Batangas port has already been awarded and it is now in Japan JBIC just for their confirmation. This is one major project that has been unlocked.

And what can I say about this? Expropriation is the key to many bottlenecks. So if there are going to be major infrastructure projects and we have greedy landowners — I cannot have 15 greedy landowners stop development for millions of people — then we will very, very quickly and decisively use the state tool of expropriation to make sure that we have good investment projects coming along. The other one is the MRT. Imagine how urban life will be much better if we had a whole mass transit loop that went around the Philippines. Right now we have only that last item, that last loop between — what is it? — SM North and Monumento, that’s the last route. And the problem there was that the builders of the first MRT had a preemptive right to the extension. But I said, we can’t wait for them to use their preemptive right forever. So, we gave them until October 15 to be able to give an acceptable proposal, otherwise, then we open it up for bidding. October 15 came and they had not gotten together on the technical proposal, so I told Bebot Alvarez, then advertise it for bidding.

And under the new bidding rules that we have — where the B-O-T Law that I authored is now being followed more strictly with regard to the new bidding rules — I couldn’t understand why it would take so long because precisely I made the bidding rule so simple that they should take no more than two-and-a-half months. So I told Bebot Alvarez, make sure that the bidding rules that I put up in the B-O-T Law that I authored are going to be followed so that we can have that loop soon. And so I hope that soon we can really, in a couple of months from now, early next year, then we can start construction of that last loop and certainly life will be much better here in our urban area. Because when more people can go anywhere in Metro Manila using that MRT loop, then we will have much, much less traffic in our neighborhoods.

Another very big bottleneck is the PNB rehabilitation. But I hope that soon it will be resolved. The different parties are down to the last remaining issues.

And another big bottleneck that I want to be resolved is the matter of the National Steel Corporation. And because there had been a long drawn out, long, long drawn out court case where the creditors and SEC already took possession of National Steel because of its failure to pay its debts but National Steel even as the SEC had taken over, gave a lease contract to an operator so therefore it’s been under litigation. Now the owner of NSC is Malaysian, and I brought this whole matter all the way up to Prime Minister Mahathir. And so therefore, I’m very glad that as a result of his intervention — through the Danaharta, which is the apt of Malaysia — then the Hotick, the owner, agreed to participate in the evaluation process for an interim operator — somebody who can operate the plant and give jobs while the final ownership is still being worked out. Now, the lease of question says that they will throw a monkey wrench into this agreement to have an interim operator because they want to be the interim and final operator. And all I can tell the people of Iligan City is Allen Gold is an Iliganon and if Allen Gold puts a monkey wrench in this, it is an Iliganon who is stopping jobs from being given to Iliganons. So they better work it out themselves there in Iligan.

Outside of that I think we will proceed, we will proceed unless the court stops us. But it’s really very important to be decisive and not to be afraid of a court lawsuit. We shouldn’t be afraid of testing the law so that at least we know what the law means when it is tested in the end. Because of we are afraid of lawsuits all the time, we’ll always be afraid of acting.

The worst that the court can tell us is, stop, don’t do it, and we will obey. Like Nani Perez says, you cannot commute a death sentence. You cannot put back a death sentence that has been commuted. Okay, I’ll follow the law. He says, of course, unless there were infirmities in the commutation. Well, okay, look for infirmities in the commutation if there are some infirmities, then we will see. And I’m enumerating here the major projects that have bottlenecks that if you unlock them then they will move — Batangas port, the MRT loop completion, National Steel, PNB, and the housing sector. So five major projects that I have identified where it is crucial to remove the bottlenecks if we want to survive the second semester of this year.

That’s why the housing sector is so important not only because of the multiplier, not only because of the social bias for the poor which is an end in itself, but because at a time like this when we need to unlock bottlenecks there is such a big potential for the housing sector because there are so many bottlenecks in the housing sector, so it’s a question of unlocking them.

The bottlenecks in financing had been pointed out. Imagine when I give a target of 100,000 economic housing and 50,000 socialized housing, that was supposed to cost 25 billion pesos. So… No, no, not 25… Yeah, 25 billion pesos. But in the banking sector alone, in the GFIs alone there’s already 25 billion pesos, not to mention the 3.7 billion that will be put in the GAA for the year 2002.

So the money is not the problem, the problem is that bottleneck — how to translate that money into the actual housing. And yesterday in the Cabinet meeting we had a rundown – that’s what Mike was pointing out earlier, the percentages — and Cora dela Paz wasn’t there yet when I had a meeting with the GFIs, so I said, how come you’re not using your money? And SSS said, because the conduit and the private banks are very prudent — prudent is a mild term. Or very conservative — maybe that’s even a mild term. But so I guess, we have to ask the banking sector to be more aggressive. But, on the other hand, I guess we had to look for other conduits, that’s what I said. And if Pag-IBIG itself could be a conduit, Cora, then maybe we should use Pag-IBIG as a conduit so that you have more options. And then GSIS, what was the complaint? Mike gave a complaint yesterday. And I just came from Laguna today, where Laguna has plenty of money for land, plenty of money for its own counterpart but they’re complaining about GSIS. And without my asking them or giving details, they confirmed what Mike was saying — theirs is limited to 12 designs. And Laguna, they’d like to put medium-rise housing, they can put their own money to make up for the difference, why can’t they use their imagination and creativity? And really that’s wrong. So yesterday we told… Lito Camacho was there and he said, it’s wrong. And tomorrow he’s going to have a meeting on the GFIs to sort out the bottlenecks within the GFIs with regard to the housing sector. For instance, I think GFIs should give free rein to designs as long as these designs are within the range of economic housing. Now, that Lito Camacho has finished working out the Power Sector Bill — thanks to our senators and congressmen — now that he’s finished working out the Money Laundering Bill — again, thanks to our senators and congressmen especially Kiko who was a sponsor — now he can attend to housing financing.

So I think if we work out those bottlenecks and of course the other reason why the banks, I understand, are very conservative is that why wait two-and-a-half years because you know the red tape, the housing permits alone take two-and-a-half years to do — 188 signatures — and that’s why during the State of the Nation Address I said, government agencies must reduce their signatures to one-half except housing which was reduced from 188 to 45. Today, Mike Defensor was talking about a surprise. And the surprise is an Executive Order that reduces the signatures not yet by 143 but by 20. But by removing these 20 signatures for CMP, it is cutting down the processing time of CMP from two years to — oh, excuse me — because you see this is after the cabinet meeting yesterday when it was inconclusive with regard to the E.O. And I said, well you’ve got between today and the housing summit tomorrow to work out. What you cannot do — because there’s a law that constraints it — leave it out and put it in the E.O. That we will try to work for the law or something like that. But whatever can be done administratively must be done between now and tomorrow, I said. And so what mike is giving me to sign today is an executive order that reduces any of whatever it is, it reduces it by 20 signatures and it reduces the processing time from two years to 90 days.

So I extemporized my speech because I saw the draft and it was full of highfalutin words and I figure that you’ve already had all your highfalutin’ words all morning and during all the many workshops. So I decided that we’ll just go down to the brass tacks and in the end we must remove bottlenecks and move all that housing money so that we can survive the second half of the year and move on to fighting poverty successfully in the years to come.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the National Summit on Housing and Urban Development. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212625/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8748&Itemid=38