Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 112th Philippine Independence Day and 35th Anniversary of the Diplomatic Relations between the Republic of the Philippines and the People’s Republic of China and the 9th Filipino-Chinese Friendship Day

[Delivered at the Fiesta Pavilion, Manila Hotel, June 4, 2010]

Thank you very much Secretary Roque for your very kind introduction.

Thank you very much Dr. Alfonso Uy for your very kind support kind words of welcome and appreciation for the work we have done for the friendship between the Philippines and China. And thank you for the gesture of appreciation from the federation. Ambassador Liu thank you also for remembering what we have done including my days as co-chairman of the Association of the Philippines-China Understanding working for diplomatic relations many many years ago.

Mayor Lim, Congresswoman Angping, Mr. John Ng, Mr. John Tan, Mr. Domingo Yap and I should also greet Congressman-elect Arthur Yap, leaders of the Filipino-Chinese community, other government officials whom I see all over the place tonight, other elected officials if they should be here, ladies and gentlemen good evening. Ni Hao!

I am very pleased once again to join our Chinese friends and the Filipino-Chinese community in this advance celebration of Filipino-Chinese Friendship Day. As our earlier speakers acknowledged when I became President I made June 9 of every year Filipino-Chinese Friendship Day. In the past, I set aside June 9 to attend activities to mark Filipino-Chinese Friendship Day in Manila. But this year, many of you will be with me in Shanghai to celebrate this occasion that is why we are holding our Manila celebration in advance.

It’s a good way to acknowledge the significance of our growing partnership we will have two celebrations one in Manila and one in Shanghai.

Over the past 35 years, the development of our bilateral ties with China with our Trade and Economic Cooperation serving as the engine driving our relations to great heights has been a very important part of our history. And it is not only the last 35 years where China has become a very important part of our history.

Our geographical ties, our trade relationship, our family relationships date back centuries before. Our diplomatic relations and even before our two republics were established. These centuries for thousand years of relationship in fact, has resulted in practically every Filipino having Chinese ancestry though, not everybody can truly be able to claim to trace his family tree to China. But one of those again who really traced his family tree to China is my husband whose great grandfather was Chinese. His great grandfather was a successful businessman from China who fought under the Spanish flag to defend Manila against the British. Therefore, he was awarded with a nobility title by the Spanish government and he changed his name from the Chinese family name of Sontua to the Spanish sounding family name of Tuason. That is only one example.

Because of the intricate and abiding connections of blood and geography, the Philippines and China grew to become more than good neighbors more than good partners and more than good friends. We are family—China and the Philippines are family.

We are family more than neighbors. But as neighbors, as neighbors, we look out for each other’s welfare and security. We are family more than partners, but as partners, we have strong ties across all levels and sectors—political, economic, social, cultural, people-to-people exchanges, and even twinning arrangements between cities and provinces.

Our speakers have talked about my ten visits to China over my last nine years as president. During my visits to China over the last nine years, many of which were in your company, I had the privilege of visiting many cities all over China and of meeting with the highest ranking officials including President Hu Jintao, Premiere Wen Jabao, and former President Jiang Zemin. And of course, we also had a very memorable State Visit to the Philippines by President Hu Jintao. Together, President Hu Jintao established as Ambassador Liu said, “A strategic and cooperative relation for peace and development.” President Hu and I, agreed that our relationship is going through a “golden age of partnership,” meaning, a period of prosperous endeavors and great promised.. how true that was indeed.

As Ambassador Liu has pointed out Bilateral trade has grown a hundred-fold since we established our relationship in 1975. From 20 million dollars to 3 billion dollars. And China therefore, is now our third largest trading partner.

China is also today one of the fastest growing sources of tourists for the Philippines, the tourism from China grows by an annual average of 43 percent since 2001. Our tourism officials are nodding in pleasure.

We also significantly contribute to each other’s development. You the Filipino businessmen have invested almost $3 billion in China.

Likewise, Chinese investments in the Philippines have also grown in the past decade. Highlighted two years, ago by China’s State Grid Corporation successfully forming with its local partners, the National Grid Corporation of the Philippines which manages the transmission line in our country. This investment from China State Grid will be 3.95 billion U.S. dollars. Thank you very much Ambassador Liu and China.

More than business partners, China has also become a development partner of the Philippines, by participating in our priority agriculture and infrastructure projects, for instance, the Philippines-Sino Center for Agricultural Technology in our number one agricultural province of Nueva Ecija and the Northrail Project, which are enhancing our country’s competitiveness as a place for doing business, and in turn attracting more investment and creating more jobs for our people.

During my time, an essential component of my foreign and economic policy has been to aggressively expand our trade and diplomatic relationships around the world. The expanded diplomatic and trade agenda we have forged in China is an outstanding case in point. I am proud that enhanced Philippines-China relations are a hallmark of my Presidency.

And I would like to think that even beyond my time, the Philippine will be committed to working with China to let our golden age of partnership flourish as a testament to the deep friendship between our countries and people.

I am proud that long before I entered politics or government with the Association of China Understanding, all the way to my career as politician, Senator, Vice President and now President, I have worked hard to establish a new and more dynamic relationship with China especially now to match China’s growing influence.

I may not be President anymore next month, next year, in the years to come. But as Congresswoman, in wherever else divine providence will bring me, let me assure you that I remain as committed as ever to promoting and further strengthening the solid partnership between our two countries.

So to all of you, Happy Philippines-China Friendship Day! Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 112th Philippine Independence Day and 35th Anniversary of the Diplomatic Relations between the Republic of the Philippines and the People’s Republic of China and the 9th Filipino-Chinese Friendship Day. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609075934/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=28026&Itemid=38