Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at a meeting with the Filipino community in Kuwait.

My fellow countrymen, good evening.

Thank you very much for being here tonight, even though you reported for work for several hours. I know today is a workday, right? But you came, and thank you very much, and thank you also to Ambassador Eric Andaya because I think all of your staff were on the phone this afternoon. Thank you very much.

I am happy for the country and the results of our trip.

I went to Kuwait to advance the foreign policy of the Philippines in our meeting with their king and their high officials, they were all there during lunch. It was there that it was discussed that our group should stay overnight and you should be invited tonight. The security of the country is very important for the development of our nation. Continuing to build a close alliance with Kuwait strengthens our security in our country.

Kuwait supports the peace process in Mindanao.

Another pillar of our security is economic stability – in attracting investment, creating jobs, and spreading opportunities for livelihood in every province of our great archipelago. For this, we are diligently working to encourage businessmen to invest in our country. We are pleased that the Kuwait Foreign Petroleum Exploration Company has entered into a joint venture in the search for oil and gas with Shell and South China Resources in an area of the sea northeast of Palawan.

The Philippines places great value on our responsibilities in the world, from supporting the imposition of safeguards by the International Atomic Energy Authority regarding nuclear power in the Middle East to all the efforts of the global community to strengthen the government of Iraq so that it can achieve lasting peace and prosperity. We firmly believe in our compromise as true citizens of the world, to promote human rights, economic development, and the security of nations for the peace of the world.

Along with our history of allies in Islamic countries, and a participant in our future. We must continue to work with them, and inform them of our major steps in the Philippines. You OFWs are our ambassadors every day in Kuwait. Thank you very much. (applause)

We value the contribution of our overseas workers to your sacrifice, your dedication to your work, your family and our country. But we are also proud that our economic reform ambitions are helping, you know to break the offshore cycle, and helping to support the economy which is now rising fastest in the last twenty years, our growth rate this year is 7.5 percent, the highest in 20 years. And the gains we are seeing now are preparing the way for the day when Filipinos will no longer have to go abroad for work. And the day when overseas work is just another career option and not the only choice that you have to earn a living. (applause)

We have created 6 million jobs in the last six years. And in continuing on this path, hopefully we will be increasing, be keeping our best and brightest, right in the Philippines close to family, close to friends, helping to build our communities and providing the next generation of leadership.

You are leading our agenda in Kuwait. We are proud of your contribution to our good name in the world. We were happy earlier to meet our hardworking OFWs at the new mall what is the name of the new mall, that one, which was just opened by their king. They said earlier, sleep well tonight, go shopping and meet with Filipinos.

In the mall, I saw there because I talked to Filipinos, there were so many Filipinos, and I had the opportunity to talk to them. And I see that many of you know my main purpose in coming here to Kuwait. (applause) Earlier in the mall, a Filipino asked me, “Is the result of your talks positive?”

I am happy to tell you the result is positive. (applause)

We had a positive and very fruitful meeting with their king this morning. We thank him for the very kind understanding and consideration he extended to our countrymen.

We are striving to protect your welfare. Just recently, we launched policy reforms regarding the sending of household service workers. The new policies include enhancing the skills of our workers, having an orientation course on the cultures and languages of different countries. Protecting, the mechanisms on how to protect the rights in the places where they work and obligating employers to bear the cost of deploying domestic helpers. And raising the minimum salary to a level commensurate with the skills learned.

Our administration has championed the increase in the minimum wage for domestic service workers, from $200 a month to $400 a month.

Since this policy began in December 2006, many initially protested but now we are seeing its benefits. For example, in Hong Kong, the number of Filipinos hired initially decreased, but now we see that most are returning even though the salary charge is higher.

Here in Kuwait, there is a noticeable increase in job orders for engineers, nurses and other skilled workers. The number of reported cases of maltreatment and runaway workers has also decreased.

In fact, just recently, I issued a directive to the DSWD, the DFA and the DOLE to review and change the mechanisms and services so that they can reach quickly, have ready access, and respond rapidly to OFWs who are experiencing severe hardships so that our OFWs will no longer be forced to take desperate measures.

For example, I said they should consider setting up toll-free hotlines and assistance groups. You Filipinos who have been here for a long time, you can even be leaders, even the assistance groups in areas where there are many OFWs like Kuwait. And these reforms we are making, especially the increase in the minimum wage, we have seen other labor-exporting countries like India and Indonesia are also following our example, and are now raising the required salary for their workers.

We know that many of you are concerned about the continued rise of the peso. On the one hand, this is a sign of a strong national economy and also provides many benefits such as less increase in gasoline and no increase in fares even though the price of oil in the world is increasing greatly. But we also understand your situation. Because of this, the government is taking appropriate steps to lower remittance fees. And we are also building a program that will help provinces with many OFWs who have low incomes. We are conducting a survey, where do our domestic helpers come from, which province. And those provinces, that's where we bring aid to the families of OFWs. That is our program to provide relief for the increase in the peso for our OFWs.

I see that our OFWs here are very aware of the news. First of all, you all know why I am here. Then you all know what happened last week.

Regarding the attempted coup last week, it is very clear that the actions of a few desperate people show that they are out of touch with the hopes and dreams of the average Filipino. Right, we ordinary Filipinos, what we want is political stability, a bright economic future, social justice. So these actions, these misguided men are sabotaging each and every one of these true aspirations of the true Filipino. Instead of building the country and working within our democratic process, their actions are like fuel for selfish motives for personal gain. But in the end, the rule of law prevailed. (applause)

The transgressors will not hold our nation hostage with impunity. They will be punished with the full force of the law. Justice shall be served and the interests of the people upheld.

What we need, and you know this in Kuwait, this is what I saw in your community when I was here in 2003, is unity, progress, peace and prosperity for all – these are our aspirations, and we will not stop in our advancement.

And again as I said to you in 2003, thank you very much for what you Filipinos here in Kuwait are doing for our country.

Thank you very much to all of you. Thank you again for attending on short notice. And merry Christmas to all of you! (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech During her Meeting with the Filipino Community in Kuwait. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135652/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2333&Itemid=38