Thank you very much to the officials and citizens of Nagbalayong in Morong, Bataan. Your concern for our sea turtles and the establishment of the Bantay Pawikan People’s Organization are commendable. This is a great help to the Pawikan Conservation Project.

We released the young turtles into the sea earlier. They will have a better chance of survival there, and we can be more confident in our conservation efforts. And in the long run, Filipinos now and in the future will benefit from the wealth of the ocean.

We also demonstrate our appreciation for the environment, which has become a pillar of our development framework.

Yesterday, we celebrated an important step in caring for our environment with the signing of our national budget.

Our budget reflects our values and policy priorities for investing in our people. We are allocating funds to things that will further advance our country. This is what we call the “Three E’s” – Economy, Education and Environment.

Every Filipino desires a good job, food on the table, good education for their children, and a healthy and clean environment with clean air, clean water, and clean land.

Today, we celebrate Environment Day in Bataan. Filipinos love our country. We need to be careful stewards of our natural environment. Our environment is a gift from God. We must not abuse God's creation. This includes a commitment to clean air, clean water, and a clean and healthy environment, free from toxic waste that could harm each and every one of us.

In the Environment, we will focus on:

Conservation – We need to beautify our villages and cities and rid them of trash; build more urban parks and recreation areas; purify our water and clean up industrial sites that are both unhealthy and aesthetically unpleasant. From our newly-approved budget that is allocating the biggest chunk to social services, we have set aside P 5 Billion for conservation activities from the DENR’s P 8 Billion total budget.

2) Energy independence – We need to tap alternative indigenous sources of power and energy, and we put a premium on green and renewable energy. We are veering away from imported fossil fuels whose prices are not only sky high, but also highly volatile. Our budget allocates P274.16 million to support the DOE’s efforts on energy resource development and utilization and conservation activities. The PNOC has its own billions of corporate funds for the development of New and Renewable Energy sources even as we work harder to convince investors to venture into the promising areas of solar, wind, geothermal and biofuel energy.

3) Reforestation – We will recover our lost forests through massive tree planting with the help of communities. The DENR budget sets aside P 300 million for reforestation. We have also convinced several countries like New Zealand to give their grants as reforestation projects. We have also directed PNOC to spend on forestation to recover the oxygen consumed by oil, which causes global warming.

4) The protection of our national parks and wildlife refuges is also high in our priority. We want to turn our coral reefs and beaches, the rice terraces — our contribution to the wonders of the world — as well as our mountain vistas and tropical forests into national parks and international sanctuaries for eco-tourism and scientific research. P 240 Million will be spent for protected areas, apart from what they can raise as gate receipts from holidaymakers. There are specific provisions for wildlife sanctuaries, including P 5 million for the Pawikan Conservation Project. I also direct that funds from the Philippine Tourism Authority be used for this purpose. Meanwhile, I brought a check as assistance for the livelihood of Sagip Pawikan to construct lodging rooms for tourists and marine biologists at this center.

While we have already accomplished much, there is still much to be done. We plan to work harder in the next two years until the end of my term in 2010 to fulfill our Philippine Reform Agenda. We need to and will, push for more reforms. We will champion the Economy, Education, and the Environment.

“Care for Nature — A Weapon Against Poverty” — this theme is fitting for our desire to combine education and the economy in the conservation of nature. Even the overflowing wealth of nature can easily be depleted with careless use. But if properly conserved, we will be further blessed with the seas, forests, and everything around us, and from these resources, millions of citizens today and future generations will rise from poverty.

For example, previously, many of you were collecting turtle eggs or catching turtles to sell, but now that you know the value of this creature, you are leading the way in its conservation. And you have also proven that your livelihoods will improve if you defend and help the turtle population grow instead of relentlessly pursuing its annihilation.

Nagbalayong is a good example of how conservation efforts can be turned into livelihood opportunities that can lift people up from poverty. Many thanks for your good example.

I expect you to continue this. I hope that all Filipinos will emulate your dedication in taking care of the environment as a fight against poverty.

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Nagbalayong is a good example of how conservation efforts can be turned into livelihood opportunities that can lift people up from poverty. Maraming salamat sa inyong magandang halimbawa.

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the Launching of the Giant Turtle Conservation Program. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123032/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1066&Itemid=38