Many thanks Secretary Cerge Remonde and our Press Secretary and our Cabinet Officer for Regional Development here in Region VII.

Many thanks also Governor Aumentado, thank you for the invitation and thank you for the Sikatuna Award. Our congressmen: Congressman Chatto, the chairman of Tourism in the House; Congressman Cajes, and Jane’s father and Congressman Jala, my colleagues and they greatly helped me with the important reforms in Congress, thank you also. Vice Governor Julius Herrera thank you for your welcome; our vice mayor here in Tagbilaran, Vice Mayor Veloso; our Bishop who plays a big role now in ensuring that peace will remain here in Bohol, Bishop Medroso. Mrs. Garcia, Mr. Cagaanan, our Cabinet members who are here today, and we have here Secretary Jing Lapus of Education, Secretary Duque of Health, and Secretary Esperon of the Presidential Management Staff aside from Secretary Remonde who introduced me, and all the officials here, our board members, mayors, all-all the barangay officials and all Boholanos: Happy Bohol Day to all of you!

Still, many thanks for the Sikatuna Award. This honor is truly pleasing because you recognize my desire to help make your place known as one of the most beautiful and progressive islands in the world.

As Edgar said, I am the only president who has visited every city here in Bohol. And every time I visit Bohol I always see here new projects that will bring benefit to the people. During my last visit to the youth to launch the Youth Commission program, I saw how the youth here love your environment. Congratulations! Jane and all the youth here.

The people of Bohol are always grateful for the various programs. And thank you for the Sikatuna Award, our mega projects are listed, a good souvenir of my service here in the province of Bohol.

Therefore, because you always recognize what we have done together with the national government, we will provide more programs to help you progress even further. (applause) It’s like the awarding in the past eight years of my administration, we revived the Bohol Irrigation Phase II. This is one example of the two million hectares nationwide of new and rehabilitated irrigation that we built during our administration. Some of them were built together with the private sector. This one we borrowed in order to build but because there were cost overruns we also had to finance it from our own taxation.

Because we made and expanded the Bohol Circumferential Road. This is one example of the infrastructure all over the country that our administration has completed. It is one example to show that compared to other administrations we built more infrastructure, including roads and also including airports of international standard. The preparations for the Panglao airport have begun so that more tourists will come here. One benefit of my visits to the provinces on the occasion of my visits to the staff work that needs to be done before I arrive, we always have updates on our projects, big projects and important projects.

And I asked Secretary Mendoza, who was with us last night, what has happened, how is our Panglao Airport project. The land has been purchased, Governor, it is complete. And the detailed engineering is now finished, the detailed engineering and its final costing now need to go through NEDA to be approved and NEDA to approve the project cost, the final project cost. So it needs to go through the Investment Coordination Committee and the NEDA Board and the timetable of Larry Mendoza is to expedite the passage through the Investment Coordinating Committee so that a technical evaluation of the costing can be done.

Well, Larry Mendoza was supposed to say this next week at the NEDA Board. Ah, not next week, the first week of August because next week is for the ICC, the first week of August for the NEDA Board. But I won't be here during the first week of August because I have an official visit to the White House. So I told Larry Mendoza I don't want this project to be like that. So Vice President de Castro will preside over the NEDA Board so that even without me, the final stage of the Panglao project can be approved.

They also mentioned during the awarding to me that we built RORO (Roll-on/Roll-off) ports so that cars can connect Bohol to Camiguin, to Cagayan de Oro, to Cebu, and even to Southern Leyte, right Governor? Because of the facilities and because there are many of your tourists. You are one of the favorites of our tourists, even our Boholanos in America and other parts of the world. More people came this year.

Why did we do all these infrastructures, because through improved financial condition, to our improved national financial condition — thanks to the support of our Boholano congressmen — we were able to put up the infrastructure which added to your natural hospitality of the people of Bohol. We developed tourism in the Philippines from 1.8 million visitors in 2004 to 3.14 in 2008 when tourism became a five billion-dollar industry. They say in other countries, because of the world economic crisis, there are countries, leading tourism destinations before, that are no longer that high, tourism has gone down. But here in Bohol, tourism is up 15 percent. Congratulations!

At Amorita where I slept last night, the owner said that because it's supposedly the lean season now, the rainy season, they were supposed to give vacation to some staff. But because of the many tourists, they brought back their staff from their vacation. So I asked them, do you have room for expansion? Yes, they are expanding now more than double their present capacity. Investors are really coming, not just to Amorita but also to various places where there are touristic attractions and various other industries and agriculture here.

But because I always come here, even when I was still a senator, before I was elected, I haven't forgotten that the progress happening in your province wasn't like this before. I can't forget here in our cultural center, our hearing for our development in Bohol. I was the chairman of the Committee on Trade and Industry. Oh, Secretary Yap just arrived. Hello! Arty. Arty Yap, our Secretary of Agriculture.

And during that time, Bohol wasn't yet that progressive but you already had a dream. It's a great honor for me that even as a senator, I already knew what you needed, what your dreams were, what your vision was, so now that I've become president, we are united in believing, in realizing these visions for Bohol.

We probably haven't forgotten in 2001, when I first entered as president, Bohol was included in the ten poorest provinces in the country. For many decades, you were disturbed by the rebels. Governor Aumentado saw — you were a congressman before, right? — that poverty exacerbates rebellion and the rebels bring greater poverty to the people. So he intentionally aimed to cut the chain of poverty and rebellion.

The combination made by your officials here together with our soldiers — terrific partnership between the local government and our armed forces. The strong fight against armed groups while implementing projects to improve communities is the reason why the support of the people for the rebels decreased because they felt the progress due to the programs. So in 2005, the province was freed from the rebels. The small groups that remained were happily hiding in the mountains of central Bohol. And this model of peace and development of Bohol has in fact been touted as the lesson for the model of peace and development in all provinces of the country.

That award that was given earlier to SPIN, that is the Rebel Returnee Program of the DTI, a terrific partnership between the DTI and the Armed Forces, so we can ask Aster… Colonel… Aster. And it is a peace and development program for rebel returnees that is patterned after the peace and development concept of the province of Bohol now spread out throughout Region VII and even in other parts of the country. Thank you for your example.

In reaching peace, development immediately followed. Thus, in 2006, you were already removed from the list of the ten poorest provinces, Bohol is now middle-class. Middle-class and perhaps when the airport is finished, when the new investments in tourism are finished, many tourists will come—not maybe—perhaps the day will surely come that Bohol will in fact be one of the ten richest provinces in our country.

I am proud of Bohol, Bohol is one of the best examples of areas with the fastest progress under this administration. Therefore, you can be assured of my support for our dreams for Bohol. (applause) We worked together when I was still a senator in planning for these dreams and now we are working together again in implementing our dreams for our beloved Bohol.

And with your support for me that has always been there since I ran for senator in 1992, in my reelection in ‘95 where I became number one, in my landslide victory in ‘98 as vice president, for my senators in 2001, for my presidency in 2004 in the election where I won here in Bohol with the largest majority in the entire country, for our senatorial candidates in 2007, with your constant support for me. Thank you very much.

I love Bohol. Thank you. Happy Bohol Day! to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 155th Bohol Foundation Day Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412100651/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25715&Itemid=38