First of all, upon my arrival here, it seems unbelievable that this is the place in Payatas closest to the dumpsite. The environment is so beautiful now. Congratulations to all of you. As Mayor Sonny Belmonte said, the engineers who came here were very surprised because life here is not what they imagined it to be in the past regarding Payatas. That was our mountain. But if you go here now, life is no longer that bad. Especially now that you have water, life is more comfortable. And as Mayor Sonny Belmonte said, the reason why foreign engineers visited here was to go underneath so that the air here would not be so poisonous. And in that way, your health will be better, fewer people will get sick. The same result will come from having water lines from good and clean pipes. Because Congressman Mathay recounted that in the past, you used to fetch water and buy water. And it reminded me of other countries that go to war over water. Here, you were even fighting with different people when getting water, because of the little water and the distance. All day, instead of working, you went to fetch water. Now that the water is here, it goes to your homes, you have time to earn a living, and you pay much less for the water.

We were discussing this earlier and I asked a family here, how much did they pay for the water they bought in the past? How much will they pay now for the water that comes to their home? In the past, some families paid P750.00 per month, now only P40.00 per month.

You know, it is a good thing that the owner of Maynilad is not the government. Because when the government owned MWSS, the government was the one making the water lines. It doesn't know how to do business. The government knows how to run a town, a city, a barangay, but it doesn't know how to run a business. That's why MWSS was always losing money, had no money to put in places like yours until it was sold to the private sector when you got water lines. That is the benefit of our system of private and free enterprise. So when someone comes here, you will hear them on television rallying, saying that privatization is bad for the country. Maybe you can answer that privatization has been good for your community. So help defend this policy of our government.

That's why I am happy because this is proof that our economic policies are truly helping the poor. So you are witnesses, or if someone criticizes our economy, you have benefited from our policies here. So let's help each other. Help defend the policies of the government. Help explain that your lives have become more comfortable because of the policies we are implementing. Help implement and help explain that all of this helps the poor. Like the poor here in the promised land, the poor in Payatas, the poor in Quezon City, the poor throughout the Philippines.

Thank you very much and congratulations to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech During her Visit at Payatas Quezon City. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212035/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8766&Itemid=38