Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you very much, Secretary Roque for your introduction of me. And thank you also Ambassador Villamor for your welcome remarks earlier.

And with us are some of the officials of our government in our delegation. I will mention those who are here on our stage. First of all, of course, our Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Secretary Bert Romulo, the boss of Ambassador Villamor; next to Secretary Romulo is Secretary of Trade and Industry Peter Favila; and next to him is the Secretary of Agriculture, Secretary Artie Yap; and here also is our Secretary of Agrarian Reform, Secretary Naaser Pangandaman. Two presidents have appointed Muslims to full cabinet positions — President Diosdado Macapagal and President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo. Well, you all know Secretary Roque, he was the one who introduced me and next to him is our Press Secretary, Secretary Cerge Remonde; and we want to greet — we all greet — all of you – the leaders of the Filipino Community here in the Eastern Province, Mary Jane Tupas, congratulations! And our other leaders of the Filipino Community and our Bagong Bayani Awardees. And our youth of the Filipino Community who are very good singers. We want to meet your parents later because you are very good, we want to congratulate them also aside from you. And to all of you, because today is Eidl Fitr Eid Mubarak,

Thank you very much for attending. My fellow Kapampangans, thank you very much for your support. You are many. To those from the Visayas and Mindanao, thank you for coming; my brothers and sisters, good evening to all of you.

We are really very happy, I am very happy to be able to come again here in the Eastern Region. I didn't expect that as Mary Jane said, I am the only president who has visited here and twice at that and I think, that is natural because if we say that the largest Overseas Filipino Worker Community is in Saudi Arabia, one-third of that is here in the Eastern Province – 400,000 of you. As Ambassador Villamor said – “and growing”. I remember when I last visited here in Dammam, one of the things I was working on was to have more Filipino workers there during their construction of …. 2, and it seems to have been fulfilled. That's why the Filipino Community here has grown even larger.

This trip here, as I said it’s always a pleasure to be with the Filipino Community in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and here in the Eastern Province.

Our trip here is an important part of our overall strategy to engage the global community for the benefit of our economy, for the benefit of you, our Filipino Overseas Workers and for the benefit of our national security.

That national security, Saudi Arabia has a big help in achieving lasting peace in Mindanao. Because it is the leader of Muslim countries, Saudi Arabia has a big influence on the views of other Muslim countries. And Saudi Arabia has been helping us for a long time to continue the implementation of the ceasefire agreement in Mindanao. It also has a big help in urging rebel groups to return to negotiations.

They designated a Saudi Fund before I became President for our projects for peace in Mindanao. But our administration was able to use it, and Naaser, right? One of their big projects was the road there in Camp Abubakar – that Camp Abubakar, that was the camp of the MILF, when we had peace talks, we built a good road there and funded by the Saudi Fund.

And also, Naaser mentioned in his province Lake Lanao, that… because, I remember my father saying that Lake Lanao is more beautiful than Lake Geneva. And one of his projects was to build a road around Lake Lanao but he started it, now we are completing it through the Saudi Fund as well. All of this is help for our peace in Mindanao.

Regarding you, the protection of our Overseas Filipinos. That's why I'm visiting to see your aspirations, your concerns and earlier the two resolutions I received were—one of them expresses gratitude because we are providing Professional Licensure Examinations.

Actually, when the global economic crisis started last September, last year, I announced that we would send Professional Licensure Examinations, but your community also requested that it be postponed until November this year so you would have time for your review. And the resolution I received says if I can make this annual. Now and even beyond my term so I said, Ambassador Villamor, draft me an Executive Order making this annual and also directing the Philippine Professional Regulatory Commission to include it in their budget annually.

The other resolution requests an embassy on wheels. So I said to Secretary Romulo, “they are asking for an embassy on wheels”, he said, “that’s possible”. But of course, I said “that means the budget is needed”. So “that’s possible too,” said Secretary Romulo and they will talk with Ambassador Villamor.

Because Saudi Arabia is the largest Overseas Filipino Worker Community in the world, you are always the number one agenda when visiting here.

What Mary Jane and many of you mentioned, saying “welcome back”, means we met before. My visit here in Al Khobar, Dammam and Dharan was part of my state visit to Saudi Arabia. And during that state visit, I think the most important thing I did was the king granted amnesty to 700 OFWs who were in jail.

In fact, many of them went home with me so I returned on two planes, not one because the other plane was full of Overseas Filipino Workers. You all know the law here right? There's public crime, there's private crime. So it’s okay, “no problem”, they said they can forgive the public crime, but the private crime is a bit difficult because you still have to talk to the victim’s parents. I was very grateful for that to Prince Muhammad, the governor of the Eastern Province.

Earlier we had a meeting, he met me at the airport and this is what we talked about. Because before, of the 700 who were pardoned by the king, some of them needed to talk to the family about the private crime. And it was fulfilled. And as I said, Prince Muhammad is doing a great job fulfilling things. Maybe you know the history of Sarah Dimatera, for example, she was already there, right? She was already on death row when we had a state visit here. But the important thing was the forgiveness of the victim’s family. And Prince Muhammad worked hard to convince their relatives, family and finally, she was able to return home, she was also pardoned, right Nitoy?

And that wasn't the only thing Prince Muhammad did, he institutionalized it, he created a Reconciliation Committee, a big help was the Reconciliation Committee established by Prince Governor composed of Outstanding Religious men to help persuade the families of murder victims in the Eastern Province to forgive the perpetrators. And he told me that what he sees, at least so far, they have 80%… average, so he is very happy and I hope you don’t mind, on behalf of all of you, I thanked him, for what he gave.

Secretary Roque told me that our Filipino Community Organizations here in the Eastern Province, you are united. And you are always ready to help with the programs and services of the embassy and POLO. Thank you very much for your help to our government.

According to Nitoy, here in the Eastern Province, you can find the most stable Filipino organizations.

He said all year round, right Nitoy? All year round, you have projects and above all these projects support our administration's programs.

So thank you very much for your concern for your family, your work and your country.

Regarding the country, your remittances contribute greatly to the continued development of the Philippines and I know, this is the result of sacrifice, because you are looking for work, you are working wherever you can find work – in faraway places — through unknown people and different cultures and sometimes, lonely and difficult jobs. That is why we are working to create jobs with good salaries in our country. So that, going abroad will be a career choice only and not the only choice for a hardworking Filipino.

With your help and as a result of our reforms, we have weathered the storm of the global economic crisis. We’ve been resilient because we’ve been prepared, and we were prepared precisely because we’ve made very tough decisions several years ago to reform our banking system, to raise new taxes, oh dear! that was very unpopular, but to take the proceeds of those taxes to invest, invest, invest in our people to make our economy more competitive.

And as a result of that, last year, while the whole world, oh! not the whole world, two-thirds of the world was experiencing a recession, our private construction increased by 17%. Why? The large expansion of middle and low income housing and many of that housing were bought by our Overseas Filipino Workers. Thank you.

Even mining increased by 16% and the Business Process Outsourcing or Call Center Industry has grown and grown — from 5,000 workers in 2001, it’s now reaching 500,000 workers.

This is because we are constantly modernizing our infrastructure. Perhaps those of you who have recently returned and are living in the north have already passed through the new NLEX and SCTEX; our highways are so beautiful. It’s so fast to go to Pampanga, Clark, Tarlac, Pangasinan, and Baguio. And of course, also our high productivity and the language skills of our Filipinos.

Even government consumption increased because we raised the salaries of government employees. And of course, a major reason why we are resilient, as I said earlier, is the remittances from you.

You know, the experts say that because two-thirds of the world is having a recession, they say that overseas remittances, especially many from America, I mean, although you are the biggest Overseas Filipino worker population, the biggest overseas Filipino population is in America. And they’re very deep in recession. So the experts say the Philippines is lucky if the growth of remittances will be flat, the same as last year, but it might even decrease. But it didn’t decrease, it wasn’t flat, it actually increased and remittances will be a record this year.

So you have defied, our remittances have still defied expectations, it didn’t decrease, it didn’t stand still, it’s also a record, thank you very much.

I just came from London, and a good piece of news we received there is that The Economist and the UK Trade and Investment Office said that the Philippines is one of the top emerging markets for investment right now.

The Philippines is included there, along with Saudi Arabia. Because Saudi Arabia wasn’t hit by the recession, right? It’s also stable. And it’s not just stable because Saudi Arabia is very rich, has a lot of oil, and the people here decide quickly and there are also many investment opportunities. So we will be meeting with some interested companies that will invest in the Philippines, both here in the Eastern Province and in Jeddah. Because they are interested. But now, with the crisis, there is a difference in interest and what will result in a decision. A Saudi Investment Mission even went to the Philippines, and we were very happy. It turned out they visited ten places because they have something like semi-finalists in their analysis. Then, they visited – like a beauty contest, there are semi-finals but they will be interviewed and not everyone will be chosen, there will be finalists, there will be a winner. So, the investment mission from Saudi Arabia is choosing from ten countries and perhaps only five at most will actually be visited, so it’s important that we are among the finalists and important that we are among the winners, so that is also one of our purposes for this visit – to follow up and make sure that whatever their doubts are, wherever they are uncomfortable – with the process, with the policies, we can answer them so that their investment in the Philippines will be finalized.

But even though that is a major reason for our visit here, above all, the most important purpose is your welfare.

The appreciation for the sacrifices of our Overseas Filipino Workers is a large part of our term, and I sincerely thank you all for the support you give to our efforts to truly develop our country. And rest assured that just as we respond to your resolutions, from your resolution last time and the resolution now, we fulfill when you ask for something reasonable – your requests are reasonable, the government will always help to improve the welfare of our Filipinos here in this very important second home of yours, Saudi Arabia. (applause)

Thank you very much to all of you.

because we have been prepared. We were prepared precisely because we made very tough decisions several years ago to reform our banking system, raise new revenues (very unpopular), and take those proceeds and invest, invest, invest in our people and the competitiveness of our economy.

The significant increase in private construction – 17% — is due to the surge in middle and low-income housing; mining increased by grew by 16.% and the business process outsourcing industry grew from 5,000 employees in 2001 to about 500,000, in large part due to our efforts to continually modernize our infrastructure and the high level of productivity and English language skills of our workforce; even government consumption increased because we raised salaries in the government; and of course, the growth of remittances from you, our overseas workers, which are very important to our economy, have still defied expectations: they said it would decrease or stagnate, but it still reaches record levels. Thank you very much.

There are also many opportunities for investment from Saudi Arabia. That's why I have a meeting with several companies interested in investing in the Philippines. Their interest should result in actual investment. Last year, an investment mission from Saudi Arabia went to the Philippines. But they visited about ten countries for comparison. We need to be one of those chosen.

Above all, the appreciation for the sacrifices of our workers, both inside and outside the country, is a large part of our term. I sincerely thank you all for the support you give. Rest assured that I will always help to improve the welfare of Filipinos working abroad. Thank you very much, and long live the Filipinos in Saudi Arabia!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during a meeting with the Filipino community. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134400/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26267&Itemid=38