Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 2001 Educators’ Congress

[Delivered at Manila Midtown Hotel, Malate, Manila, April 23, 2001]

I am very happy to be here with all of you today. I feel quite at home in this gathering because I was a teacher too for many years. I taught at the Ateneo, the University of the Philippines, Maryknoll, St. Scholastica’s. When I joined the government in 1986, I tried to teach for one more year, but the long hours in government, 16 hours a day, compelled me to give up my teaching load. However, my joining in the government paved the way for my entering in the government afterwards, paving the way for my becoming President of the Philippines; so that now, even if I am not a teacher, I can have a chance to be with my former fellow teachers once again. So I’m glad to be here with you.

When I took my oath of office as President last January, I said, we must be bold in our national ambitions, so that our challenge must be that within this decade, we will win the fight against poverty.

To make this happen, we must recognize that the world our students will inherit is truly a new economy, where capital markets and information and communications technology or ICT are forces that create both peril and opportunity.

To address the perils, we must give a social bias to balance our economic development plan in the form, among other things, of safety nets for globalization.

The best means for reducing poverty and providing safety nets for sectors affected by globalization is through investments in education and training. In this people power administration, we must invest in the increasing quality of basic education, especially in science and mathematics.

As we do so, we must equalize access and expand the opportunities of the poor to acquire the kind of education they want. We have piloted early childhood development so that children from poor families are not disadvantaged when they enter first grade. We must find the means so that these pilot projects can be expanded and eventually implemented on a national scale.

As for higher education, this must be led by the private sector. Instead of government subsidies, which because of the huge budgetary deficit we have inherited shall remain modest, we must start thinking in terms of educational loan programs that entry into colleges and universities is not determined solely by family incomes.

To tap the opportunities of the new economy, I have formed a cabinet cluster on information and communications technology which includes the Department of Education, Culture and Sports. Technology, especially ICT, is what will create the high-wage jobs of the future and raise the quality of life of every Filipino.

That is why your adopted theme, “Learning Through ICT”, is a laudable step which is in line with the government’s thrust to develop the Philippines as the knowledge center of Asia.

We can increase the impact of ICT in our country’s economy by focusing on three areas of concern: physical infrastructure, policy and legislation, and human resource development.

On physical infrastructure. One of the country’s disadvantages is the lack of telecommunications infrastructure to support high-speed productivity at relatively low rates so that ICT use can expand to include a greater majority of ordinary Filipinos, and thus, spur the growth of the domestic IT market. Of course, that one is the work of the Department of Telecommunications and Transportation.

On policy and legislation. Government and the private sector must work together in order to come up with a policy framework that will be conducive to the growth of the ICT industry, and that will be responsive to new ways of employment and commerce that are evolving. Of course, that is the work of Congress.

But on human resource development, which is your work, the demand for technology savvy knowledge workers has increased as ICT continues to penetrate and transform the organization of markets and the workplace. This poses an enormous challenge to all educational institutions to be able to adapt both the content and the method of training that you provide in order to prepare your students for the digital economy.

I am not talking here only of computer literacy but the development of higher cognitive skills such as abstracting, planning, critical thinking and problem-solving, the digital workplaces of today, the knowledge workers comparative advantage does not simply lie in his word processing skills or his ability to do broadsheets, but in his ability to think strategically in a complex, highly dynamic environment.

Clearly, there is a purely technical imperative for bringing ICT into the classroom. The essence of E-learning, however, is developing critical, creative and strategic thinking through exchange and collaboration. The potential of ICT to enhance learner efficiency, effectiveness and engagement is enormous. E-learning, therefore, will not only increase the productivity of basic literacy skills but also help improve the planning, problem-solving and analytical skills of the learner.

We have already taken the initial steps in bringing technology to the classroom and E-learning in Philippine schools. The government’s “P.C. for public high schools” program will bring computers to 1,000 public high schools in the country. This modest step is being complemented by various sector and private sector and civil society initiatives aimed at bringing the power of internet into Philippine schools.

Undoubtedly, much needs to be done. But I am confident that with the focus in infrastructure development, creating an enabling legal and regulatory environment, and of course, your work, which is human resource development, the Philippines can now begin earnestly preparing for the global new economy.

Philippine education is everybody’s business. In the matter of funding, it would not be difficult to seek partnerships in the communities, among education’s stakeholders, and even foreign assistance to bridge the so-called “digital divide.” Education is a top priority of your government.

Your leadership will give full support to developing Philippine basic education into one of the finest education systems in the world. When we achieve this, our dream of becoming Asia’s knowledge center will only be a few graduating classes away.

I know for a fact that as teachers, a great deal is expected from you. I am aware that your calling entails a lot of sacrifices inside and outside the classroom because I’ve been there. I’ve been a teacher.

Let me assure you, that as your President, I have the same concern for you as my father, President Diosdado Macapagal, who did his best to uplift your sector during his term. In the time of my father, he approved Republic Act 3665, which upgraded the salaries of high school supervisors and teachers; R.A. 4128, which provided assistance to provincial high schools; and R.A. 3881, which increased the pensions of schoolteachers.

Now, as your leader and fellow teacher, I will do everything within the powers of my office that you have reposed in me to uplift your financial standing.

I am sure you have already heard that to increase the take-home pay of public elementary and secondary teachers during the months that cash is badly needed to pay for your children’s tuition and other school needs, DECS has coordinated with the Department of Finance and the BIR to temporarily suspend the payroll deduction for withholding taxes. Hopefully, DOF and BIR will not post such great objections so that this scheme can take effect in May. This would increase the take-home pay for the affected month above the P2,000 threshold.

I am also happy to let you know that even outside the DECS community, our other cabinet members understand the need of teachers to be recognized for your work, which is not only education in the schools but also in the community.

I am happy, therefore, that even the Home Development Mutual Fund is finalizing the mechanics of a P1 B credit facility for teachers. This P1 B facility fund seeks to provide assistance for teachers for your short-term needs because, as know, you have all of these delays in the way that your pay gets to you.

In addition, DECS has been exploring ways and means to modernize your payroll system to address the problem of this delay in the payment of salaries as well as to check corruption. Among the measures considered is the use of automated teller machines through a bank chosen by the teachers of a particular school.

This checkless payroll system will minimize delays which have hampered the present system of delivering checks by mail. It will also insulate the system from “ghost teachers” and other forms of corruption. In the meantime, as I said, the Home Development Mutual Fund will try to help you make ends meet when that P1 B facility is worked out as far as the mechanics are concerned.

These, of course, are short-term measures. In terms of mid- and long-term measures, DECS is now designing a proposed new legislation to rationalize the salary structure for teachers. This initiative will be certified as a priority administration bill to rationalize the salary structure and tax exemptions of teachers to truly make teaching a professional career. The end-goal is a public school system with a professional corps so much so that when a 20-year old graduate becomes a teacher, she or he will have enough opportunity to move up the teaching career ladder, support a family after marriage, and by the time he or she retires at the age of 65, the education system would have optimized her or his accumulated creativity and experience. Under this legislation, we hope to make the salary structure in touch with inflation.

And pray with me, so that when Congress resumes, they will act on the five percent increase in salary that we are going to ask as part of the supplemental budget.

You are the molders of the minds, the intellect and the character and the ideals of our youth. You have in your hands the power to transform their future into a better and more progressive one. You are the role models for our people and perhaps, this is the reason why, of al sectors in our society, you have been chosen to help oversee the conduct of elections in this country.

You are looked upon by our people as moral, efficient, hardworking and trustworthy. People consider your character as unassailable, hence, the people look to you as the vanguards of the sanctity of the ballot, which they consider as the true expression of their will. No doubt some of your colleagues have even sacrificed their lives to ensure that the will of the people is not frustrated. This happened in past electoral exercises, we hope that it will not happen in this electoral exercise.

I have been told by some publishers, especially in Chinatown that so far, election violence and signs of election fraud had been much, much lower this elections than in the past. I hope that this will continue.

As teachers, I need not remind you that when you do your counting, you are I also supposed to be fair and non-partisan. As civil servants, I am supposed to remind you that you are not allowed to use your office to campaign for specific candidates. But as individuals, you can vote and I hope you will vote for the people power coalition candidates.

And, as in the past, I am confident that you will rise to the challenge of promoting and ensuring clean and peaceful elections on May 14th.

It is also my fervent hope that you will take advantage of the new learning opportunity that this conference is providing you on ICT. Take to heart the practical knowledge in ICT so that you may apply your knowledge in your teaching profession and pass it on to your students.

I hope that you will be effective advocates and great teachers of ICT as you go back to your respective workstations. May we, as a nation, be able to utilize ICT as a potent weapon in the fight against unemployment and poverty in our country.

I know many teachers in our country themselves are quite poor, and I hope that you, or at least your children will be able to find the great opportunities for employment, creativity in the new world of ICT. But for the next generation to be able to benefit from that, your generation, you, the teachers must first be the learners.

Thank you. Good luck and God bless all of us.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). Strong republic : selected speeches of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo . [Quezon City] : Philippine Information Agency.