Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the awarding ceremony celebrating the 100th anniversary of Far Eastern University (FEU).

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Secretary Lina, for your introduction.

I would also like to greet the various important guests as well as those from FEU today.

First of all, Chairperson Montinola and all the officials, teachers, students, and employees of Far Eastern University. I believe you are still celebrating a century of the university. And I am happy to be with you on that very day. I would also like to greet the mayor of Manila and all the officials of Manila, Mayor Lito Atienza. With Secretary Lina here are the various members of the Dangerous Drugs Board, including the one sitting on the right, the Executive Director of the Dangerous Drugs Board, Undersecretary Efren Fernandez, and also a member of the Dangerous Drugs Board as president of the National Youth Commission, Bambam Aquino.

Today is important for our fight against drugs, because today is the first anniversary of the Dangerous Drugs Board and the Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency. I said, let's celebrate the first anniversary, not in the office of the Dangerous Drugs Board or the Drug Enforcement Agency, let's hold the celebration in the University Belt. That's why we are here now. Because I want to emphasize that one of the important directives I gave to the Dangerous Drugs Board and the Drug Enforcement Agency is that they need to make the University Belt Drug-Free. This is included in what I call my four main objectives in our fight against drugs.

First, we want to cut off the supply of drugs. That's why raids continue, both in laboratories and on the streets, and I ordered that confiscated drugs be burned weekly after obtaining permission from the court.

So for your information, and if there are NGOs who want to watch every Tuesday is the day of burning confiscated drugs. The first Tuesday and the third Tuesday of the month are held here in Metro Manila and Region IV. On the second Tuesday and the fourth Tuesday of a month, the burning is held in remote regions. Last Tuesday, there was a burning here in Metro Manila. So the next burning here nearby will be held on August 19th. So the NGOs here, including student organizations, if you want to monitor our fight against drugs, you are invited there. To make sure that it is shabu that is being burned and not alum.

Secondly, I said that we should identify the areas where drug sales are strong. And included in the areas where drug sales are strong are the surroundings of schools. That's why that's one of the goals I stated. Let's make the University Belt drug-free. Help us, students and teachers of Far Eastern University.

Thirdly, I said, let's identify the big fish, the big bosses, the drug lords. And perhaps you've been reading that in the past six weeks, many big drug lords have been arrested, many drug laboratories have been dismantled. How much has been seized? Six billion pesos already, Efren? Six billion pesos worth in the past week. Even Congress itself is happy with the work done in the past six weeks. So I watched it on television, they said they are ready to allocate one billion a year to drug enforcement because they see results.

Because if I allocated one billion this year from the Lotto earnings of PCSO, it's already worth it. With one billion, not even that much has been spent, only about one hundred million has been spent, right Joey? With the one hundred million spent from the one billion allocation, six billion has already been confiscated along with their lords, so the funds we are providing are worth it. And this has not escaped the notice of even the Congressmen and Senators who like to criticize.

And fourthly, before the youth even use drugs, let's avoid it. Let's give them a warning so they avoid starting a drug habit. That's why the role of the youth is very important. The role of our students is very important.

That's why we want to do this and as I said at our celebration of the first anniversary of the Dangerous Drugs Board and Drug Enforcement Agency, I am here in the heart of the University Belt, at my favorite university, Far Eastern University. Perhaps you know that I have a loved one studying here in law school, right? They don't know, my son Dato.

That's why I am here — hey, not just because of that — but so that we can have a command conference, which is why our program is short, where I am participating because we will now move to a room where there will be a command conference with representatives of the university so that we can plan together how to make the university belt drug-free.

Happy Anniversary DDB. Happy Anniversary PDEA. And Happy Centennial again to Far Eastern University.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Awarding Ceremonies in Celebration of the Far Eastern University (FEU) Centennial Anniversary. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194753/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6517&Itemid=38