Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 2008 Sangguniang Kabataan (SK) National Congress

[Delivered at the Waterfront Cebu City Hotel, Lahug District, Cebu City, Cebu, October 30, 2008]

Thank you so much Jane, for your introduction and thank you so much to all of you– leaders and members of the SK who are here today.

Congratulations on the best attended SK Convention in history! (Applause) And thank you to all who signed your manifesto of support for our administration. (Applause)

We have here with us today leading officials of the Philippine government and the Cebu government: we have Secretary Cerge Remonde, who is our Cabinet Officer for Regional Development of Region VII; (Applause) we have one you can identify with, very young acting mayor of Cebu City, Mike Rama; (Applause) we have Raul del Mar (Applause) who is the host congressman of this district where you’re having your convention; and we have Secretary Gabby Claudio, my adviser for Political Affairs, (Applause) the SK relations are part of his jurisdiction; and we have our NYC Chairman Richard Nalupta, himself an SK alumnus. (Applause)

I would like to greet the officials who are here in the head table: Secretary General Marco, (applause) Vice-President Miranda, (applause) Vice-President Gumban, (applause) and Vice-President Lumanog. (Applause)

And we should have a special welcome for the biggest delegation, the delegation of Pangasinan. (Applause) And a special congratulations for all those who organized this event because Jane said that you did not get a professional event organizer. This event was organized by youth leaders from different parts of the country, congratulations!

(Applause)

Indeed, the way you have organized this event reflects your choice of the conference theme: “Transform Leadership, Transpire Action, Transcend Competence.” And indeed, times call for strong decisive leadership.

We have been working tirelessly to address challenges arising from the slowdown in the global economy combined with high oil and food prices. We have succeeded in ensuring that our country’s food supplies remain stable and we put food on the table for every Filipino.

In terms of oil, the high price of gasoline and everyday commodities hits our poor the hardest. While the price of oil is a global issue and outside the control of government–when oil was going high up in the world market in price, we introduced measures to lift the burden off our people. Several months ago, we cut the tariff from three percent to two percent when the crude price went to 86 dollars, to one percent when it went down to 92 dollars, and to zero percent when it went up to 104 dollars. We have also been providing targeted cash payments to the poorest of the poor to help them cope with their electric bills.

Now that the price of oil is going down in the world market, on my way here upon landing, I talked to Secretary Angie Reyes of Energy, who just arrived from a conference abroad. I said, Angie, the price of oil is going down. We must do something to convince — since we have a free enterprise economy and we can’t force businessmen to make decisions unless there’s an emergency — we must find a way to convince the oil companies and the gasoline stations to bring down the price of gasoline faster, and that’s what he is going to work on. But many things are left to be done.

We work hard to fulfill our Philippine Reform Agenda. We fight for the Economy, Education and the Environment.

And you the SK are important to this agenda because you represent the young, and we are in fact a young nation. Our people are young — you represent those who are under 30 years of age and you make up more than half of the population. We are a young nation — our democracy is just 60 years old. The growing pains are still with us. We are a young nation — our heart is young. We love life. We sing. We dance. We love sports but our minds are also young. We love innovation and technology. We are young because we are true citizens of the world. We can keep up with change. We’re part of the rapid pace of change that is taking place around the globe. In fact, we are on the cutting edge of the global workforce.

And so on this occasion — of the best attended SK Congress in our history, organized by you yourselves not by any professional — I call for a Vision for a Young Nation. It is you, the youth of this nation who have the energy to make your dreams come true. And as SK, you have a share in the internal revenue allotment so you have the means to make your dreams come true.

It is now time for you, the young generation to get involved in civic life, as the SK is involved in civic life, and to take action and take responsibility for your own fortunes.

You belong to the SK system. You can work within the system to make a better world. Use the tools afforded to you by government; meaning, your budget and the local government. The tools accorded you by your family; meaning, your education. The tools afforded you by the nation. On the tools afforded to you by your family (your income, your family incomes), the tools afforded to you by your nation (the educational and career opportunities) — use these tools to become doctors, lawyers, farmers, healthcare workers, leaders in high tech and clean tech and many other noble professions.

The vision we have of a young nation must include creating high-paying jobs right here at home, not just abroad. We love and value our expatriates. We honor their service and their sacrifice. Yet, we must work for a day, a day when you will be at your peak when a job abroad is a career choice and not the only option available to a hardworking Filipino. In addition to jobs at home, we must build a new quality of life that keeps you our young people here that keeps our nation young and beautiful like you the majority of its people.

So, it is to you, the next generation that I ask to join me in a ‘Green Philippines’ campaign. What is the meaning of this ‘Green Philippines’ especially for our young? We must take back our forests and replenish fallen trees with new, protected forests to protect our land and our people. That is for you who live in the mountain areas of the country. We must reforest that land and bring back the beauty of the Philippines we all love and want. We want to tap the enthusiasm of young and old alike to clean our environment. For you who come from areas with no forest because you’re in the urban areas — we need to beautify our trashy barangays and cities. We need to build more urban parks and recreation areas. We need to purify our water. We need to clean up unhealthy and eyesore industrial sites. Some of these need to be done by the national government and the regulators but some of them can be done by the youth especially the SK.

As part of our ‘Green Philippines,’ we want an energy-efficient nation, free from reliance on costly and exhaust-spewing cars and smokestacks — that is for our regulators. We can harness our sun, wind and geothermal resources and produce our own clean fuels. Again, to do geothermal power, solar power, wind power — that is for the business community. But we can also produce clean fuel through biofuels and rely less on foreign suppliers. And SK can plant the materials for biofuels. We need the will of the people to encourage the political leaders to embrace this new clean, green Philippines. And you represent the majority of our people.

This is a perfect time to devote ourselves to ‘Green Philippines’ programs because Congress has passed legislation on the development and promotion of renewable energy sources which I will soon sign into law.

We want to turn our coral reefs and beaches, the wonder of the world, into national parks and international sanctuaries for eco-tourism and scientific research. The proclamation will be done by the national government. The scientific research will be done by the science professionals but promoting eco-tourism is something that can be done by the young in the SK.

We have the chance to develop our nation right from the start: clean, healthy, productive and beautiful. And I hope you, our young people today, you our SK will be part of this ‘Green Philippines.’ And your terms are… what? How long is it going to be, three years, five years? Three years. Let’s try to make this happen within the three years of your term. These are just a few ideas because you the SK can provide your own ideas when you start thinking of what projects you should do. But I call on you our youth to respond to this call to bring to action new innovative thinking on land management, on care for our environment and ways to create jobs and have a clean, socially responsible environment policy.

We need to get beyond the era of “either/or thinking” on the environment. We must embrace change and be bold in creating a ‘Green Philippines’ that is both green and economically successful. The Philippines can become a model of environmental stewardship within ten years. In ten years you will be at your prime — you will be the leaders not only of your communities but of the nation. And if you begin this ‘Green Philippines’ now you will have a much easier time being a leader of the nation in ten years from now. That is why we need your help to move that vision forward.

I have strong faith in our youth. I have strong faith in our SK. I know you will not shirk from these challenges. I know you will not neglect your country and abandon your future.

And so, what I would like to do in order to encourage you to be able to allocate your SK funds into this ‘Green Philippines’ campaign, some of which I have already given examples of, I will give a fund to the SK of 10 million pesos (applause) as equity in the projects that will be approved by your council.

To all of you, Congratulations! Best wishes on your National Congress!

Thank you. (Applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 2008 Sangguniang Kabataan (SK) National Congress. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134824/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1712&Itemid=38