Many thanks, Mayor Tony Osmeña for your kind words today and thank you for hosting here in Cebu City our Team Unity proclamation rally.

Thank you also to Governor Gwen Garcia, to all our brothers and sisters, officials of Cebu, our various congressmen who are here now to give their support to our Team Unity here in the city of Cebu, Raul Del Mar and Tony Cuenco. From the province, Neri Soon Ruiz is here, Sim Kintanar is here, Eddie Gullas is here, Red Durano and we also have other various guests from the other areas of the Philippines. We have Congressman Mitos Magsaysay from Zambales, the daughter-in-law of Vic Magsaysay; and we have Governor Jericho Petilla of Leyte; our officials from the City of Cebu, Vice Mayor Rama and all our councilors, our leaders in the barangays, all our brothers and sisters, first of all, as Tony Osmeña said, many thanks for the landslide victory you gave me in the last election.

And many thanks because you served as host for my inauguration. Many thanks also for your hosting of the Malacañang sa Sugbo. And many thanks for all you have done to make the events of the ASEAN Summit here in Cebu successful and very important.

Now, with your continued support, I believe that this election in May is for the future and not just for the past.

The election should really be about new perspectives and not about old complaints. And it should be about our fight to strengthen the nation and not just about fighting. I thank you all not only the governor and other… The congressmen, the mayor, the city mayors, the municipal mayors, all officials and everybody. And I ask you this time again help us. We will focus on the national agenda that includes more jobs, stable prices, peace and order.

We will work to expand education and health care.

We will take action to develop a green Philippines agenda to improve our environment and beautify our communities.

And we hope that with your continued support, we can ensure that the benefits of the new economy reach all areas throughout the Philippines and not just Metro Manila. Therefore City Mayor of the City of Cebu, city mayor of our various cities in Cebu, our Campaign Spokesman Ace Durano, our municipal mayors and our congressmen, our barangay officials, all officials and our people throughout Cebu, city and province, our candidates:

First, former Senate President, The Splendor of Life in Ed Angara’s Nine-point Agenda;

Next, a pillar of justice for the people, a pillar of democracy, that is why we call him the People’s Dragon, If You’re Bad, You’re Finished! Joker Arroyo;

The hope of the youth, champion of housing here in Cebu City itself, ‘Tol’ Mike Defensor;

Next, governor, striving to strengthen local governments, Magsaysay is our Guy;

The Cebuano that we will rely on who will be the promoter of the future of our culture and tourism, Cesar Montano;

The champion of women, not only a champion of women, but a champion of teachers and students, Senator Tessie ‘TAO’ Oreta;

Also Cebuano, now a Cebuano from Mindanao, will become a champion of agri-business because we will plant Pichay in the Senate;

We will not reach a fiscal crisis because of his correct laws, Ralph Recto;

The champion not only of the local government but also of the farmers, is Chavit Singson;

Who among Cebuanos hasn't been admitted to the hospital named after his grandfather, Vicente Tito Sotto III?;

We need peace throughout the Philippines for the peace and progress of Muslim Mindanao, Kiram, the Sultan of Sulu and the family of our royalty;

And the future is young but has already accomplished much, the future of our energy, Mr. Biofuels, Zubiri! Zubiri! Boom! Boom! Boom!

Fellow countrymen, our Team Unity, which is pro-poor, pro-growth, and pro-modernization, asks for your help and support.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the ‘Team Unity’ Kick-off Proclamation Rally for Senatorial Candidates. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151509/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1884&Itemid=38