Thank you very much, Secretary Nasser Pangandaman, our CORD here in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao. Our various Cabinet members who are here. ARMM Governor Datu Zaldy Ampatuan, thank you very much for your words of welcome and support. Congressman Dilangalen and Mrs. Dilangalen, thank you also for attending this program that we will launch today from the national government. Mayor Sinsuat of Datu Odin Sinsuat, various government officials of national governments, as well as of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, those from the Datu Odin Sinsuat hospital, friends…

In June, we released P4 billion from the collection of Value Added Tax on oil. Two billion for paying the electricity of four million poor people. Maybe, Nasser, check if there are already recipients here of that check or their credit. These are those who buy less than one hundred kilowatts of power a month. One billion as a college scholarship or loan to 70,000 poor students. I hope, Nasser, you check if there are people from here who are receiving this scholarship loan. Half a billion loan to replace the engines of thousands of public vehicles with more fuel-efficient LPG-CNG or biofuel. Check that too, okay? And half a billion for the installation of fluorescent lights on roads, government offices, hospitals and other public places. Because if all the bulbs in the Philippines are replaced with fluorescent lights, we can save more than P2 billion. That’s why it’s important. Following the VAT proceeds, there is an additional P1 billion for paying the electricity of the poor. Half a billion for the elderly who are not covered by GSIS or SSS, and half a billion capital for housewives and family members of bus and jeepney drivers and conductors, and half a billion to increase the capacity and equipment of small hospitals in the province.

So now, we are launching this program, a half-billion peso program to increase the equipment and capacity of primary care hospitals to become secondary care hospitals that can perform simple operations, including Caesarean births. This comes from the funds collected from VAT from April to June. So here in Datu Odin Sinsuat, we chose to launch the program because we prioritize areas where there are more poor people who are most in need of care. Your province is among our priority provinces to be given more service to reduce poverty. In increasing the capacity of your hospital, we are investing in your people.

So for the Odin Sinsuat Hospital, this building will be fixed, the fence will be fixed, because your fence is wire, chicken wire. Okay. Barbed wire, not chicken wire. In fact, if it were chicken wire, that would be good. In Marikina, their fences are made of chicken wire for see-through visibility and it provides an X-ray view. Don't you have an X-ray? (Voice: None, sir) Laboratory diagnosis equipment, operating room, instruments, that’s what we will provide for you. So the check will be given to your regional secretary of Health of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao. Please witness, ARMM Governor Ampatuan and Congressman Dilangalen.

The sad irony of Mindanao as food basket is that Mindanao, aside from being a food basket, also has the highest hunger and malnutrition.

Fortunately, in the past months, hunger in Mindanao has decreased. After all, Mindanao has the largest field of high productivity, but Mindanao also has six or seven of the 10 poorest provinces in our country.

One of the reasons they give for this unfortunate fact is that the endless conflict has affected Mindanao for so many years. For decades, a comprehensive peace has eluded us, but I am proud the talks will soon resume, and we are on the threshold of peace. If we can truly move from arms to farms in Mindanao, we can give the gift of peace and prosperity to Mindanao and to the whole country. So I expect all of your help for peace and the success of our peace talks.

Typhoon Frank also had a big impact on lowering the standard of living here in ARMM and in neighboring provinces. Governor Sacdalan and I came from Makilala, flew here and we saw the flooded areas. So for calamities, we will allocate an appropriate amount.

Climate change is a key factor in increasing frequency and intensity of typhoons. Over the last 36 years, it cost the country 0.5 percent of the GDP. Our disaster management consists of mitigation, preparation, response and rehabilitation. And to address these four needs regarding disasters, the Cabinet and the Disaster Coordinating Council of ARMM will meet later, after this event, to expedite action for the recovery of this region from the disaster.

The dramatic surge in the price of fuel and food has created a global price crisis unseen since the Great Depression and the wake of World War II. The economic uncertainty moved like a mighty tsunami around the globe affecting every nation, rich and poor. We must continue to build and buttress bridges to neighbors, and strengthen ties with allies around the world to bring in the rice we need to feed our people.

Earlier, I was asking around – because I have been here in Mindanao since yesterday – how much rice costs in Mindanao, the common commercial rice, in General Santos. Mayor Jun Acharon said P32 to P35. That’s a good price, and Governor Sacdalan in North Cotabato, you said, Governor, P26, a very good price. Here in this area of ARMM, it’s a bit higher, but if it’s being fixed in other places, we can say that we have the world food crisis well in hand for now. We have done this with our farming program combined with more vigilance over prices, and greater sovereignty against price manipulation under the leadership of our rice czar, Arty Yap, who will probably be with us later at our Cabinet meeting.

But this morning, on the day of the launch of the VAT share for small hospitals, I congratulate the people of Odin Sinsuat, all of you, on having a larger and stronger hospital. The government will not abandon you, but the government also needs your continued support, as Zaldy said in his speech, you always provide for programs to help and lift the entire country out of poverty. So to all of you, congratulations! And (inaudible) hopefully, more of these small hospitals will be given the capacity with equipment to perform simple operations. To all of you, congratulations to Datu Odin Sinsuat Hospital!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). Speech of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo during the upgrading of Datu Odin Sinsuat Municipal Hospital. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412115820/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1600&Itemid=38