Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Brunei State Dinner

[Delivered on August 22, 2001]

I thank his majesty for the privilege of being here in your beautiful and prosperous country.

I thank his majesty for the warm welcome and gracious hospitality accorded to my delegation, and for the excellent arrangements made for the visit.

His majesty and the people of Brunei and the Philippines are continuously reinforced by frequent visits at the highest levels between our two countries. This is a tradition that is as old as many centuries. It dates back to the time of his majesty’s ancestors and mine.

One such visit was that of Rajah Lakandula, my ancestor and a descendant of Sultan Bolkiah V. Around the year 1575, Rajah Lakandula came to Brunei to visit his cousin Sultan Saiful Rajah.

Previous Philippine presidents have visited Brunei as well, and his majesty has visited the Philippines several times. I thank his majesty for receiving me in Brunei in 1995 when I was still a senator, and I cherish the times that I had the privilege of welcoming his majesty to manila when I was vice president.

Now, I come to Brunei again, this time as president and as your state guest. I come not only in the name of friendship and neighborliness but also to pay my respects to his majesty the sultan as the current leader of ASEAN. The original leader of BIMP-EAGA, as a member of the committee of eight of the organization of Islamic conference, as an economic giant, and as a benevolent host of overseas Filipino workers.

I am excited that my first ASEAN summit as head of state will take place in Brunei. Knowing that the Brunei government did an outstanding job hosting APEC last year, we are confident that Brunei’s hosting of the ASEAN summit this year will be just as spectacular.

ASEAN is especially important to my administration for two special reasons. One is our high hopes in BIMP-EAGA and the second is our anxiousness for the early conclusion of the code of conduct in the South China Sea.

On BIMP-EAGA, my delegation and I express our faith in his majesty’s leadership for the active revival of BIMP-EAGA, not only at a sub-regional level but also at a bilateral level. On the South China Sea, it gratifies me to know that Brunei agrees with the Philippines on the settlement of disputes in accordance with recognized principles of international law.

Your majesty, I thank Brunei for contributing to peace and development in the Philippines by being a member of the committee of eight charged by the O.I.C. to monitor peace and development in Mindanao. And I ask Brunei to be an advocate to help explain to the other O.I.C. members what we the Philippines is trying to do in Mindanao.

Your majesty, today, our two countries signed a memorandum of understanding on defense cooperation. I trust that the military cooperation provided for in this agreement will help to ensure peace in Mindanao. Hopefully, it will also lead to more collaboration in other areas such as fighting transnational crimes.

Your majesty, Brunei is a small country of 300,000 people but it is a petroleum giant. Tomorrow two Bruneian corporations and two Philippine corporations all associated with shell will sign two agreements. One for joint exploration and the other for training our people with regard to running our new gas pipeline. But the most welcome news I can bring home to our people is that his majesty is instructing his investment managers to study the petrochemical consortium proposed by the Philippines with a view to participating in the said consortium. Your majesty, my gratitude for this is boundless. This development is as important to my administration as Brunei’s 0 million budgetary support loan was to the administration of then president Corazon Aquino. Incidentally, with regard to that loan, I am proud to report that since the grace period has expired, our government is now religiously paying it back.

I am grateful to his majesty for acknowledging that there is plenty of room for expanding and deepening bilateral linkages. For instance, I understand that there is a proposed agreement on the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to income. This and other cooperative endeavors can be pursued in the forthcoming Philippine-Brunei Darussalam joint commission for bilateral cooperation, which is scheduled to be convened next year. Another bilateral linkage is the training that Royal Brunei Airways is doing for Cebu Pacific, the Philippines newest international airline.

Tomorrow another Philippine international airline, air Philippines, will sign an agreement for chartered flights between Brunei and the Philippines. This will certainly boost tourism between us.

Your majesty, I come also to express the gratitude of my people to Brunei for being a second home to 20,000 Filipino workers. For almost 50 years now, Filipino workers have been part of Brunei’s development. Brunei has been a benevolent and considerate host to the Filipino community.

And I thank his majesty for repeatedly acknowledging the contributions made by the Filipinos in Brunei and I am confident that my countrymen can continue to count on Brunei’s open doors in the years ahead. One indication of this continuing benevolence is the agreement mentioned by his majesty to be signed tomorrow that will accredit Filipino seafarers for service on Bruneian vessels.

Your majesty, in this spirit of common historical and cultural heritage and mutual interests and goals, which are the anchors of our close bilateral relations, I am confident that the cooperation and friendship between our two nations will continue to flourish well into the future.

In behalf of the members of my delegations, I wish to reiterate our heartfelt gratitude for the hospitality accorded us and the excellent arrangements made for our visit. I look forward to your state visit to the Philippines as well. Meanwhile, my countrymen will wait for you, and in the meantime, they join me in wishing your majesty continued happiness and good health. May the blessings of god almighty be upon you as you lead your nation and people to even greater prosperity and success.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during Brunei State Dinner. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212955/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8700&Itemid=38