Thank You.

Other cabinet members; Monching Guico and the other mayors who are here with us today; we have Congressman Anton Lagdameo Congressman Way Kurat Zamora here with us, good morning to you; and to all of you; to the municipal governments under the able leadership of Monching Guico, for spearheading very important caravan that responds to issues on the environment and health, congratulations to all of you!

And thank you for the Manifesto that you have presented Monching. I understand this is the manifesto from all the caravans that have been done starting with Region I because this caravan today is the culminating activity of all the caravans all over the country as Gerry Calderon has reported to you. And I hope that among those commitments is a common commitment to put up or to invest in MRFs in your different barangays.

I have just returned from the Conference of Leaders of the Non Aligned Movement or NAM held in Egypt. And I spoke in behalf of Asia, and I expressed confidence that the developing world will be able to forge increased international solidarity as we work to address such significant global challenges as faster and more equitable levels of economic development and poverty alleviation, the quest for greater peace and security, which is an issue that unfortunately Mindanao knows only too well, closer interfaith dialogue, the protection of migrant workers, and climate change.

Even there in the NAM, it was acknowledged that we must not lose sight of the challenges we were already addressing before the onset of the global economic crisis. And high on the list of these challenges is climate change.

Amidst climate change we have put into action our drive for energy security and environmental conservation. This includes initiatives for which financing up to $250 million could be sourced from the Asian Development Bank and through the trading of Philippine carbon credits. Now as local government units, you have corporate powers. You can access this facility of the ADB and you can create in carbon credits.

In fact, as an example, this partnership is presently undertaking a program to replace incandescent bulbs with compact fluorescent bulbs. That is a national program of the DOE to the ADB, but you can have your own individual programs using carbon credits.

Well, Sonny Alvarez is here, our presidential adviser for climate change. And he’s been talking to the ADB, perhaps you can help them on how to access that ADB facility for which the Philippines can grow up to $250 million. It’s actually a two-billion facility, but every country can access up to $250 million.

Also, one of the jobs of Sonny Alvarez as my PACC is to participate in the crucial negotiations leading to the Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change to be held this December in Copenhagen.

The Philippines is active in the preparatory discussions and negotiations. Because if we are going to impact the climate change dialogue and we must, because we’re going to be one of those who will suffer the most from climate change, we must carry a message to the ongoing meetings.

We must remain actively involved in negotiations concerning carbon emission reduction targets, because we are not a big contributor to carbon emission which causes climate change, but we are a big victim, so we have to convince the other countries, the ones who are emitting a lot of carbon to reduce their carbon and to present _________ for carbon emission reduction.

Also because they have contributed to global warming because of their carbon emission, the industrialized countries should somehow make up to that by providing financing for countries like us who are not really at fault but who are victimized to adapt to climate change. And also share with us technology that we can use to adapt to climate change. So, the industrialized countries must decide, before the Copenhagen meeting on how much they will reduce their carbon emission.And what they announced as a target will enable us to determine whether or not we can keep global temperature rise to less than 2 percent. Why is 2 percent so important? Because beyond that point, countries like us and our neighbors in Southeast Asia could lose as much as 6.7 percent of GDP yearly by 2010. We will suffer more than twice the rest of the world according to the Asian Development Bank.

Our region of Southeast Asia is one of the most vulnerable regions to climate change because we have a high economic activity along our long coastlines. Imagine coastlines disappear because climate change, global warming will cause the polar ice capture the north pole in Antartica to melt and the water will rise in the ocean, and our coasts on which we rely so much for the livelihood of our people will disappear. Also we depend heavily on agriculture, forestry and other natural resources. And with climate change and global warming comes all these aberrations in the typhoons, getting more frequent, getting stronger and therefore that will also impact on us.

As I said earlier, we produce only one-third of one percent of the global green house gases, much lower in per capita terms than those of industrialized nations. But from rising tides, as I mentioned to changing weather, and even to deforestation and the pollution of the air, sea and land, to us the challenges and change are great. We are 7,000 islands, and for us when the seas rise due to global warming that’s a whole new meaning. 7,000 islands and many of them are, you know, there a few islands that are called ‘luli’. I thought they were named after my daughter Luli. Yun pala they are short for ‘luluboglilitaw – luli’. When the tide is high, they go under water. When the tide is low, they surface. Well, if the tide becomes permanently high, talagang lulubog. And that will be a lot of island of the Philippines. In fact, they have a saying, “With climate change and global warming Florida may lose some coastline, but some of us may lose a nation. That’s why we must work together to solve this problem. And if wdo, it will be one of the great achievements in our history.

Whoever is at fault, we’re saying we’re not at fault. But every nation, developing or developed, must assume the mantle of leadership and work to address the challenge of climate change. On the part of the Philippines, we have begun the Green Philippines plan. This is a blueprint for mapping our environment and economic policies that will allow for sustainable development that doesn’t fall on the backs of the poor or erode our environment. Yes, there is a cost to make the Green Philippines come to life.

For instance, a factory will have to spend extra money for treating its water, that’s extra cost. There is a cost to making the Green Philippines come to life. But the cost is greater without the plan and the investment in our people and the environment.

Because what happens when we spoil the environment. The cost may not be so much for one factory or maybe for one town. But it will be very large for the country as a whole in terms of lower production of agriculture, fisheries have been lower in output because of the rising tides. Health being bad because of the pollution.

We took the bitter pill in the past years to strengthen our revenues and invest in the people and the nation. And we enhanced tax revenues by P291 billion more between November 2005 and December 2008. Kauban si Waykurat kaniadto when he was already a congressman during the time of our difficult tax reforms.

And this year, the LGUs have started to enjoy 40 percent of that increased in taxes. In other words, from the P100 billion additional value added tax, P40 billion now goes to the local government units.

So, I hope that the members of the League of Municipalities will use part of your increased IRA to invest in the MRF that Gerry Calderon was telling us about in his report.

Let us continue to invest in the 3 E’s — Economy, Environment, Education.

Dear mayors, together we have been working all these years, 8 years now, we’ve been able to work to get the economy working again. But still there are two Philippines as I’ve said very often: One is where the economy is working again and moving ahead; the other is where the political system is badly broken. And I thank you for advocating the need to fix the broken political system.

But even as we begin fundamental political reform to fix our broken political system, let me say in no uncertain terms: there will be elections in 2010. (applause) Anyone who questions our resolve on this critical issue is undermining our nation’s commitment to a vibrant democracy.

And let me thank this opportunity to congratulate the COMELEC for putting the finishing touches to put in place the automation of next year’s polls.

And I call on all of you dear mayors, not only to put up your MRFs in your barangays but to support the COMELEC in making the first ever nationwide automated elections in our country a success. These elections will send a signal that our democracy remains strong, viable and stable. So much depends on our local government units — the future of our country because of sustainable development and concern for the environment, the future of the political stability of our country as well.

So, to all of you, congratulations! Daghang salamat. Mabuhi kitang tanan!

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the League of Municipalities of the Philippines- Zero Bazura Caravan 2009. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412100724/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25676&Itemid=38