Thank you very much Ace Durano for introducing me and congratulations! To the DOT because almost three million tourists we have this year. Thank you very much to all of you.

To our hosts, Governor Loy Romualdo and Congressman Romualdo and the entire Romualdo family, thank you very much for inviting me to… Always every year at our Lanzones Festival.

I would also like to extend my welcome to Mayor Romualdo. Today with me are many Cabinet officials: you probably already know Secretary Ace Durano; also with us is Budget Secretary Nonoy Andaya; Public Works Secretary Jun Ebdane; Peace Process Secretary Jess Dureza; and then during our meeting earlier, they were at the meeting place, Secretary Ronnie Puno of DILG and the National Security Adviser, Secretary Bert Gonzales; with us also is the head of SPDA (Southern Philippines Development Authority) Zam Ampatuan; also with everyone is the entire top brass of our armed forces who are now meeting here in Camiguin, the Chief-of-Staff of the Armed Forces General Jun Esperon.

And because we have a big meeting not only with the generals but also with the governors and City Mayors of Mindanao, here are the governors here in Mindanao with me now: governor of Sarangani, Governor Dominguez; Governor Plaza of Agusan Del Sur; Governor Loong of Sulu; and Governor Pimentel of Surigao Del Sur. There are still five governors and two city mayors at our meeting place now. So today, Governor Loy and Congressman Romualdo have many visitors. And to all of you, of course thank you Camiguingnon people, good morning to all of you, my beloved Camiguingnon people.

I am happy that I was included, we all are now in your Lanzones Festival, especially now that we have included Camiguin in the Central Philippines super region whose progress is in tourism.

We created the super regions to further accelerate the completion of important infrastructure such as roads, ports, airports, irrigation, telecommunications needed by businessmen and investors and ordinary people.

And I’m very happy that Camiguin is one of the provinces where we are carrying out our super regions blueprint. There’s a growing bandwagon of belief that economic take off is well within reach, and this is why the government — all our many Cabinet members are here — why the government has been working overtime on our economic blueprint.

The Philippines has shown itself to be relatively imperious to domestic and global pressures because you are our people. Our people are upholding productivity and stability on all fronts, I extend my welcome to all of you. Zam Ampatuan has been transferred from the Poverty Commission to the Southern Philippines Development Authority. A minor reshuffle in the Cabinet and agencies is being done to put performance in the people’s interest at peak as I and my entire team intensify the campaign of good governance, more revenues, and prudent spending. The payback to the poor is becoming evident as take off looms in the horizon.

Camiguin deserves tourism. Your lanzones are very delicious but your island is small so the land is small and the income is small if we depend on agriculture. But through tourism, your lives will really improve and progress here in Camiguin will be faster.

Before, Camiguin was with the bottom 10 provinces. Not anymore now, you have graduated from the club of 10 poor provinces. I have been here many times at this Lanzones Festival. For twenty-seven years now we have celebrated your Lanzones Festival which continues to attract many tourists to come to Camiguin. Today, nine governors, two city mayors, many generals and officials of the SPDA for the first command conference of the newly divided Mindanao– Western Mindanao and Central Mindanao — we are holding the first command conference here in Camiguin. Because Camiguin is very beautiful as a host to tourists and officials and meetings.

Your province is also known for its cool climate and beautiful places like the beaches, Mt. Hibok-Hibok, waterfalls, hot and cold springs and the cemetery submerged in the sea. Your tourist attractions are very beautiful all concentrated in one beautiful island like the Isle of Capri.

Now to increase the number of tourists, along with the super region are the projects for the Roll-on/Roll-off ferry. You already know that you have a Roll-on/Roll-off ferry from Balingoan to Guinsiliban, now with us is the Roll-on/Roll-off ferry from Mambajao to Jagna in Bohol.

This is like the Strong Republic Nautical Highway we built in Western Philippines including the ports of Dipolog and Dapitan, to Negros, Panay, Mindoro going to Batangas directly to Manila. Now comes the Central Nautical Highway — Cagayan de Oro and Balingoan, through Guinsiliban to the Guinsiliban-Mambajao road going to Bohol, Cebu, Masbate, Bicol or Quezon directly to Manila.

To complete this… With us, it’s like with us the Philippine Ports Authority District Officer — are they here? Here. — and the port manager — you too? Only one person — our Ro-Ro port project including the extension of the Ro-Ro in the Guinsiliban port, as requested by Congressman Romualdo, and the Mambajao port extension of the Ro-Ro ramp, a passenger terminal and reclamation of the back-up area. We will spend more than 83 million pesos for the Mambajao Ro-Ro port.

We need to do this because it is part of our promises in my State of the Nation Address last July and we will complete this Mambajao-Jagna Ro-Ro next year. The program of work is now being prepared and the bidding will be done in November.

Now of course, if we want to make Camiguin part of the Roll-on/Roll-off Central Nautical Highway, it's not enough that our ports are beautiful, our roads also need to be good, from Guinsiliban to Mambajao. So here now is Secretary Nonoy Andaya, he brought two checks. One of these is 10 million pesos as a sub-allotment for the Camiguin circumferential road, especially the Guinsiliban-Mambajao section. And there is a second sub-allotment, another 10 million pesos, so we can repair the slow protection in the part where we came from now with Congressman and Governor Romualdo.

So today, the project we brought for our Ro-Ro, for our… For our tourism, more than 100 million pesos for our Lanzones Festival celebration.

In the Lanzones Festival every year, it is a fiesta where we give thanks for the graces given by our Lord. Today, beyond our gratitude, we will once again promise to further strengthen unity and cooperation.

Thank you very much for your support for me always, I also love you all.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 27th Camiguin Lanzones Festival. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409204500/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3010&Itemid=38