Thank you.

Thank you, Nonong, for your introduction, and thank you for not submitting a courtesy resignation. Well, first and foremost, I choose whom I want in my cabinet and can add or subtract Cabinet members when I need to based on performance. And I can assure you as I greet the up law alumni headed by Boy Reino and the other members of class ’77-’78, and all the other classes, I’m not going to wait on courtesy if someone in my government isn’t working out to the benefit of the nation. But I can assure you that Nonong is indeed working to the benefit of the nation.

Chief Justice Davide and Senate President Drilon, congratulations.

Chief Justice Davide’s name is now forever etched in the main chapters of our history with his historic role in the impeachment trial and his equally historic leadership of the Supreme Court and its landmark post-EDSA rulings.

Nothing is easy in a democracy, and Frank Drilon also has his difficult role to play. And I believe his mark in history will be in the difficult but landmark legislative reforms that are being passed and will be passed under his watch. These pieces of legislation have real and lasting impact on our economy and the ability to lift our people out of poverty. For instance, among the challenges that he is right now dealing with is the Transco legislation which will make the franchise available to any potential purchaser of the transmission assets of NAPOCOR, and in so doing, enhances the value of these assets. A successful privatization program is one step to creating a more competitive electric power industry, lowering prices for consumers and delivering better services to remote areas of the country.

The power sector is the key reform area that we must address today. The capital needs of MERALCO, NAPOCOR and TRANSCO have ballooned all these decades. Now, they reached about 40 billion pesos annually, and government subsidies to the power sector reaching these amounts should instead be used to fund other services. Because this amount can build more than 100,000 classrooms, irrigate more than 100,000 hectares, put up more than 75,000low-cost housing or construct more than 6,000 kilometers of road.

Privatization is the key to the reform of the electric power industry. Privatization enables the government to stretch its scarce finances to meet other basic needs that our people should have immediately.

Privatization is needed so that the government will no longer need to seek additional budget to avoid brownouts in the coming times. Privatization will solve the debt of NAPOCOR and TRANSCO. Without privatization, the debt of NAPOCOR and TRANSCO will continue to grow. Our problem with the budget deficit will continue as well.

Because of the staggering numbers involved for the power sector, foreign capital and technology are key to privatization. At the core of privatization is the framework for greater competition and a level playing field for power generators. The lack of capital and technology is the reason why the price of our electricity is too high. When I first became president, the electricity price I inherited was the second highest in all of Asia. This is the reason why… One reason why prices of goods were so expensive when I first sat as president. But with the reforms we made, the price of electricity went down for most people and we became only sixth, no longer second in the most expensive electricity in Asia. And the inflation rate has also gone down, the lowest now in over a decade.

Pero hindi pa tapos ang reporma dito. And it’s in the context of the power sector as the key reform area that we must approach the burning issue of today which is MERALCO.

Last night, before a group of housing executives, I spelled out the principles under which we shall move forward on MERALCO:

First, we are taking steps to ensure the financial viability of the corporation as an institution. Through the department of energy, the government which has a 25 percent stake in MERALCO is shepherding a series of consultations which began the other day between MERALCO and its creditors. We will see to it that the rehabilitation plan is set up that is fair to creditors, investors, and most of all, the public.

Second, we shall see to it that the decision of the Supreme Court regarding MERALCO’s obligations to its customers will be implemented. The ruling is currently at the stage where there will be motion for reconsideration and a review. And it’s not yet possible to measure the total impact. However, we do believe that this decision whatever it is can be manageable. And if indeed the final decision is a refund, it is my duty to see to it that one way or another you, the consumers, will get your refund. Let me add that the Supreme Court is the highest court in the land and nothing will aid our economy and democracy more than strong institutions of law.

Third, I am duty-bound to ensure that there will be no crisis in power services that will result from the financial problems of MERALCO. I am constitutionally bound to serve the public interest.

I shall not be swayed by populist politics nor by power play. I shall not please the poor by tearing down the rich nor please the rich by ignoring the poor, because there is nothing more important to me than the future of this country, not even the elections of 2004.

I take exception to the assertion by some that politics will paralyze the Philippines through the 2004 presidential election. Why? I believe the Presidential election for whomever is running presents a great opportunity to enact positive change, not paralyze the nation. The parties out of power would like to stop the process because it’s in their interest to do so. For me, I am energized by focusing on policies and prescriptions that will help create jobs, improve health care, deliver better services, and enhance our peace and order. And I assure you, we will continue to be diligent in this regard. So, I view this time as one of untold opportunity and hope. Any critics will have to come up with a vision on the economy, security and democracy that is real like what I’ve been fighting for.

It doesn’t mean that I am a candidate for president. It means I am the president and will continue to focus on being president, and creating jobs, improving health care and providing a better education to the next generation of Filipinos. I’ll worry about the election when the time comes, but it is not now.

Last night, there were real estate developers who were with me. And they committed to build half a million houses in the next two years. They are enthused not only with our housing reforms but also with our central bank and other reforms particularly those that have brought our interest rates to the lowest levels in more than a decade. They are currently building not just planning to build. That is why the NCSO figure show a 25 percent increase in construction this year.

These interest rates will go down even more if our budget deficit will go down, and that’s what we are working on. In turn, bringing down the budget deficit depends on revenue reform measures both administrative reforms and legislative reforms. The proposed revenue measures will ensure that everyone pays their taxes and provide the government with spending money on health care, education and job creation.

These are basic services that a government is expected to deliver in a strong republic. But the most important basic service is an environment of peace and the rule of law.

This government is making significant inroads in solving our peace and order challenges.

When I took over the government early last year, kidnapping and organized crime were the main concern. Robberies, high profile kidnappings at least once a month with demand for ransom, so that peace and order was rated as among the top three concerns in the surveys. Now, in a November survey, fighting terrorist groups and fighting kidnap-for-ransom syndicates rate among the top five issues where the government is assessed to be doing a good job.

This administration is tackling the issue of peace and order on many fronts. Fortunately, we have developed a formula that’s working. We’ve become tougher on crime. We look at the drug problem as a source of the peace and order challenge, and we have set up the special drug enforcement agency to address this. Meanwhile, i instructed the chief of the national police to focus on kidnapping and weeding out misfits from the police. We have stepped up intelligence coordination. We have a hot line, telephone number 117. And related to this, community mobilization has been very effective in locating criminal fugitives. My Presidential Anti-Organized Crime Commission secretariat supplements the work of the enforcement institutions. Now, we have inter-agency coordination mainly through stronger police work. The result of all these is a reduction in the crime rate.

In order to preserve and grow the success we’ve achieved, we are professionalizing the police and fighting the root cause of criminalism by focusing on poverty reduction and sustainable economic development. We have a higher budget to provide higher pay to police and soldiers, who under this new budget will earn as much as the teachers currently do. We have increased the educational requirements of the police, they now have to have a college degree. We have also increased the budget for training policemen.

I make no apologies for being tough on crime and criminals and terrorism and terrorists. Our people deserve no less than to feel absolutely safe to live, work, and raise a family. I will do everything in my power to improve the situation and will continue to do so.

I’m most concerned about taking criminals off the streets in order to preserve the basic right of our people to live in peace, safety and order. My hands-on involvement in this issue in no way impedes suspects of their right to free and fair trial, it does put them and others like them on notice that they cannot hide if they break the law. This is the same warning I have to those who practice corruption in and out of government.

And it is here that I value most the work of lawyers. Fighting corruption is a complex task. And the complexity of modern law is a great challenge to nations and societies especially ours. Weaving through its complexity to bring about good governance and a good strong republic with strong institutions is the job of lawyers as well as many others. But it is specially the job of lawyers not the run of the mill kind but those who have the skill, the acumen and most of all, the commitment to our national ideals.

The up law alumni association has been a well-spring of this breed of lawyers. And so, I ask that you use your special gifts and your privileged education to help me build the strong Philippine republic that we all aspire for.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 2002 General Alumni Homecoming of the University of the Philippines College of Law. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409205954/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8448&Itemid=38