Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Secretary Romulo, thank you for introducing me; Secretary Durano, thank you for your efforts in bringing to the Philippines leaders of our number one tourism market, the United States market; DTI OIC Tom Aquino, thank you for being here as well; and Dante Ang, chairman of the Commission of Overseas Filipinos, thank you for being with us today; and of course, Ambassador Albert del Rosario, thank you for your efforts; our consuls general, consuls, honorary consuls general and our officials of the DFA and DOT and DTI; and of course, the members of the Fil-Am delegations representing the various consulate jurisdictions.

Welcome to the Philippines! Welcome to Malacañang!

I’m honored to hear from Ambassador Del Rosario that this trip tour to Malacañang and this visit with me is — oh! I’d like to greet also Mrs. Del Rosario — that this tour to Malacañang and this visit with me is the highlight of your tour to the Philippines. But I understand that the delegations from Washington, New Orleans, Florida, Atlanta weren’t able to make the tour. I would like to ask my PSG and the head of our museum, please let them be our guest for a guided tour this afternoon.

I’m very grateful for this meeting. It celebrates our friendship and shared history with the United States. Why? Because while we all share wonderful concepts, ideas with the United States especially our cherished democratic traditions, the most important link between the U.S. and the Philippines today is persons, our 3.5 million Philippine-Americans who are represented here today. You represent the personification of the cherished traditions shared by the United States and the Philippines — democracy, the rule of law. And during the four years of my presidency, I think you’ve known that we’ve been fighting to strengthen our democratic institutions against those who have been seeking to undermine them during these past four years since Edsa Dos.

Today, as you come here, we are taking the fight to a higher level. I thought that when you would see the political noise on TV some of you would back out from coming here. Thank you that you’re all today. And I hear from Ace some more even wanted to come but the carrying capacity wasn’t enough anymore. Well, that means we need more investments in carrying capacity and I hope you will be there to do the investments.

Your enthusiastic visit, your enthusiastic response contributes to my feeling especially with the stock market up 25 points, the peso breaking… It was fifty, went down to 55.19, the dollar went down to 55.99. This means that the time is now for a wake up call to my detractors. They whine and complain, but do they have a plan for the nation? No.

The solution to our problems is not to continue to divide the nation. My opponents want to divide and go back. I want to unite and move forward. the reality is that my opponents exploit and perpetuate the reality that there are two Philippines: one for the well-to-do and well-connected, the other one for the down and out and alienated; one where the system works because of class or privilege, one that has no justice if you are poor and disenfranchised; and one where the system can be subverted if you don’t get your way, and the one where the system never works. Period.

I want one Philippines. No more double standards; no more dual justice systems; no more cynical behind the scenes manipulation. We need… I know we need a government that serves the people, not the special and vested interests.

I wake up every day early and work until way past sunset to put my plan — because I have a plan, my 10-point pro-poor plan into force — and it’s working. Our previous speakers have pointed out the numbers to show it’s working: exports are up; growth goes on as Bert Romulo said, the highest in 15 years, the highest in non-oil producing Asia; investments are coming in, thank you for keeping Calpers coming in. But the other day, Uniden, a big Japanese company who came here when I was still undersec… assistant secretary of Trade and Industry — I promoted that investment in 1986, created 4,000 jobs — and then left the country in the aftermath of 9-11 because the shrinking U.S. market required them to consolidate and they consolidated in China. Well, the other day, they visited me. They’ve restarted construction. If they had 4,000 people then, they are hiring 10,000 this time they’re back in the Philippines. The other day, I had a visit from a Malaysian group that built so many of those super highways in Malaysia. And they are going to build our expressway from here to Batangas port — eight lanes, 11 billion pesos — no cost to the Philippine government. Monday, I have an invitation to inaugurate the Batangas port, the alternative international port to the Manila port so that our Calabarzon companies can choose where to go depending on the traffic that they want to encounter or not encounter.

We… FedEx will consolidate their hub in China, but that’s because of China’s growth. They hasten to say, however, they are still expanding their operations in the Philippines.

Job creation is up. Last year, we had 3.1 million unemployed — big number. Now at least it’s gone down to 2.9. At least it’s going down and we are not running on a treadmill running just to stand in place. We have better infrastructure. We’re building as I said the south expressway. We’re building… Completing the Batangas port. You’ve seen the north expressway. And we are a more secure nation for what our administration has been able to deliver, has been able to do against kidnapping, against drugs, in the peace process, and with our U.S. allies and regional allies against terrorism.

But let me be clear: I know we need more jobs, better health care and a cleaner government. I know that and I’m working on that. Of that, there should be no doubt. But my opponents don’t want to look at what’s working, they merely want things to work in their favor. And in the process, they are willing to sacrifice the gains we’ve made for their own motives.

If they want unrest in the streets, I will enforce the law. I will stop any violence that threatens the rule of law. If they want to subvert the constitution, I will fight them every step of the way. If they want to cast the first stone, let them do so with a clean conscience. Because their hands are dirty as they seek to besmirch not just me but the nation itself. This fight isn’t about me, it’s about working within the rule of law and the virtue of democracy that we share with many countries especially the United States.

I know that the Filipino people are deeply cynical about government. They desperately want change and will accept nothing less than strong action. I was elected under those circumstances and on a very issue-specific platform of economic reform, pro-poor investments and the political will to change the system itself. On this score, today, we shall begin to plead our case in the halls of the Supreme Court so that we can get the implementation of the vat bill on track to put our fiscal house in order. Meanwhile, we have the alcohol and cigarette taxes, and the accountability reform law that I was able to have passed last year to give us an additional 20 billion pesos in new taxes.

When Congress opened last year, I said, that for the first session year we would work for fiscal reforms. We achieved that. I called that Phase One of our fundamental reforms. And I said last year as Congress was about to open, we will work on the fundamental political reforms after Phase One. We’re ready to do that now. We are on schedule.

What I intend to do is work with legislators and civil groups who believe that changes in the fundamental law of the land are necessary in order to conduct or confront such basic issues as federalism, the parliamentary form of government, reducing red tape in government processes, running for public office under a true party system and with less need to raise campaign funds, modernizing the economic provisions of our constitution, and so on. Remember how hard it was to get the overseas voting law and to get the dual citizenship bill passed. We really have to examine the constitution.

At the same time, I’m restructuring and strengthening the Cabinet. Giving it a free hand to meet our reform and manage our day-to-day governance with as little political interference as possible even from me.

I already announced late last week the appointment of Land Bank president Gary Teves as the incoming Secretary of Finance. The stock market went up when his name was announced. Today, I’d like to announce the appointment of NEDA secretary Romy Neri as the new Secretary of Budget and Management. His very competent and professional deputy, Tito Santos, as the new NEDA head. Peter Favila as the new Secretary of Trade and Industry and incumbent president of the Philippine Stock Exchange. And the incumbent head of the Office of Muslim Affairs Zamzamin Ampatuan as the new head of the National Anti-Poverty Commission. It’s a good team. it’s a kind of team together with Gary, Bert and Ace, and all the other Cabinet members, those with Cabinet rank like Dante. It’s a good team. It’s a kind of team that I can leave the day-to-day affairs of government with while I work on the fundamental reforms.

And speaking of the day-to-day affairs of the government, because of the increased tax collections from our Phase One reforms, we can now focus more money on things that will hopefully affect the poor more directly. Short-fuse microlending programs that would quickly put a little money in the pockets of thousands of farmers, teachers, tricycle drivers, policemen. Allocating resources to these projects would give great social dividends as would increased expenditure in the programs of the DSWD. In addition, NFA rolling stores and Kadiwa stores are being more aggressively deployed.

Last year, we were able to enroll already nearly 80 percent of the people of the Philippines in our Philhealth program. The Philippine national government gave the first year’s premium. We are hoping that the local governments will give the second year’s premium for their indigents. But because this program has become so valuable for the local governments that are not able to provide the premium for another year, the national government will also help in that premium to renew their insurance.

And we’ve had a very successful emergency employment program funded by the road users tax where instead of giving all of the work to contractors to do the pavements and the maintenance of roads, we’re hiring out-of-school youth and other unemployed to do the work manually. They are doing actual work but at least we help solved the unemployment problem. That is the modern version of the Tennesy Valley Authority. And I have a budget of two billion pesos for that. One part of it will go to the pavement which has to be done more professionally by the companies. But the other part are things that can be done manually, and we hope as it worked last year that it will work this year to help reduce our unemployment problem.

We campaign against tax evaders, smugglers, hoarders, cartels and the like because these campaigns protect the poor who end up shouldering the cost of these transgressions. I know that we must reform the government. I know that we must reform moral standards, and I hold my family on equal footing to every citizen when it comes to the rule of law.

In order to put more vigor into our anti-graft campaign, I have asked Tony Kwok who put together the Hong Kong’s independent commission against corruption, to be the consultant of the Philippine government. He has given me a very difficult list of things to do. And I will do them. He will be coming here to help carry them through. And I’d like to use the model of the Hong Kong’s independent commission against corruption because before they set it up in 1974, Hong Kong was one of the most corrupt societies. Seven years later, Hong Kong, as we know, became one of the societies with the highest honesty and integrity. And we will seek to work on that in the Philippines.

At the end of the day, I’m fighting for the average Filipino, not the privileged Filipino. I will stand firm to turn the economy around, work to earn the trust of the people and defend our democracy. This is not a popularity contest; this is a contest for improving the lives of our population. My surveys may be down but my resolve has never been higher.

For all these years I’ve offered my pro-poor agenda, that has gained ground every day while, I repeat, the opposition has shown no plan, no plan but the blueprint for obfuscation and division. I challenge my opposition to show their true colors: show me the plan. You don’t have one. And even if the people don’t like me right now neither will they follow a road that leads to nowhere.

There is a Philippines that works, lives and strives; there’s one that doesn’t. There’s a Philippines where we must… And that is where we must focus our energy, the one where things don’t work and things don’t thrive. We must lift everyone up, not tear everyone down. Are we on the brink of disaster? Absolutely not. Are we in a time of soul searching, national soul searching? Yes, and we should be. For it’s time to break the cycle of politics and create a government that, at the end of the day, works.

Fil-Am leaders, as we welcome you back to the Philippines, although for a short visit, we express our pride in what you have achieved and our gratitude for keeping our alliances and connections alive and strong.

Thank you for being Fil-Ams. Thank for loving your resident country. But thank you for continuing to love your motherland.

Greetings! And welcome to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the call by the U.S. consuls and Filipino-Americans Tour Group. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412075515/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5094&Itemid=38