Thank you. Thank you for your greetings.

And thank you very much, Secretary Dinky Soliman for introducing me. Thank you also Mayor Lito Atienza for fast-tracking the papers of our first one hundred beneficiaries for the security of their land in Parola.

Congressman Bansai Nieva, thank you for your prayer. I am with various cabinet officials who are helping me take care of our urban poor, the head of our Anti-Poverty Commission, Secretary Ging Dele;. The Secretary of Newspapers, Secretary Milton Alingod; Secretary of the government's main programs and the processing of aid papers from abroad, Secretary Mai Jimenez; and your constant partner in the daily needs of the urban poor, Percy Chavez; is also here, a son of Manila, helping me, Presidential Assistant for Housing, P.A. Nestor Ponce, former Congressman; and the one who explained to us earlier the history of your desire for more than a decade to have security of land, the director of Natural Resources here in NCR, Corazon Davis.

Thank you Barangay Captain Eli Salud for the warm and gracious welcome from your colleagues in Barangay Parola. Oh, not Barangay Parola because your barangays are numbered, just the people of Parola.

And I am happy to be with you again, people of Parola, today because today we are delivering benefits and services to address your basic needs. Because I remember – I don't know how many of you still remember – one day, I was a new president, I suddenly arrived, without advance notice, I went to a house there, I sat down – yes, you remember? Oh yeah, you! It was your birthday then, right? It was your birthday then. Then I said, “What is your main need here?” You said, “Security of land.” so that’s what we are delivering today. Oh Lucy, right? You, back then? Thank you, thank you. It was your birthday then. Okay, or there’s a belated birthday present. You are one of the hundred. Very good.

So with your help, we can stop the threats to the stability of our lives so that we can focus our time and attention on the serious problems affecting the people, especially poverty, crime, terrorism.

The alleged destabilization plot, or whatever remains of it, is an empty box of gossip, malicious text messages, and noisy propaganda.

In English, because we have someone in the audience listening here, the so-called destabilization plot, or what remains of it, is an empty shell of rumors, mischievous text messages and noisy propaganda. The conspiracy is still there. The conspirators are still there, driven by raw ambitions of power of persons who want to evade justice. Those who are conspiring are still there. Because they want to seize power to avoid justice. But, especially with your cooperation, the threat is being defeated and no amount of media play and intrigue can make it rise again.

Yesterday, I had my first command conference as Secretary of National Defense. And that was a meaningful event. The Chief of Staff reported on the current implementation of all my directives regarding the reform and consolidation of the armed forces. Seventy-seven officers have been released from their prison. And the cases filed against them have been dropped because they were proven innocent of the Oakwood incident. So we are giving justice to the innocent. But the harshest punishment awaits those who are guilty. The police, on their part – this is Colonel Jamias, the one I visited before who didn’t have my picture on his desk, but now it’s there. Ah, his boss, Pete Bulaong, is answering him.

The PNP, Pete, Colonel Jamias, yesterday at my command conference reported very successful campaigns against drugs, in half – no, in how many? – in the past two and a half months. You know, in the Philippine National Police, of my one billion pesos that I set aside from the PCSO Lotto for the fight against drugs, 100 million was given to the PNP for use in three months. Two and a half months, they have only spent thirty million, they still have seventy million remaining. But as a result of their work, the price of shabu has doubled because the supply is very difficult to obtain. So congratulations to the PNP for a good job. Good job, and still saving funds. Isn't that a model public servant?

We’re moving forward in the security and law enforcement fronts. And this is clearing the ground for sustained reforms. Because when it’s peaceful, we can do more, we can address long-term reforms. Currently, I am directly addressing that your fares are not increasing. And your prices of your basic goods are not increasing even though the price of gasoline is increasing all over the world. So I just want to express to Secretary Lito Atienza that the day after tomorrow I will call a meeting – what did I say, Secretary? – Mayor Lito Atienza, that the day after tomorrow I will call a meeting of the Metro Manila Council together with the NEDA Executive Committee at the Metro Manila Development Authority to discuss what local government units can do to ensure that bus and jeepney fares used by our poor do not increase.

And I am also increasing my visits to urban poor communities. Of course, I will return to the provinces to broaden our people’s support for the big push forward. And I also ask you to continue to have full trust in the government. Imagine, Corazon Davis said, more than a decade of your desire. Lito Atienza said, several proclamations but only now individual papers for the security of land.

The continued disruption of groups wanting to discredit and overthrow the government is a major obstacle to our efforts to help our poor countrymen. But today, however, because we are suppressing it with your help, those who want to destabilize. How do you help suppress those who want to destabilize, aren’t you the ones they ask to do people power against the government and you don’t agree, thank you very much. Because you do not allow yourselves to be used by the ambitious in their desire to seize power, we can now address your needs. So today, what is our occasion?

This, we have 100 who are marked, they are the first to benefit from the granting of a certificate of eligibility for lot allocation today. This is just the beginning, because these 100 are the first to finish the process, with the great help of Mayor Atienza. Because these first 100 have completed the papers, the certificate can now be given, can now be distributed. The others, there are still two thousand, which I think in what we will do starting now will be fulfilled within three months.

This is part of fulfilling the desire of my administration to provide land security and our goal is 150,000 families per year. So in two years now we have reached that number and almost three hundred thousand urban poor families have been given security of land.

This first one hundred, that is the final step for you in the process that began when I issued a proclamation in Parola. And that proclamation of mine was part of more than fifty proclamations declaring certain government-owned lands for use in socialized housing for poor urban families.

Now, why doesn't it exceed 300,000? Or why haven't the two thousand of you completed your papers? Because of the different laws, the papers in different agencies are needed if we are to proceed from the proclamation to the title. So it's difficult, there are many papers. So as Corazon Davis said, I ordered the establishment of a “One-Stop Shop Processing Center” in more than twenty areas of the urban poor to expedite the processing of your papers regarding your titling.

You know, the investors when I was at DTI, I put up a one-stop shop center for investors, so they wouldn't get tired going to so many agencies for their papers. Many local government units like Manila, for businessmen who need many licenses, also put up one-stop shop centers so they wouldn't get tired going to different agencies. Well, if service for the wealthy investor has a one-stop shop, there should be one for the poor too. So now, we have a one-stop shop center for the poor so that in your titling, in obtaining your certificate, in obtaining your papers to ensure your land, you no longer need to go to agencies… You'll go to different agencies.

We experimented with this one-stop shop for the poor in Barangay Escopa in Cubao, in Barangay Pineda in Pasig, in Barangay Sto. Niño in Parañaque, in Grace Park in Caloocan. Today, I am pleased to inform you that we will build your one-stop shop center for the poor next to the Delpan sports complex here in Binondo.

So after giving the certificates here to 100, I invite the other 2,000 — it's not too far — come with me, go there to see how your papers can be properly processed in just one building. And in that way, you will have more opportunities to do your other work and your livelihood, like the emergency employment announced by Mayor Lito Atienza.

You know, in other places where I have already given a certificate of lot entitlement, it's surprising. On my next visit there, their homes are improving. Because when you have certainty and you have papers, your papers themselves can be used by you, right? To borrow for business, to borrow to improve… Improve your house. That's what we call the De Soto principle. As an economist, I learned this from experiences in other places, especially in South America where there were also many squatters before. But because of the De Soto principle, they have decreased, almost no squatters there in their country, and that is our aspiration for the urban poor.

I hope what we started today in Parola will continue and that the day will come in our lives when you can say that you are no longer squatters in your own country.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Awarding of the Certificates of Eligibility for Lot Allocation (CELA) to Beneficiaries of Parola, Tondo. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194456/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7129&Itemid=38