Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the ADB International Conference on poverty growth and the Role of Institutions

[Delivered at Asian Development Bank Auditorium, Pasig City, October 10, 2001]

A very pleasant morning to all of you and welcome to all international participants in this conference. As you address the important relationships among poverty, growth, and the role of institutions, I hope you will also gain an insight into our vision of the Filipino future and a firm idea of what our people power administration is seeking to achieve in the Philippines and what it has sought to achieve in the last eight months.

Nine months ago, we faced a very different situation. Any honest discussion of Philippine situation would have had to acknowledge severe and almost hopeless prospects of dealing with poverty or achieving growth.

Today our political troubles are largely over. Our unemployment level improved somewhat. But the challenges of fighting poverty and achieving robust growth remain.

On the day I became President, I declared that we must be bold in our national ambitions, so that our challenge must be that within this decade, our country will win the fight against poverty.

To succeed, I said in my State of the Nation Address last July, our national agenda must revolve around four components.

The first is an economic philosophy of free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century. Not a pitiless free-for-all free enterprise but a free enterprise with a social conscience.

The second component is a modernized agricultural sector founded on social equity.

The third component is a social bias toward the disadvantaged to balance our economic development plan.

And the fourth component is to raise the moral standards of government and society.

Poverty can be defined as an outcome of a person’s entitlements on command over output, income assets, and material goods.

On the other hand, poverty can also be defined as a process or situation of social exclusion, where individuals are constrained against full participation in social life due to barriers in ethnicity and race, gender, age, physical handicaps, and of course, economic and physical resources.

For instance, undoubtedly, economic exclusion is at the root of our nation security problems in Mindanao. The traditional view of Muslims and indigenous peoples as inferior to lowland Filipinos has been a hurdle for them to contribute to Filipino social and political life, and hinders their ability to gain access to economic opportunities.

The high level of income and asset inequality and the slow reduction in poverty incidence in the Philippines are due to the lack of entitlements and social exclusion. A large number of Filipinos face limited opportunities to improve their quality of life and face barriers to fully achieve their social and economic potentials.

We notice the following characteristics of Philippine poverty:

Poverty continues to be mainly a rural phenomenon and is agriculture-based. More than two-thirds of poor households in the Philippines live in the rural areas.

And while agriculture-dependent households consist now of only 40 percent of the total population, this sector accounts for over two-thirds of the poor. Thus, one of the four main components of our anti-poverty agenda as I mentioned earlier is the modernization of agriculture founded on social equity.

Inter-regional differences in poverty incidence are high. Among 16 regional areas of the Philippines, the National Capital Region has only a 9.7 percent poverty incidence. But three regions, Bicol, Central Mindanao, and the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, have a poverty incidence of greater than 50 percent.

I have said that one of the four main components in my administration’s battle against poverty is a social bias toward the disadvantaged to balance our economic development plan.

This social bias is anchored on the redistribution of economic opportunities and enhancing the capabilities of the poor to participate in decision-making.

Redistributive reform is the primary framework in improving the level of human development and in articulating the direction of economic growth of the country over the next several years.

Thus, priority emphasis is given to several core strategies of this framework – the redistribution of economic resources and political opportunities and they include the following:

One, priority is being given to asset reform programs or the redistribute of physical and resource assets to the poor, especially land and credit. This entails funding the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program; implementing the Urban Development and Housing Act, especially the provisions on social housing for urban poor groups; quicker distribution of ancestral domain claims to indigenous people under the Indigenous People’s Right Act; and ensuring equal ownership rights for women in all laws and executive orders.

Two, this government is working to provide fuller financial and institutional requirements of human development services, which strengthen the human capital base of the poor. It has set specific, concrete, and quantified targets in making available basic education, health, shelter, water, and electricity for the poor and marginalized sectors. It is working to distribute public spending progressively towards these areas.

Three, we are working to increase employment and livelihood opportunities for the poor over and above what the market would provide and to strengthen the capacities of marginalized groups to engage in productive activities. In this regard, the government is funding the requirements of the Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Act in the hope of providing one million jobs in agriculture. It is creating employment opportunities for out-of-school, out-of-work youth; it is providing micro-finance services for 300,000 new borrowers per year and following the classical Grameen Bank formula. Most of these borrowers will be women.

Four, the participation of the poor in governance and institution-building and civil society groups are included in policy-making in the national and local levels. We are working to strengthen the Party List Law and the legislation of sectoral representation in local governments. Our government is addressing the requirements of our women in Nation Building Law, the Accessibility Law, and the Senior Citizens’ Act.

Five, this administration is working to provide social protection and security from violence for the basic sectors in order for them to fully exercise their political, social and economic rights and to be mainstreamed in society.

Social protection includes three components: social welfare assistance that are regular government programs that maintain a minimum standard of living among the poor and that reduce risks from such incidents as violence, illness, disability, old age, unemployment, resettlement, and harvest failure; safety nets or bridging mechanisms that mitigate the adverse impact of economic dislocations and shocks, disasters and calamities, and structural adjustments on specific disadvantaged and vulnerable groups; and, social security to diversify and mitigate the risks among the poor arising from retirement, unemployment, illness, and stability.

Security from violence means strengthening the implementation of the Anti-Sexual Harassment and Anti-Rape Laws; legislation against domestic violence; stricter enforcement of the law against illegal demolitions and strengthening the participation of urban poor groups in cases involving relocation; and prohibition of labor-only contracting. Through existing government structures, we recognize indigenous culture and practices, including communal-based management of resources and existing health and education practices. Security also means protecting the environment to ensure its long-term sustainability.

In order to implement these thrusts, I have asked Congress to pass a law that will recognize the property rights of the poor so that they can use them as collateral and I have asked my cabinet members to reduce the number of signatures required to transfer lands for redistribution.

In the governance chapter of the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan. I have instituted several governance reforms including the following:

Strengthening private sector participation in infrastructure development:

Developing greater partnerships among governance actors, government business and civil society in infrastructure and market development;

Improving the enforcement of anti-corruption laws; and

Government accounting and auditing reforms.

And finally, as I pledged during my inaugural address, I renew my commitment to lead by example to improve moral standards in government. This is my personal commitment in order to improve institutional standards in the country.

The creation and transformation of institutions to fight poverty is more urgent than ever today. Weak and ineffective institutions such as problematic laws and systems of property rights, fraudulent court, biased markets and entangled requirements for setting up business, more often hurt the poor and disadvantaged rather than the rich. As you can hopefully glean from my sharing the poverty reduction thrusts of my administration seek to transform and create new institutions in order to effectively respond to the marginalized groups in the country.

I am very grateful that we witnessed this morning the signing of a partnership between the ADB and the Philippine government in fighting poverty. This partnership has been going on for a long time now. As I entered the building, I am very happy I was made to stop by a picture of my father, the late President Diosdado Macapagal, during the groundbreaking ceremonies of the first ADB building in Roxas Boulevard. When I was a young teenager, my father used to tell us and that he wanted the Development Bank for Asia to be established in the Philippines and for that purpose they were enthusiastically offering land in Roxas Boulevard. Now ADB is in the Philippines. We have had a long partnership in fighting poverty and today, we renew that partnership. I hope that this will hew closely in its characteristics to the elements of the social bias for the poor that I have enumerated in my statement today.

To the delegates and participants of this conference, I hope that your discussions will help in understanding the relationships of poverty and growth, and the social, political, and economic institutions that underlie them.

In this new millennium where there is great hope because of information and communications technology and rapid advances in capital flows, but where there is also great uncertainty because of the new battle against terrorism in the world, I hope that with the new insights learned in this conference ADB will continue to be relevant and will increase its relevance in strengthening institutions, promoting growth, and eradicating poverty in the 21st century.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). Strong republic : selected speeches of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo . [Quezon City] : Philippine Information Agency.