Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 28th Joint Meeting of the Philippines-Japan Economic Cooperation Committee (PHILJEC) and the Japan-Philippines Economic Cooperation Committee (JPECC)

[Delivered at the Rigodon Ballroom, The Peninsula Manila, Makati City, February 27, 2008]

Thank you, Secretary Remonde for your introduction.

Ambassador Katsura, please thank the Prime Minister for his wonderful words in greeting this event.

Mr. Hagiwara and other delegates from Japan; Chairman Alcantara and other delegates from the Philippines; Mr. Tsuji; Roy, Mr. Navarro; ladies and gentlemen:

First of all, to all our friends who have traveled from Japan for these important discussions, welcome to the Philippines! I am pleased to see such distinguished representation from Keidanren, the Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Keizai Doyukai and from the private sector.

To JPECC and to PHILJEC, to the members of the Philippine-based Japanese and Philippine diplomatic and private sector communities working hard to achieve the already positive relations between our two nations, thank you.  We value your commitment to help us achieve our economic goals.

Japan has been one of our most important trade, investment, tourism and development assistance partners, since February 1953 or 56 years ago, when President Elpidio Quirino received the first Chief of the Permanent Japanese Mission.

When my father was President in the 1960s, the Crown Prince and Princess, now Their Imperial Majesties Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko, made a state visit to the Philippines.

And today Japanese-Philippine relations have never been stronger. Japan remains one of our country’s largest sources of foreign direct investments. Japan has made a major contribution to peace and stability in Mindanao. And as in the case of many recipient countries, and in fact, the world at large, witnessed the announcements of Prime Minister Aso with regard to the IMF fund in the G20 meeting and the fund for developing countries in the Davos meeting, Japan is by far the number one source of Official Development Assistance.

While the global economic crisis has created unprecedented challenges for all countries in the world, we are fortunate to have inaugurated the Japan-Philippines Economic Partnership Agreement as a milestone in our relations. This landmark agreement can play a significant role in helping our nations capitalize on the mutually beneficial economic opportunities that will support our efforts to meet the global challenges and build a stronger long-term economic relationship.

The JPEPA is about bringing advantages to both nations while eliminating disadvantages. Any trade agreement requires adjustment for both parties, but this agreement will benefit both of our economies.

The agreement will bring about liberalization of trade and services between our two countries, facilitation and greater liberalization of investment, and enhanced technical cooperation and capacity building. It will promote an increased flow of resources and help create a bigger market that will provide greater opportunities and larger economies of scale for both Philippine and Japanese businesses.

Also, it will improve access of Philippine products and services for the Japanese market. It will immediately have a positive impact on farmers, fishermen and processors because bananas, pineapples, crabs, shrimps, chicken, and tuna will have better access. Japanese industries will be able to supply the Philippine manufacturing sector with critical inputs such as Japanese specialty steel products, auto and auto parts, and electrical and electronic appliances and parts. Textiles and apparel will enjoy mutual elimination of tariffs. With limited exceptions, the Agreement enhances Philippine service providers’ access to the Japanese market and guarantees non-discriminatory treatment. For the first time, Japan will accept foreign health workers — our very much in-demand Filipino nurses and care workers. We hope to see more trade in outsourcing, tourism, maritime and air transport, banking and telecommunications.

This is particularly important because with the global economy and trading system under assault it is essential, as Mr. Hagiwara said, that political and business leaders throughout the world stand up and face down those challenges.

This certainly isn’t the time to raise barriers to trade, as what was done in the 1930s or to retreat into domestic isolation, as what destroyed the world in the 1930s. Instead, we must come together — as we are doing today — to address our common economic needs as we have done in the past and will continue to do for many years to come. So I congratulate both the Philippine and Japanese delegations for your efforts to find ways to expand trade, investment and other levels of cooperation. History will look back on this dark period in the world economy as one that rewarded those who had the foresight to look beyond current challenges and recognize that long-term solutions can only be found if they are based on mutual trust, respect and benefit. This first year of JPEPA’s implementation gives both the Philippines and Japan an opportunity to build on and reinforce the high level of existing cooperation between our two nations.

It is, of course, natural as what happened in 1930s, for any country to do what it can to protect its citizens against the threats posed by the global economic crisis, to consider setting aside commitments to reform and to liberalization, and to seek short-term relief at the expense of long-term benefits. But having learned our lessons from the past, and if we review the world figures cold-bloodedly in the last few years, we cannot overlook the fact that trade has been good for the world; it has helped reduce poverty and lift up the poor. True, we have far to go before we can rid the world of poverty, but the journey would be longer if we abandon our commitment to a strong global trading system. The Philippines is more committed than ever to a strong global trading system, but one where the interests of the developing countries take a rightful place in the global order.

And that is why I thank our speakers. I thank the Japanese Prime Minister for giving importance to the G20 because it is much more representative of the world than the G7 or the G8, and perhaps the G20 should become a G30 to be even more representative. On the part of the Philippines — yes, as I said — it is natural to want to protect your citizens. And on our part, we have made sure that the way to protect our citizens is to focus our government resources on programs to see the poor through the lean times first. We must adjust and change, but we must not do so at the backs of those who can least afford it.

We have accelerated our assistance to the poor and our investments in 2009. That is our version of the economic stimulus; we call it an ‘Economic Resilency Plan.’ These expenditures are not meant to break the bank, but to further stimulate our economy to help our people, and to sustain the growth that has been so important to our economic success that has generated 8.0 percent GNP growth in 2007 and 6.1 percent GNP growth in 2008 when two-thirds of the world went into recession.

If there is any bright side to the darkening world economy, it is this:  we all have an opportunity to do things differently. To fix what hasn’t worked; to repair what has worked; to experiment and innovate; and to unleash the creative spirit of all our peoples.

We have the opportunity to create new industries to clean our environment, save energy, and create new and rewarding jobs in the process. And I congratulate Japan for its pioneering work on this way back in the Kyoto Protocol.

Today, in the Philippines, I have an Executive Order on climate change. And every Friday is “Anti-climate Change Day.” It is a day when I devote my own activities to making sure that we promote the work that has to be done to mitigate climate change. One of them is making sure that our government agencies across the board have their own solid waste management facilities. And after this event, I will be going to the Manila Police District to make sure that they work on that. And I can’t help but think, “I’m glad that my meeting with you today is on a Friday.” It’s on a day, a Climate Change Day, because it is also a means for us to be able to recognize and congratulate Japan’s leadership in fighting climate change.

We must be bold and try harder in trying global times. The JPEPA is the greatest test of keeping our bonds strong and our economies open to each other.

And so I look forward to a more brisk and energetic collaboration between the Philippines and Japan. The “Land of the Morning” and the “Land of the Rising Sun” to mutually benefit our present and future generations.

Arigato. Maraming salamat. Thank you. (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 28th Joint Meeting of the Philippines-Japan Economic Cooperation Committee (PHILJEC) and the Japan-Philippines Economic Cooperation Committee (JPECC). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412104529/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=21492&Itemid=38