Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the launching ceremony of the Libmanan Biogen Power Plant

Thank you to my son, Dato, and happy birthday! (Applause)

Our esteemed officials of the First District of Camarines Sur and our guests. Congressman Danny Suarez is here… sorry, he spoke before we welcomed him because we were eager to hear about his Biogen project; Congressman Joey Solis from Sorsogon and Nonoy Andaya, the former congressman in your district and now the Secretary of Budget and Management; (Applause) Mayor Jimenez, our host mayor; and all the mayors here today from the entire district; various officials. Good morning to all of you. (Applause)

You know, I really requested that we meet today on Cong. Dato’s birthday to discuss some of the many things we want to do for the railroad towns or the First District of Camarines Sur. The very first item on our agenda, even before the welcome remarks, was immediately called upon because we were excited about the Biogen Power Plant proposed by Congressman Danny Suarez of Quezon, and Danny has already explained to you that it will provide cheaper energy and also help with the waste disposal of hundreds of thousands of metric tons of rice husks or ipa collected annually from rice, corn and coconut here in Bicol.

A 10-megawatt power plant that Congressman Suarez is envisioning is 28 million U.S. dollars or one billion pesos. That’s how big that project is. According to DBP, it can also be reduced depending on how much capital Congressman Suarez’s investors will put in, as there is a debt equity ratio that DBP follows regarding how much they will lend. As long as the source of the rice husk feedstock is secured. That’s also what DBP is looking at. So, they need to map or measure how much rice husks can be obtained here in Bicol, here in the First District.

If Congressman Suarez builds a plant here in Libmanan or even in Pamplona which also has a large area owned by the government that has been sequestered, it doesn’t matter where, thank you for the electricity that will be generated. If he builds it first in the Bondoc Peninsula, which is adjacent to this district, we are still thankful because we can sell our waste products to him. So, that’s important, we can sell waste products. The waste will not be wasted and we might even have electricity, as Danny mentioned, that will save on drying mechanical dryers compared to sun-drying rice on cement which is not efficient.

But aside from the waste products of the Biomass Power Plant, the First District of Camarines Sur is also very important because it is a watershed of the Bicol River Basin. And that’s the second topic I want to discuss this morning. The district needs to take the lead in taking care of trees because we are a watershed.

Our priority is to implement the Bicol River Basin Project which covers forest management, irrigation and flood control. In fact, when I went to America in 2001, my first visit to President Bush, that was the first thing signed by the Philippine Government and the World Bank to fund the Bicol River Basin Project. (Applause)

But now, thanks to the help of former congressman Nonoy Andaya, Congressman Danny Suarez, Congressman Joey Solis, they passed the Value Added Tax. We no longer need to borrow from the World Bank for the Bicol River Basin Project. (Applause) So, it may or may not arrive, depending on… or other components will arrive but not everything can be done immediately, we can already start.

In Forest Management, for example, Nonoy already put in the budget… there are 129 million pesos (Applause) for reforestation. And not only that, the DENR is currently bidding it out, so implementation is near.

Now, there is a DENR component, there are local government components. Because if we remember correctly, according to the law, the communal forest has already been devolved to the local government. So, today I thought of this as a gift to the Bicol River Basin communities on Cong Dato’s birthday, I will give a check for reforestation to the various towns, ten towns in this district. (Applause) The amounts vary because the towns are of different sizes. But what I can say is that the smaller ones, if the amount is obtained, will be increased until you are all equal. So, this is because there are populations of 30,000 or below, there are also very large towns like Libmanan, so the amounts vary, but as long as you finish it, it will be increased again.

For irrigation, the Libmanan-Cabusao Irrigation Project will be intensified. (Applause) I was told by some colleagues here that this irrigation, some of the irrigation canals date back to the time of my father, President Diosdado Macapagal. But the problem with those built in the past, ever since then throughout the Philippines, no administration has really rehabilitated, so one of our priorities in our administration is to rehabilitate old irrigation projects. But here in Libmanan-Cabusao, I heard from the farmers that they are burdened by pump irrigation.

So it is better to make it a dam and gravity. (Applause) And isn't it, if it's a dam, gravity, what? If it's a dam, gravity, right? Okay. So, the current one serves 1,500 hectares, we will spend 700 million pesos for the dam so that four thousand hectares in Libmanan-Cabusao can be irrigated. (Applause) Artie Yap is a pity he's not here because he has the flu, he wanted to personally show you his advertisement in the Philippine Star. Because last Saturday, the first publication for the bidding of the Libmanan-Cabusao Dam and Irrigation Project was made, which is the largest component of the Bicol River Basin Project. (Applause)

For flood control, 600 million pesos is needed for the twenty-four kilometer embankment along the river in Libmanan-Cabusao, as well as the flood gates. Since 2005, you may not have noticed, we have been gradually releasing, building revetments and 170 million pesos have already been spent. But we want to speed it up. So I spoke to Secretary Ebdane to release another 200 million pesos now to speed up the embankment of the Bicol River Basin. (Applause)

But the Bicol River Basin is not the only important source of assistance from the national government. Bicol CARE, if you remember, the “Bicol Calamity Assistance and Rehabilitation”. And in that Bicol CARE project, I learned that the Center for Health Development in San Fernando is complete and there is a lot of help, even up to Sorsogon. In the Bicol Sanitarium in Cabusao, it is almost finished, but there was a lack of funds because some were diverted to Albay — not diverted to Sorsogon, diverted to Albay, never mind — to help fill the diverted amount, I also have a check for one million pesos for the communication system of the Bicol Sanitarium in Cabusao. (Applause)

But it wasn't all finished, there's another request if it's possible to build the Libmanan-Canaman Bridge. (Applause) And the DPWH looked at how much it would cost, it's 800 million pesos, but I called Jun Ebdane if we have any bridge project funds that we can still use to reduce costs. Because this is like two bridges, there is an island in between, so he will look into that. But whatever it is, whether it's the whole 800 million or something less than that, Secretary Ebdane said he will do it. (Applause)

So this… in this matter, instead of a 40-minute travel time from Pili Airport to Naga, instead of 40 minutes, the travel time will only be 15 minutes. (Applause)

So these are our plans to do for the towns here in the First District of Camarines Sur.

What I ask of you is to continue our unity, let us help each other – the national government, the local government, all the citizens of the different towns towards accelerating development not only of the railroad towns of Camarines Sur but also of the entire Bicol Region and the entire Philippines.

Thank you all very much. (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Launching Ceremony of the Libmanan Biogen Power Plant. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412115400/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1694&Itemid=38