Thank you. Thank you.

Thank you very much, Secretary Peter Favila.

Other members of the cabinet and government officials; Ambassador Donald Dee, happy birthday! Heads of the other organizations and foreign chambers; leading players in the business community; honored guests; ladies and gentlemen.

Thank you for organizing this event upon my request, not only because it’s Donald’s birthday, but because it’s often difficult to see the progress of the nation on a day-to-day basis and sometimes it’s important for us to get together and take stock. And heaven knows the crisis of the moment or the headline of the day can be unsettling and discouraging. Every molehill is treated like a mountain; every accusation is treated as truth; every piece of good news is stepped on by the bad.

One example of this is what Donald referred to the blurring of the long- term importance of the Value-Added Tax reform law to our nation’s strength. The easy manipulation of this issue by the destabilizers and the media who further their agenda is a case of little chicken screaming that the sky is falling. Well, the sky isn’t falling and that’s part of what we’re celebrating today. In fact, as soon as the Supreme Court issued its opinions, markets rallied, the peso strengthened, the prospects for a credit upgrade dramatically improved.

No one likes to raise taxes here or anywhere in the world, but you the movers and shakers of the economy should take deep pride in the fact that this decision has already strengthened this nation and will provide more economic opportunity and job creation than any other single initiative we could have done.

Nomura and Merrill Lynch have already registered bond upgrades. I understand also Morgan Stanley. All indicators are up, business is on the roll. These fundamental economic reforms will unleash a wave of innovation and modernity that will prepare our nation for the 21st century.

Today, I want each one of us to take a step backward from the clamor of the moment and lift our sights up to what is really going on in the Philippines. In my State of the Nation Address last July, I said that ours is a country divided, almost as it where two countries under the same name: one, is the Philippines whose economy after long years of cumulative national endeavor is now poised for take off; the other is the Philippines whose political system after equally long years of degeneration has become a hindrance to progress.

The good news is that the Philippines has embraced all things modern in so many ways. For instance, we’re the text capital of the world and our mobile phone usage has skyrocketed with thousands of cell sites as use has soared and prices have come down.

And our tourism is up by more than 13 percent. The skyline of Manila and Cebu has taken a new look with thousands of young workers now populating high rises fitted out as global call centers. The malls are full. I just went to the movies yesterday. I saw the movie ‘The Legend of Zorro’ and when I was looking at Catherine Zeta Jones, I thought I was looking at Diana Santos. The restaurants are busy. The airports are jumping. This progress can continue and can expand to lift up the boats of all our people but only if we knock down the wall that is dividing the two Philippines. And only if nation-building becomes the spirit of the times with a collective vision of business, government, and the people to move the nation forward.

Today, I’d like to share with you a vision of a modern Philippines that in 20 years will be poised to join the ranks of first world nations and leave our developing nation status behind. That vision is built on three fundamental strategies I have put in place: first, I have focused unceasingly on building strong macroeconomic fundamentals and strict fiscal discipline. As a result, we will balance our budget, improve our credit ratings, attract investments and have money to invest in our infrastructure and our people.

Second, I have taken an aggressive campaign to reengage the Philippines with the world. I believe our engagement with the world including the trade agreements we’re forging with Japan, with China, with the U.S., with Europe, I believe engaging the world is essential if we are to protect our overseas workers; engaging with the world is vital for our economic expansion; engaging with the world is central to our ability to protect our people from terrorism at home and invest in bringing peace to Mindanao.

Third, I insist on fulfilling my ten-point pro-poor agenda that invests in our people. We need people who have the education, skills and language ability to compete, absorb and serve in top jobs here at home.

For instance, when I came to office in 2001, there was no business process outsourcing industry to speak of. We now have a 100,000 people employed in this growing industry and you the business community who made that happen should be proud of that.

In 2003, after one year’s experience as president, in my State of the Nation Address that year I said, we must build a strong republic. And I repeat that today, because only a strong republic, a strong state can bring our country to the first world in 20 years. A strong state that derives its strength from the people and its inspiration and humility from the almighty God. A strong state that begins by dedicating our hopes and energies to the almighty.

We need a strong state because everyday, the nation faces promise, but also peril. We must transcend bureaucratic stagnation and enable frontline services to operate in an emergency or state-of-calamity mode. Terrorism, avian flu, destabilization, we must never let our guard down.

Only a strong state can create in manila a national brand that can compete on equal footing with other metropolises like Bangkok, Singapore and Hong Kong as a center for metropolitan life, because to do this will entail massive decongestion, face-lifting and urban revival.

Only a strong state can build the urban corridors of growth such as Clark and Subic northward, and southward, Calabarzon interconnected by expressways and by the Laguna lake.

Only a strong state can mobilize land for wealth creation. And only a strong state can integrate discipline with skills training to build a disciplined, skilled work force that we need to compete in the 21st century.

Only a strong state can forge a meeting of minds among political parties, bring about a more democratic, more participatory mechanism for dialogue with the people, and provide the foundation for creating a mass base for good governance.

A strong state builds an economy that can afford the best public education, the best public health, the best social services. On the other hand, the social cost of a weak state is more poverty and destitution.

Yes, we have made progress in the past few years: the poverty rate is down even in the SWS survey, employment is up, and our economy is growing. But these accomplishments are hardly enough if you’re hungry and without a job. For until poverty is behind us, the promise of the 21st century will remain out of our grasp.

Everyone of us in this room is part of a soft state, a political process, and a culture that is out of step with the needs of a modern nation.

To build our strong republic, therefore, I reject extremist calls to isolate our nation from our friends and allies in the world; I reject extremist calls that would junk the market system and create a controlled economy; I reject extremist calls to overthrow our duly constituted government and entrust our fortunes to an un-elected anti-capitalist dictator.

I believe in an agenda that builds up not tears down the country.

I embrace economic incentives, less red tape, reducing corruption for our business while endorsing a decent wage for our workers. Yes, a raise in the legislated minimum wage is the right thing to do, and everyone in this room should work with employees to find an appropriate center position.

Social justice should go hand-in-hand with enlightened business.

And let me finally say that I embrace a change in our basic system of government because I do not believe our current system serves our nation well today and won’t bring us to the status of developed country in 20 years.

We need a new constitution, neither leftist nor rightist but centrist, a constitution that will eliminate legislative gridlock, a constitution that will transfer power from the center in Metro Manila to the countryside that feeds it, a new constitution that will align the rules of the economy to the global world of the 21st century.

To conclude, let me say how pleased I am at being here among the men and women, both foreign and Filipino who make this nation work. And I am confident seeing you, listening to Donald speak in your behalf, I am confident we have the vision, the plan, and the people in this room and across the nation who are ready to make the dream of a fully modern, developed nation of the Philippines a reality.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Joint Business Meeting of the Foreign Chambers of Commerce and PCCI. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092048/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5403&Itemid=38