Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Vin d’ Honneur for the Diplomatic Corps

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, January 9, 2004]

Members of the Senate and the House of Representatives, Chief Justice and Mrs. Davide and the Justices of the Supreme Court and the other courts, Officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Philippine National Police, members of the Cabinet, ladies and gentlemen.

Once again, we gather at the start of a new year to wish one another well, and to take stock of the year just past and the year just beginning.

This is both a happy and a challenging tasks.

Happy, because we can reaffirm our fundamental solidarity as a community, a peace loving nation in the country and a community of peace loving nations in the world, committed to the betterment of human life in our country and all around the world.

Challenging, because we must continue to address the most urgent issues of our times–mass poverty, terrorism, environmental degradation, social injustice.

But it is these challenges that give our lives and our community and our offices their purpose and meaning. You and I are bound by solemn pledge of service to our peoples and our nations. Our respective peoples, our respective nations and the world. Ours is a special fraternity–those who pass through our work in diplomacy, must represent humanity at its best, but must also act to save humanity from its own worst tendencies. That is also what politicians must do, and that is also what the armed forces and the police must do.

Here in the Philippines, 2004 is shaping up to be a year fraught with both challenge and opportunity. Our resolve to stay the course of the downpayment that we had put in, in reform and reconciliation will be put to the test. But this is a test we face with confidence and enthusiasm.

We have no choice, but to move forward on this path of growth. Like many of the countries represented in this hall today, the Philippines is caught between the claims of its feudal past and the imperatives of the global future. We must complete the revolution that our forebears began more than a century ago and take the mission to uplift the life of every Filipino to the global stage.

During the short time that I had been President, I have been fighting in behalf of our people and our nation to make a strong, secure and respected. I have been fighting to improve the image, respect and clout of the Philippines abroad in order to aid our quality of life here at home. I have been fighting to secure the rights and privileges of our overseas Filipinos in order to aid their friends and families here at home. I have been fighting for peace in Mindanao with our allies abroad in order to bring stability, unity, and prosperity to our Muslims and Christian peoples here at home. I am happy reviewing what we have been able to do in the short time of my Presidency.

No longer is the Philippines an isolated nation from the modern world . And we thank divine providence. We thank you the members of the diplomatic corps, we thank my fellow policy makers, we thank our law enforcers and keepers of the peace for helping us restore the luster of the nation and the respect of the world. We thank divine providence and you, dear friends, for being together with me in the fight against terrorism and for peace in Mindanao. We thank divine providence , the government officials of the Philippines and the government’s of the diplomats represented here that for the first time in a generation we’re Asia’s representative through the Security Council of the United Nations.

We have aligned our foreign policy to gain the respect of the nation on the world stage in order to champion the common man at home.

I have harnessed the goodwill of you, our allies to lift up the poor at home as a result of our pursuit of economic justice here in the Philippines and the pursuit of our rightful role abroad.

As we enter the New Year, we take hope and thank god for a better future.

In that spirit, I wish you all a Happy New Year and invite you to join me in a toast to the good health of the people and government of the republic of the Philippines and the good health of the people of the countries who are with representatives to our diplomatic corps in the Philippines.

Mabuhay and Happy New Year!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Vin d’ Honneur for the Diplomatic Corps. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412091130/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5499&Itemid=38