Thank you, Secretary Lazaro. Many thanks for introducing me and many thanks for your invitation to me and the Cabinet members who attended here.

Mayor Arcillas Nazareno, congratulations as well! Congressman Dan Fernandez, Congressman Evie Arago, of course President Mamon of the Laguna Chamber, otherwise known as Mr. Enchanted Kingdom, (applause) and our Cabinet members, so many of whom are here, and the national agencies. Congratulations on this Investment and Business Expo! (Applause)

This Expo demonstrates a vibrant private-public sector partnership. And held in the midst of the global economic storm, it also demonstrates that the Philippines is in relatively good shape. As Ning Lazaro said earlier when we were seated, “Look at Laguna, it’s as if there’s no global crisis.” Congratulations to Laguna! (Applause)

Laguna has carved out a name as the industrial area with perhaps the widest array of investment venues in what we call the Luzon Urban Beltway. And it is also part of the Cyber Corridor. In fact, one reason why Rey Chua is here, our ICT chair, together with Larry and Peter, is that we are proud to congratulate Metro Laguna, made up of Sta. Rosa, Calamba, San Pablo, Cabuyao and Los Baños, as having been selected by the Business Process Outsourcing Association as the next wave city’s, number one after Metro Manila. (Applause) So, it is indeed a part of the Cyber Corridor as well.

And it is also one of the nation’s major rice producing provinces. So, Laguna is truly a microcosm of the entire Philippines.

But today, we’re talking about the Luzon Urban Beltway, the Cyber Corridor — two of our five natural sub-economies or “super regions” of the Philippines where we are spending hundreds of billions under our Medium-Term Public Investment Program.

The Luzon Urban Beltway consists of most of Central Luzon, Metro Manila, CALABARZON, Mindoro and Marinduque. And if it has to be a good urban beltway, it must be globally competitive for urban service and industrial sectors with a high quality of life for its people. And indeed, this Luzon Urban Beltway produces more than one-half of the country’s Gross Domestic Product.

To be globally competitive in our Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan we invest in five strategic measures:

You can see that we are fixing the SLEX and after this, the SLEX will be connected to STAR. And the SLEX connected to C-5 will be connected to NLEX. So, all of this will be discussed later in our Cabinet meeting which we are holding here in Sta. Rosa, Laguna. (Applause)

The logistics involve the movement of people and goods. So, this includes travel expenses and currently, according to Secretary Larry Mendoza, the LTFRB is holding a hearing to discuss how to lower fares because the price of oil is decreasing.

But what I want to discuss now to reduce the cost of electricity in the urban beltway, PEZA now offers reduced rates for the locators. And the implementation of open access awaits the consummation of the Calaca investment in the power sector. We expect this to be completed by November. And what Calaca is waiting for is the decision of the Energy Regulatory Commission regarding what charges can be imposed on the power generating plants.

Earlier than this, we began the “Time of Use” method of computing power rates along with the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market and MERALCO’s Customer Choice Program and High Load Factor Discounts for consumers that are consuming at least 5 megawatts. Loans of electric cooperatives have been condoned. And recently, the ERC ruled that the system’s loss recovery cannot be more than 8 percent.

Later in our Cabinet meeting, we will also discuss how we can further lower our energy costs, especially for SMEs and for the ordinary Filipino.

Your government is doing everything in its power to put food on the table, because a full employee is less likely to ask for an increase in their salary. And to protect the paycheck therefore from high prices and high inflation, we are also continuing to invest in our nation’s system of healthcare, education and social services.

Because the relative strength and resilience of our people and our economy is still no consolation to the Filipino who has to pay higher prices for basic commodities, we are aware of the pressures you face from high prices and high rates of inflation. We know that you, especially those employees and professionals, are concerned about job security and the buying power of your wages and salaries. We are also concerned.

That is why we are working hard to keep down the prices of rice, food and fuel, and to increase the number of jobs and investments that will continue to generate high-paying employment opportunities for more of our countrymen. That is why my Cabinet and I came here because this Expo is a big contribution in finding more investments.

As for the farmers, they’re getting the investments they need. The government will continue its unprecedented support for agriculture via the F.I.E.L.D.S. program. The NFA will buy one million metric tons from Filipino farmers compared to last year’s less than 100,000 metric tons. In fact, Arty Yap told me that to date, the NFA has purchased 330,000 metric tons compared to 30,000 the last time around. Hopefully, our farmers, because many of them are receiving good prices from the NFA, will plant even more rice.

And with this, we expect inflation, which has started to come down, to come down even more. And the price of rice, which has started to come down, should go down even more. And with that, we expect the earning power of your workers and officers’ paycheck to increase.

Our economic team, here is Peter, is working to rein in inflation — because Peter is a member of the Monetary Board — and to monitor prices. That is his job along with the local government as DTI Secretary and to put the price manipulators out of business.

He and we will continue to make spot checks in markets to make sure no one is taking advantage of their fellow citizens during this challenging time. But this challenging time is still allowing Laguna to hold expos.

This Expo — Congratulations to all of you! — (applause) this Expo makes me optimistic about our future. It makes me optimistic about the hope–optimism and resilience of the people of Laguna.

A key objective of this Expo is to demonstrate the excellence of the province of Laguna as a center for investment and business. It also serves as proof of the competence, beauty, readiness, and resilience of the people of Laguna in promoting development.

So, for playing such an important role in our country’s economy, thank you all very much.

Thank you. (Applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 1st Laguna Investment and Business Expo. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134804/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1766&Itemid=38