Congratulations to Yazaki Torres and the people of Batangas on your expansion and the inauguration of the St. Frances Cabrini Cancer Institute.

Yazaki Torres has grown from two hundred employees in 1974 to eight thousand now, serving the wiring harness needs of vehicles around the world.

I learned that St. Frances Cabrini started to serve the health requirements of Yazaki-Torres employees and other clients in the industry.

We are visiting factories to personally attend to the working conditions of labor. I encourage wage and non-wage benefits like the medical center in Cabrini and day care centers for mothers in the work place.

As we travel abroad, we will continue to fight for the interests of our vital OFWs in places that are far from home, including Japan. Our government has worked long and hard to improve the quality of life of our brothers and sisters abroad. We will remain vigilant in that effort until the end of my term.

We will also leave no stone unturned as we seek even more foreign investments to bring more jobs to our nation. We will do everything to project a positive image of the Philippines to the world. The Filipino worker is the best in the world. We want the world to know that we not only have great people, but that as a nation we live up to our global responsibilities.

The success of Yazaki-Torres is a tribute both to the excellence of its Filipino workforce and to the vision of its Filipino and Japanese investors.

The Japan-Philippines Economic Partnership Agreement will further enhance our partnership.

To quote the respected economist Winnie Monsod:

The benefits of the JPEPA far exceed the costs. The draft agreement has been available on the internet since sometime the end of 2003/beginning of 2004. And the agreement is negotiated every five years.

The Philippines was the first country (after Singapore) with which Japan pursued the idea of an Economic Partnership Agreement. But it has entered into the same kind of agreements with Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia and Brunei. Here we are, at the starting point, with everybody moving in front of us.

The Philippine Institute of Development Studies estimates JPEPA benefits between P 6.5 billion and P 110 billion, due to an improved investment climate, with projected direct foreign investment from Japan amounting to P365 billion, plus more than 200,000 jobs; compared with costs of around P 4 billion because of tariff reductions. The studies also show an overall positive impact on poverty eradication.

Tariffs on our farm goods would fall to zero, boosting exports of Philippine produce. Add to that the high-wage hiring of our nurses and caregivers.

About the environmental issue – the fear that we are going to be made a dumping ground for Japanese toxic wastes. Their importation is banned (by international as well as national fiat). In any case, Japan has signed a side letter making that even clearer.

The JPEPA is worth it. We cannot afford not to ratify, because with everyone else but us on board, the Japanese will take the business to them.

We hope the Senate will ratify the JPEPA when Congress convenes next week.

Let us all work together for our collective progress and a bright future!

We must put the interests of the individual Filipino we above all else.

In this challenging task, I count on the cooperation of all hardworking Batanguenos.

Long live our countrymen at Yazaki Torres!

And thank you very much to all of you again!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech During a Visit to the Expansion Facility of Yazaki-Torres Manufacturing, Inc.. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412122119/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1349&Itemid=38