Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the Third Philippine International Sisterhood and Twinning Association, Inc. (PHISTA) Region IV-A (CALABARZON) Chapter Assembly Cum Seminar Workshop and First Tourism Summit.

Thank you very much. Thank you very much Secretary Mendoza for your introduction. It is fitting that Secretary Mendoza introduce me because he is a true son of Batangas, from San Juan, Batangas. And not only that, his town of San Juan is where the newest tourism attraction of Batangas and CALABARZON is located, Laiya Beach. Congratulations!

But before anything else, after my thanks, I would also like to greet our officials who organized this meeting: first of all our host governor, Ate Vi, Governor Vilma Santos Recto; and our host city mayor, Mayor Eddie Dimacuha. You remember Eddie, when I was a senator I would suddenly show up at your house for breakfast, thank you for accommodating me when I come uninvited for breakfast. But thank you also to Benny Brizuela, the president of PHISTA Region. Thank you for your invitation and thank you also for the expression of support given to me today by the PHISTA officials.

Congratulations! to Mayor Sandoval, he is in charge of the twinning which is very important and a big help to our local governments. And I also greet Governor Mark Leviste, our very young vice governor here in the province, and Undersecretary Palabyab of… undersecretary in the Department of Tourism, as well as the other Tourism officials here. And to all of you officials, citizens, I saw many students, good morning to all of you.

Although the morning is beautiful, let me appeal to you, for all of us to pray for our people throughout Luzon. First of all for those who have lost loved ones, homes, property, and for many who have lost hope for the future due to the calamities of nature that is still wreaking havoc on parts of our islands.

And let us pray that this new typhoon coming will spare us from great suffering because I am tracking it. And supposedly last midnight, we should have already been feeling the rain and wind, and supposedly today the landfall would occur and there was a threat that it would become a super typhoon. But in our prayers, the latest news from 195 kilometers per hour which we thought would increase to 200 plus seems to have gone down to 160 kilometers per hour. And the rainband has become smaller, supposedly even if it hits Cagayan province, its rain and wind would reach Central Luzon, but now its rainband has become smaller and the movement has weakened because a high pressure area is hindering it so it might make landfall on Monday, giving us more time to prepare. And let us pray that it weakens completely and when it arrives here or hopefully it avoids us and is very weak and brings no more disasters to us.

But the weather is so good now, you had a meeting in between supposedly big typhoons and the weather is so beautiful, that is a great thanks to our Lord, it means that your PHISTA General Assembly is blessed. So thank you to PHISTA and Ate Vi for hosting this Tourism Summit. With your kindness, you remind everyone of the beauty of CALABARZON. And because you are here in Batangas, the beauty of Batangas which has so many beautiful beach resorts and is known not only for being historical but also for the beauty of your environment.

So your theme is very beautiful: “Together, we will Build CALABARZON LGUs’ Economic Growth through Community Partnership, Education and Tourism.” Isn't that right, Benny, is that your theme? Your theme is timely for the region and for our country because what we can achieve for the tourism of CALABARZON, which is the largest region in the country, will have an impact on the lives not only of the people here but throughout the country and not only now but for different generations.

You know, when this affair was first on my schedule, my presence was briefly cancelled supposedly because I was going to Spain at the invitation of the government there. But because of the disasters, I cancelled and was able to come back here now. But I mentioned Spain because Spain's wealth comes from tourism and there was a time when Spain's income from tourism was higher than Saudi Arabia's income from oil, that's how much can happen with tourism in an economy.

So this undertaking is important and also timely because our work is taking place during a global economic crisis that still exists in many parts of the world, and it is also happening during a crisis coming from natural disasters. They say that in 2007, there was a food crisis, then in 2008 there was a financial and economic crisis – we are talking about the whole world – and now there is a climate change crisis.

The economic crisis, we admit, is man-made because it is often the result of wrong decisions by some of our colleagues in the world. For example, there in America, the excessive lending, all sorts of lending even with bad credit, someone holding twenty credit cards. I don't know if the young people watched Confessions of a Shopaholic, she had twenty credit cards and kept buying even though she couldn't pay. That's really true and that kind of credit was the source of the crisis first in America, and because America is the largest country in the world, it reached different parts of the world. So that crisis came from people.

But natural disasters are also becoming more frequent. In our region, it is also blamed on global warming, and who made global warming – humanity too. Because of excessive use of oil, coal, because garbage is neglected, because trees are killed, those contribute to global warming.

If people made these problems, then people should also solve these problems. And there is no other time more than now that we need more cooperation and unity, and tourism has a big impact not only on the economy but also on the environment because the more beautiful the environment, the more attractive a place is to tourists.

So I congratulate the LGUs that have town twinning. So there are over 60 of you now Benny and you expect to become 100 so this is a good advertisement for twinning so I congratulate the PHISTA Chapter of CALABARZON. Congratulations on what you are doing! The concept of twinning of towns and cities can help a lot. Often the twin, as Benny mentioned, Lucena is twinned, are cities in developed economies, so your twins are those kinds of economies, our towns can learn new methods from towns in other countries, especially about modern systems and technologies that are happening in wealthy economies.

They also have something to learn from us, especially in showing that we can work together to confront the challenge of the global economic disaster and work together to offer help and provide new ways to fight natural disasters.

Well, regarding the economy, I won't be able to go to Batangas and I won't be able to meet with Ate Vi if we don't talk about how to strengthen our economy against the global economic crisis also because of the sacrificial work done by Senator Ralph Recto in our fiscal reforms.

Although the world has been hit by an economic crisis, we are still strong compared to other countries. That is why I invite the people of CALABARZON to prepare for the resurgence of our global economy. Because many lessons have been learned and the reforms needed to restore the world economy are already being implemented. There are small signs of the world economy's recovery, for example, here in CALABARZON — this is the heartland of our country's industry — our export sector is what went down. Although other parts of the economy remained stable, our exports declined. But now it is gradually recovering.

Therefore, CALABARZON will surely be among the leaders in development again because you have a strong faith in God, you are hardworking, and you are courageous. Aren't the Batangueños well-known for their bravery and self-confidence? Community partnership is the theme of your assembly here, a partnership for development. So I congratulate you all. CALABARZON is known for industry, but that doesn't mean you won't also utilize the beauty of the region given by God.

Take care of it and it will bring further development through tourism in CALABARZON.

To all of you, thank you very much and Long Live CALABARZON!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 3rd Philippine International Sisterhood and Twinning Association, Inc. (PHISTA) Region IV-A (CALABARZON) Chapter Assembly Cum Seminar Workshop and 1st Tourism Summit. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134019/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26595&Itemid=38