Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas for your introduction of me.

Can you hear me? Okay. Yes, you may all be seated.

Let me begin by introducing my companions here on stage who are all here to visit you. First, the superstar of the senate, Senator Miriam Defensor-Santiago; we have five congressmen with us tonight: from Lanao, Congressman Tikbong Badelles, Congressman Jun Macarambon, Congressman Bobby Dimaporo; from Mandaluyong, Congressman Benhur Abalos; from my province of Pampanga, Congresswoman Anna York Bondoc.

Also present is the governor of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, Governor Zaldy Ampatuan. Oh! He's not here. Didn't he join us? Because he is meeting with the Organization of the Islamic Conference and wasn't able to make it. But we have two provincial governors: Governor of Lanao del Norte, Angging Dimaporo; Governor of Antique, Sally Perez.

From the Cabinet: here is our Secretary of Trade and Industry, Peter Favila; you have already met Pat Sto. Tomas, I won't introduce her; our Secretary of Energy, Popo Lotilla; Press Secretary, Toting Bunye; hey! Where's Toting? He's arranging our coverage because he's the Press Secretary; the chairman of the National Broadcasting Network, Secretary Cerge Remonde. Not here either? Oh! It seems our media are arranging our coverage. Okay, he's not here either; our Presidential Adviser for the Peace Process, Jess Dureza. Oh, the three of them are together, so they are probably on their way.

Also here is our special envoy to our preparedness team for the Middle East, Ambassador Roy Cimatu; we have with us the one who takes care of you, helping Pat Sto. Tomas, the head of OWWA, Nitoy Roque; and virtually a member of the Philippine community, he has done some… Prepared some very good meetings for the members of our party, the Saudi ambassador to the Philippines, Ambassador Wali; and earlier, he made his maiden appearance, spoke to you, if he passes the committee of Senator Miriam Santiago in the Commission on Appointments, he will be the next ambassador here in Saudi Arabia, Ambassador Tony Villamor. Why was he chosen as ambassador to Saudi Arabia? According to Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas and other DFA officials who nominated him, it's because his track record in Hong Kong in taking care of overseas Filipino workers is very good. So, he will take care of you.

To all of you, friends, good evening. To my fellow Kapampangans, good evening… To the relatives of my mother’s province, good evening to all of you. Oh, a greeting in Ilocano too. Oh, where's Paeng? There! Across there, your former ambassador, ambassador to Saudi Arabia before, now undersecretary of foreign affairs, Paeng Seguis. And even when he was no longer in Saudi Arabia, whenever we have problems with OFWs here in the Middle East, even on Christmas, Valentine’s Day, even for eight months, Paeng Seguis is here in the Middle East to take care of and rescue you.

I mentioned my greetings to you and… Oh, Pat Sto. Tomas said — to our brothers and sisters from the Visayas and Mindanao, good evening to all of you. To the provincemates of Senator Santiago, good evening to all of you. Are there any Bicolanos here? Dios marhay nga bangi sa indo gabos. To our muslim brothers, assalaamu alaikum pagariya — how wonderful your reception of us is, thank you very much. So warm.

This day, we woke up in Riyadh, had lunch in Jeddah, had dinner in Shieba, and now the nightcap with the Filipino community here in Al-Khobar. It’s so much fun.

When we arrived in Riyadh two days ago, we were welcomed with warmth and generous hospitality by no less than his majesty, the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques. A mark of the deep importance given by Saudi Arabia to the Philippines and you, the Filipinos in his kingdom.

The kingdom has a clout in the world that shall stretch forward to the millennium and the more than one million Filipinos here in the kingdom contribute to this influence. How else would they become a huge oil power without Filipinos like those in the eastern province who are working in their oil and gas fields and related businesses.

That’s why in my talks with the great king and other high-ranking officials of the Saudi government, I always boast about the great Filipino worker. But I suppose you expect that from me. The better news I have for you is that Saudi officials also always boast about you. They recognize your big role in the development of the kingdom’s economy and infrastructure. In every important undertaking, even in the center in Riyadh, in the west in Jeddah, in the east here in Shieba and Al-Khobar, in all important work here, who produces the oil? Filipino workers. In Jumail City… Juvail, you know who built it? Filipinos too. The laying of roads, power lines, who built them? Filipinos. Those who take care of health, those who held the medical mission earlier, who are the most well and demanded nurses here in Saudi Arabia? Filipinos.

Who is the general manager of the Meridien Hotel in Al-Khobar? Filipino. Oh, Mr. Sandoval, please stand up and be recognized. Okay. Mr. Sandoval is so young, he probably wasn’t even… probably wasn’t even born when this OFW phenomenon started here. But I was already born then so I can tell some of you. During the first petrodollar boom, 1974, because the oil fields were being built — thank you, thank you. Hey! Thank you, that’s why I won here in Saudi Arabia in the last election, thank you. You weren’t around in 1974, were you? You weren’t.

In 1974, the first ones to come here were companies, construction companies because there was a construction boom in the oil and gas fields in the new cities. But of course, Filipino construction companies, bringing Filipino construction workers. The Saudis saw how good they were, so the Saudi companies themselves, they themselves hired Filipinos. Government agencies, they themselves hired Filipino workers until now, there are more than a million Filipinos here in Saudi Arabia.

This group of yours, this more than one million Filipinos in Saudi Arabia is the largest overseas contract worker community of the Philippines in the whole world. There are so many, more and more Filipinos, and in my travels around Riyadh, Jeddah, Shieba and here, I see how many more Filipino workers they are looking for.

Therefore, Saudi Arabia is very important to our government's foreign policy. Our foreign policy in my administration has eight points – I won’t go into those eight points because they are lengthy – but I will mention three things in this foreign policy that are greatly related to Saudi Arabia:

First of all, the importance of the O.I.C. country – whose headquarters is here in Saudi Arabia – to our government's firm determination to forge a just and lasting peace in Mindanao. That is why Zaldy Ampatuan, the governor of the Autonomous Region, his real purpose in Jeddah was to talk to the O.I.C.; secondly, economic diplomacy. And economic diplomacy is very important to us now here in Saudi Arabia. It is greatly involved in finding relief from the oil crisis which has a negative impact all over the world including the Philippines; and thirdly, of course, the welfare of the great Filipino worker.

I am pleased to be here today. I have been to Saudi Arabia many times. The first time, as a tourist, in Jeddah. The second time, as a senator, in Jeddah and Riyadh. Now as president I need to go, especially at this time, I need to go to the center of the oil and gas industry here in the world, none other than Al-Khobar. This is very important.

And earlier, when I was riding the Saudi Aramco plane from Jeddah to Shieba, Secretary Lotilla and Secretary Sto. Tomas showed me a message from the Minister of Oil, and what did the oil minister say? He conveyed his assurances that in an unlikely event of a destruction in the Philippine oil supply from other sources, Saudi Arabia is prepared to make up for shortfalls.

First of all, because they have an investment in the Philippines, Petron. And secondly, considering – Al-Khobar and only in Saudi Aramco, three thousand are already employed on their contractors’ payroll, they know of 50,000 and with the whole multiplier effect here in the eastern province 400,000 – of course, considering you, their investments in the Philippines, and our visit and engagement with the great king of Saudi Arabia, of course they will not neglect the Philippines.

You are one of the four largest groups of overseas workers here in Saudi Arabia. The three others: India, Pakistan, Egypt. The Minister of Social Welfare told me these statistics because he was my Cabinet-in-attendance, my escort wherever I went in Riyadh. The minister added that the difference between Filipinos and other overseas workers communities is that almost all Filipinos, eighty percent, are in managerial and technical positions. That’s what they told me in Riyadh. When I went to Jeddah, the Arab businessmen who were with me at lunch added that Filipinos are number one in skill and kindness.

Near Jeddah there is also a new petrodollar boom, even bigger than the petrodollar boom in 1974. What is this? The establishment of King Abdullah Economic City which is several times larger than Juvail and larger than the countries around it. And that is just one, there are four more economic zones that they will build, each one larger than the countries around them. And if any of you – but you are all so young – if any of you remember the boom in 1974, this is many times bigger than that boom. And according to the head of the Saudi Arabia General Investment Authority who I spoke with during a briefing yesterday, in this boom, Filipinos are their preferred human resource.

Filipinos earn high incomes here in Saudi Arabia, so I thank you for the remittances you send to our country. Because of you, our peso is strong now. Because of you, our real estate is strong. You are buying houses for your relatives so our real estate is getting stronger. And this is really being given thought by the officials of the heads of state on how to help you here.

In my meeting with the leaders of the kingdom, we always discuss how important fair treatment is, fair treatment for you, especially those facing cases in court in Saudi Arabia. All we can do is ensure them and their families full support, full legal support. That's why I instructed Nitoy Roque of OWWA to hire an Arab lawyer to defend Filipinos with cases.

I thank the Saudi officials because when I was supposed to come here initially, right Pat? Because I was supposed to come here earlier. Actually, it was postponed several times. And they pardoned some prisoners, about a hundred. But the trip was postponed, and I said, let's not postpone their release. So, they are being released over the last four months. When I went to… When I visited the great king, I thanked him. Then I said, if I could ask… I asked if they could add fifty more.

Last night, at the dinner given by the Crown Prince, the answer came. They said they would not release fifty, they would release 138. And these 138 are not just for minor offenses, they are for major offenses, those involving blood money, but even the blood money will no longer need to be paid. When I arrived in Jeddah, I told that story, after my speech, Ambassador Wali approached me and said they would not release 138, they would release more than 200. Because apparently, since the meeting two nights ago, the officials of their government have been working overtime, looking everywhere in different prisons for Filipinos so they can expedite their papers, so that when I leave tomorrow, they will leave too.

I am pleased with this gift because my coming here to Saudi Arabia has one purpose that overshadows everything else, and that is to ensure your safety and well-being in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

You can rely on my administration. You can rely on Pat Sto. Tomas. You can rely on Nitoy Roque. You can rely on the embassy to continue to protect your interests. Whatever plans we are making for the comfort of the Philippines or for the betterment of our foreign affairs, your needs, our overseas Filipino workers, will always be given attention and value.

That's why I am pleased with the opportunity to visit here in the center of the oil and gas industry in the world to meet the workers, great Filipino workers who operate, do difficult technical work, and provide various services here in the oil and gas industry and related services including health services, hotel services that are Filipino. When I came here and met the general manager, and then I saw all of you, I said, Filipinos are really great. That's why during our visit to the Council of Chambers of Commerce in Riyadh, during our visit to the Jeddah Chamber of Commerce, during the meeting with some individual big businessmen, they were really ready to invest in the Philippines. Why? Because they recognize that if Filipinos here in Saudi Arabia are this good, there must be more where you came from.

So we are here to tell them where they should invest — tourism, oil refinery, agriculture, information technology, mining, banking — but the main come on as to why they answer yes to our offer is you. So on top of your remittances, on top of the good reputation you give, you should also be thankful because you are the best investment promoters and ambassadors of the Philippines in Saudi Arabia.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during a Meeting with the Filipino Community in Dammam. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213754/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2781&Itemid=38