Maraming salamat. Maraming salamat.

Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.

Thank you very much, Speaker De Venecia, president of our party.

Thank you very much, Chairman Emeritus, Former President Ramos for your inspiring words.

I also greet the various star-studded officials of our party: here is our DVP, Mayor Sonny Belmonte; here is our Secretary General, Nonoy Libanan; here are the various members of the party coming from our group: there's Ed Ermita, Gabby Claudio, Sonny Alvarez, Raul Gonzalez; there's our Majority Leader Boy Nograles and all our congressmen; there's our senator and future mayor of Makati, Lito Lapid; there's Rico Aumentado and all our governors and provincial candidates; there's Jerry Treñas and all our city mayors and city candidates; there's Monching Guico and all our municipal mayors and municipal candidates; and there you all are, our allies and strengthening the strength of Lakas-CMD, good afternoon and thank you all very much.

Lakas has strong hope for the future of the country and the welfare of the people. I haven't yet greeted our senatorial candidates. We will discuss them one by one later. But for now, let's talk about the platform. The Lakas platform was formulated to advance the country towards greater political stability, economic prosperity, peace and order.

Our platform focuses on creating good jobs and income, stable prices, delivering the benefits of a strong economy to every Filipino. This is a platform that is pro-poor, pro-development, pro-modernization. And as President Ramos said, “the principle of Lakas-CMD is subsidiarity.” So here in our platform, we have moved the nation forward on the strength of our phalanx of our local stalwarts like Vic Magsaysay and Chavit Singson.

We trust the officials of our party and our coalition called ‘Team Unity’,” that we will work together to continue on the path of reform, social justice and economic development. You form the center of Philippine democracy, the Philippine democracy that Joker Arroyo always fought for. You are on the frontline of change.

Lakas partymates, congratulations! For coming out as the most trusted political party in the country. Congratulations! For being the party perceived to be the most capable of addressing the nation’s concerns, whether the economy or security. We must internalize this distinction and embrace it as a solemn responsibility to pursue the fight for the rightful economic and social deliverance of our countrymen. This challenge is most timely and urgent because at no other time than now in the last decade do we have real opportunity for an economic takeoff.

The grand agenda of the administration — fighting poverty and terror and building peace is the foundation of political victory in the elections. Today, the administration coalition has the most comprehensive, doable and ongoing platform of nation-building that has brought six years of continuous growth to the Philippines on top of a strong campaign for law and order, democracy and human rights. Your numbers, the numbers of Lakas push the momentum of victory for the administration at all levels mula sa senador, sa pangulo, sa senador sa congress, sa probinsya, lungsod, bayan. The campaign has still a long way to go but the air of victory rides on the tide of the optimism of the people.

Lakas is the dominant majority party, and therefore, we have the extraordinary capacity to help forge unity, stability and a united front in support of our country’s progress. In achieving victory and advancing of our country’s goals and visions, let us be in synergy rather than in combat with the five other parties within the ‘team unity’ coalition, as well as with the essential sectors of the national community.

The victory of our unity team coalition in your respective districts and localities is as crucial as your own individual victory to our nation’s stability and the ability to secure the present momentum of growth and progress. And so I ask you, Lakas partymate, let each vote you gather for yourself be a vote for every senatorial candidate of team unity.

We want to end the gridlock. We want to continue on the path of creating jobs, capital and peace and security. We want to work with all the groups in our coalition and even outside if there are others who will join to advance the country and not set it back.

We have worked tirelessly to build a modern nation that will one day take its rightful place beside first-world countries.

We hope for the day when enough good jobs are created in the Philippines so that hardworking Filipinos don’t have to go abroad for work. We see a day when going abroad for a job is a career choice, not the only option for work.

You and I, our administration have made the tough but necessary decisions to strengthen our economy. These painful steps are paying off. Now, we have the money — thanks to Ralph Recto — to invest in job creation, new roads, bridges and ports; and thanks also to Ed Angara, more on education and healthcare.

Through strong international alliances, we have forged new partnerships that have helped to create five million new jobs. And we have strengthened our military and security alliances in the region and the world. This has led to major gains for peace in Mindanao, from the Caraga of Butch Pichay to the Sulu of Sultan Kiram, this has led to the isolation and tracking down of known terrorists and a reduction in violent crime.

For the first time in a long time, the government is doing what average Filipino families do, those Filipino families championed by Tito Sotto, that’s why we call him tito in the senate. Like the average Filipino families, the government is working to balance the budget and reduce our debt. And rather than borrowing to leave our nation in debt as has happened in the past, our administration is investing in the nation and particularly our young people. That means, what we are doing — IS MORE FOR YOUR CHILDREN. Why did I say “IS MORE FOR YOUR CHILDREN”? It’s a reminder of our aspiration, and also a reminder of our candidates’ names.

“IS MORE FOR YOUR CHILDREN” — MORE, M-A-S: M-A for Magsaysay, S for Singson. So ‘more’ refers to the two governors. FOR, P-A-R-A: P for Pichay, A for Angara, R for Recto, A for Arroyo, they are legislators. More for SA, S-A: S is for Sotto, A is for Aquino-Oreta, the two former senators. More for KIDS, K-I-D-Z: K-I, Kiram; D, Defensor; Z, Zubiri. That…so Mike Defensor and Migz Zubiri are the youth, while Kiram is an elder statesman of Sulu. And more for KIDS MO, MO for Montano, a class of his own.

There is much to do if the nation is to work towards a more just, modern and prosperous nation.

We will work to expand education, as Tessie Aquino-Oreta has been doing and will continue to do. We will work to expand healthcare, as Cesar Montano has pledged to do ever since he came across the poisoned children in Bohol. We will take action to develop a green Philippine agenda to improve our environment, as Migz Zubiri has legislated, and through green Philippines we will beautify and put order in our communities, as Mike Defensor has implemented. And we will do all these by working with you, our local party stalwarts, to see that the benefits of the new economy are spread to every corner of the Philippines and not just Metro Manila.

Much of the stability and harmony. Thank you, thank you. Much of the stability and harmony that we wish to have in society will also depend on how politicians undertake the campaign and endeavor to attain victory with honor and dignity. Let us keep these elections peaceful and credible.

And let us join the call of the church for all candidates to spare the Lenten days of Holy Thursday and Good Friday from political noise. Let us all respect the solemnity of the height of the Lenten season and use it as a time for moral rearmament, healing and solidarity.

We are striving to ensure political and economic stability in order to give hope and inspiration to millions of hardworking Filipinos who deserve to attain a better quality of life. The success of this objective is the success of strength.

Our coalition is ‘Team Unity’ — support the team of unity.

Our party is Lakas — let us strengthen our organization further to achieve our national goals. As President Ramos said, “we can do it!” right?

Thank you all very much.

Long live Lakas!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Lakas-CMD National Convention. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412150933/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2005&Itemid=38