Daghan salamat.

Many thanks, Congressman Codilla. And congratulations! On your very beautiful geothermal projects.

Chairman Pete Aquino; President Paul Aquino — but they’re not related to each other — Mr. Choresh; our fellow guests: Congressman Romualdez, Governor Meanne Mercado of Southern Leyte, of course, Acting Governor Bagulaya who is not a fellow guest but a fellow host; our fellow host Mayor Codilla of Ormoc and that direct beneficiary of these royalties here; my members of my party: Secretary Ebdane and Secretary Favila and Presidential Assistant Vic Domingo; all local government executives; board members of the PNOC companies; friends; dear guests; ladies and gentlemen, good morning to all of you and congratulations! To everyone.

I am also grateful to the Leyteños for your generosity, which is why your geothermal resources are being shared throughout the country. And we laud Ormat Leyte Co. Ltd. Which built and operated, and is now turning over the four optimization plants with total capacity of 51 megawatts for many years of bringing clean energy to the Filipino people.

We are happy in our country because we have the largest steam field in the world. Mayor Codilla said that this is the largest in Asia, geothermal field in Asia, but if you talk about wet fields, Paul Aquino said, this is the largest in the whole world, these Leyte geothermal fields.

Kining atong seremonya nahitabo panahuna konusaa. It comes a time when we are developing and promoting our Green Philippines agenda which puts an emphasis on a sustainable economic model that brings economic opportunity and a concern for our environment.

Our economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability with some of the strongest macroeconomic fundamentals in 20 years. We have aimed high and have met the challenge. Six years ago, no one thought we could get more revenues, cut down on tax cheats, strengthen the peso and move the stock market. And no one thought we could bring our budget into balance as we did last month, pre-pay our debts and raise employment, but we have.

Today, the Philippines is on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. Investments are pouring in, the peso is strong, our stock market has reached historic heights, we have created six million jobs in six years. And the world is taking notice. We believe the Philippines offers one of the best values in Asia for domestic and foreign investors.

The surge of investments has been anchored over many industries. For instance, by the billion dollar investments in our country of several major international companies including Texas Instruments in electronics, Korea’s Hanjin in shipbuilding, Japan’s Marubeni and Tokyo Electric in electric power and America’s AES which recently won the bid for the Masinloc Power Plant for 950 million dollars and will expand it by another one billion U.S. dollars as soon as they get clearance from the Philippine Reclamation Authority. These heavy investments are coming across the board in a number of industries. We’re working to make sure this will be sustained. And we are committed to consolidating the gains in new revenue by making long overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure. This includes billions of pesos in education, healthcare and training along with billions in new bridges, roads and ports to upgrade the competitiveness of the Philippines.

We take great pride in the discipline of our administration to focus on the economy and our overall economic health. We’re proud of the fact that external debt is being pre-paid at a rapid clip, optimistic that we will balance the budget in the year 2008, two years ahead of schedule, and that we are making sure to use the gains to invest in vital social and economic needs.

The PNOC-EDC I.P.O. was oversubscribed last December and the follow-through offering last July. PNOC-EDC is one of the best proofs that our privatization policy is viable.

Privatization of the power generation and supply sector remains a top priority. It hasn’t been happening fast enough for me, but now I’m glad we’re making progress.

Reform of our power sector is essential for our long-term health. We will not be able to take the economy to the next step without it. We are seeing progress on this front this year.

We’re always concerned about prices that consumers and industrial users alike pay. We want them much lower. This is why we’re eager to move along the privatization of NAPOCOR which will free the government of its subsidy and allow us to make more investments in other infrastructure areas.

We offer excellent opportunities in a range of sectors for investment particularly, mining, technology, various forms of tourism including medical and eco-tourism, infrastructure, business process outsourcing and biofuels and energy.

In addition, we deeply believe that we must both sustain our natural environment and grow our economy at the same time. We’re developing and promoting our Green Philippines agenda which puts an emphasis on a sustainable economic model that brings economic opportunity and a concern for our environment.

We have good working relationships with some of the world’s leading environmental organizations such as the worldwide life fund, conservation international, and others to help us truly make the Green Philippines a reality.

We are so proud of our Green Philippines initiative to create a sustainable economic model that allows for growth, job creation and environmental stewardship. Too many nations, developing and developed, believe the environment must be sacrificed at the altar of growth. We believe otherwise. We believe that we have a unique opportunity to get it right from day one: to introduce new industries that are clean and profitable. This ranges from sustainable furniture, to eco-tourism, of which there are many, many opportunities here — Congressman Codilla was telling me about lake Danao for example — and to developing a biofuels and geothermal industry that helps our energy independence, create jobs and keeps our nation clean for future generations.

I am happy that local governments are receiving royalties from your geothermal fields. And the local governments are able to use the royalties to subsidize the constituents’ electric bills. Therefore, what the constituents here pay for their electricity is lower compared to what is paid in other areas without their own energy source.

So, geothermal plants need not only transform steam to power. They can also be harnessed to channel steam to jobs. And earlier, Mayor Codilla in his speech said, “Unta I can bring over those gwapo investors here.” there is a way to do it. We can do this by convincing investors to take advantage of cheap power in the communities hosting geothermal plants. Cheap power by itself coming from your subsidies of electric bills is already a powerful draw but we will make it more irresistible by throwing in other fiscal incentives which an ecozone is allowed to grant. Thus, if we build these ecozones, the investors will come. The synergy of geothermal power and ecozones will power up progress.

Therefore, I signed an executive order instructing the LGUs to establish economic zones in areas near the seven geothermal sites of PNOC-EDC. Including this one. We call this program GIGA (G-I-G-A) for generating investments in geothermal areas. The acronym GIGA connotes bigness, gigabytes, which describes our geothermal fields, the biggest wet fields in the world as well as the potential in incubating businesses near them. What should lure investors to set up shop near geothermal plants is the same reason that led government and the private sectors such as the Leyte optimization investors to put in billions to build them — the availability of cheap and clean energy.

And as I said, it will be cheap, because in these areas local governments have large bank accounts from project royalties that they use to subsidize the electric bills of their constituents.

My executive order also states that the Philippine Economic Zone Authority under Secretary Peter Favila will guide you on how to establish the economic zones.

So, as to borrow the ending of Paul Aquino, I will also use the same ending but address it to the host communities: “to the whole host communities, I urge you: full steam ahead.”

Congratulations! Daghan salamat kaninyong tanan.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Handover Ceremony for the Leyte Optimization Geothermal Power Plants. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412142132/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2151&Itemid=38