Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the conference dinner with Asian leaders

[Delivered at the Peacock Room, Imperial Hotel Tokyo, Japan, May 24, 2007]

Thank you very much.

Prime Minister Abe; Chairman Sugita; Prime Minister Badawi; Vice President Kalla of Indonesia; Deputy Prime Minister Kim of Vietnam; Minister of Commerce Nath of India; Former Prime Minister of Korea, Madame Han; Excellency, Former Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore; Mitarai San, Chairman of Keidanren; other officials of Japan and other leaders from all over the world; ladies and gentlemen:

We thank Nikkei Shimbun for the hospitality extended to all of us and we pay tribute to its abiding vision in the future of Asia.

We are also glad for the opportunity tonight to hear such an important and comprehensive message from Prime Minister Abe about global warming. As the new generation of leadership of the second largest economy in the world and the largest in Asia, Prime Minister Abe is a valued partner of the developing ASEAN community and major leader of the broader East Asian community. And now, following his initiatives in the Cebu Summit last January and its all important pronouncement tonight, a leader of sustainable development in the entire world.

The concept of an East Asian community, which has been the subject matter of our talks today, has become exciting because of the success of the launching of the East Asian Summit in Kuala Lumpur two years ago under the leadership of our first chairman, Prime Minister Abdullah Badawi.

Thus, it is our great honor tonight to have both Prime Minister Abe and Prime Minister Abdullah here with us. For us in the Philippines, these two gentlemen and the countries they lead are valuable allies in our quest for permanent peace in Mindanao.

In Mindanao, Japan has joined the international monitoring team led by Malaysia to help nurture the peace talks there to a successful conclusion. Malaysia has been facilitating the peace talks — and I thank Prime Minister Badawi for that — while Japan has been making significant economic investments to build up the economy of Mindanao — and I thank Prime Minister Abe for that.

Through the valuable support of our two friends, Malaysia and Japan, the role of “soft power” — that is non-military activities — has been the most significant development in the Mindanao peace process. The Philippines with their help and with the help of other very important countries like Indonesia who heads the committee of the 8 of the OICs to monitor the peace agreement with the MNLF, we have truly been able to forge a new paradigm for peace in Mindanao. This paradigm offers more soft than hard power. It relies on interfaith dialogue and an expanding cast of international players to keep the peace.

Japan’s involvement in keeping the peace in Mindanao inspires the Philippines to strongly encourage Japan to expand the present concept of collective security. We would like to see Japan playing a leading role in contributing to community building in the region, in leading us in the fight against global warming, and in maintaining and pursuing international peace and security as we try to forge the East Asia community of our dreams, a dream that gained momentum with the first East Asian Summit in Kuala Lumpur.

Japan’s values of peace with strength, innovative enterprise, green energy and enviro-technology can help save the world from a scenario of strife and hunger, ignorance and disease. And that is the framework and the vision and the strategy that Prime Minister Abe has shared with us tonight.

Japan has the political, economic and cultural power to help the region and the world choose the right path in the crossroad of the 21st century. It has the power to help the region and the world stick to that path for the harmony and prosperity of mankind especially Asia as well as its sustainable development.

Ladies and gentlemen, there is much work ahead for all of us in Asia. Events such as the Nikkei forum play an important role in bringing us even closer to the goal of “deepening cooperation towards a true community.” I thank Nikkei and all of the attendees of this forum for your valuable contribution towards meeting this goal of deepening integration and deepening integration towards sustainable development.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Conference Dinner with Asian Leaders. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412150153/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2009&Itemid=38