God bless you very much, Governor Bulut for your beautiful introduction. And I thank you for knowing all the various projects we have in the province of Apayao.

Governor Congressman Butch Bulut, good morning also Congressman and important is your work in Congress because you are the chairman of the Land Reform Committee, God bless you very much. (applause) Please be seated everyone, sir.

Mayor San Jose, the Mayor of Flora; the new Assistant Secretary of Education, Thelma Santos; (applause) Presidential Assistant Tom Quilip; various officials; from the various municipalities of the province of Apayao; officials of the Department of Education; teachers; students; mothers and fathers; countrymen, good morning to all of you, sir. (applause)

One day, during my State of the Nation Address, I announced the start of this program, Massive School Feeding. Ten pesos will be allocated for food for each student, and this program will provide them with nutritious food every time they enter school. (applause) The child will receive more nutrients because the food includes noodles fortified with vitamins, or arroz caldo enriched with moringa which is rich in protein, or whatever can be found locally that will be nutritious. And great credit to you for starting this program, especially in the municipality of Flora in Apayao. (applause) I will speak in Tagalog now because of the start of this new program, I want the entire audience to understand.

A strong and healthy child is equivalent to a strong and healthy nation.

Every child needs a “Healthy Start” or a healthy start to the day, a healthy start to life. So Assistant Secretary Santos, what we will give through this program is “Malusog na Simula” or “Healthy Start.” This Healthy Start Child Nutrition program aims to fill our children with hope as well as a healthy breakfast.

We must nourish the hearts and minds of our children through the blessing of education, but before this happens, they first need a full stomach.

Our children should start every day happy, healthy and full of hope. They should only look forward to knowledge and not the basic need for food on the table for breakfast.

Providing nutritious breakfast to children who would otherwise go hungry is the most important thing our country can do. It is good manners, a social necessity, and economic well-being.

Indeed, if we listen to the people, there is no dream or desire that will be beyond our reach.

Indeed, God bless you all, I thank the honor of being able to start this important program, no other but in the beautiful, albeit small, province of Apayao.

God bless you all again. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the launching of the Department of Education’s Supplemental Feeding Program for School Children. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412115625/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1585&Itemid=38