Thank you very much and happy birthday to our Clean and Green Governor Ningning Lazaro.

That's right what Ningning said, she is the daughter of farmers. Obet Pagdanganan even recounted that Ningning's parents were from Calumpit, fellow provincemates of Obet, who moved to Laguna and that's how she became the governor of the province of Laguna.

Let me greet the one who told me the story of Ningning's life, her fellow provincemate to her parents, Secretary Obet Pagdanganan of land reform. Obet also organized this seminar and he also arranged for you, farmers, to no longer be squatters on your own farms, congratulations to you!

I am also with the Secretary of Housing, Michael Defensor. It's just right that I'm with Obet and Mike, because the Laguna Industrial Center in Calabarzon, in the area of Calamba, with Mayor Lajara, and here is an agricultural center. That's why Laguna is a model of our urban land reform being done by Mike Defensor and agricultural land reform being done by Obet Pagdanganan.

Let me greet… It's not because she's old, because she's beautiful and still young, but she's almost considered the mother of Congress, the First Lady of Congress Gina de Venecia. Because I will greet her before I greet her children from Laguna. The two congressmen who are here: in the 3rd district is Dan Bueser and here the former mayor of Sta. Cruz, Mayor San Luis. Oh! Congressman San Luis now, mayor before, now congressman. and of course we are talking about the mayor of Sta. Cruz, thank you to our host mayor for his very beautiful welcome, Mayor Panganiban.

Governor Lazaro has already mentioned our various mayors who are here. I will not mention all their names. I will just greet them, all of them, but a special greeting to the president of the Mayors’ League, Mayor Arcillas as a sign of sympathy, because just two hours ago his beloved mother passed away. We saw his sense of duty, Mayor Arcillas is still here with us.

Let me also greet those who take care of our municipal and city mayors. There are only two cities in Laguna, Calamba which I already mentioned with Mayor Lajara and San Pablo, let me also mention Mayor Boy Aquino. Their caretaker is Undersecretary Agnes Devanadera of DILG. And the members of the board of Laguna under the presiding officership of Vice Governor Dan Fernandez. Let me greet all the barangay captains under the leadership of ABC President Board Member Nomel Buenviaje.

Friends, first of all, again, happy birthday to Ningning Lazaro! Secondly, again, congratulations to the new landowners! You are no longer squatters on your own farmland. What we gave today, those are already titles, Transfer Certificate of Title (TCT). And we also gave some assistance to the barangay of Los Baños and also, where else was one? In the barangay of Siniloan. And those, the Certificate of Land Ownership and the checks we distributed in Siniloan and in Los Baños, in a barangay of Mayor Cesar Perez, are included as our gift to Governor Ningning Lazaro on her birthday.

I also want to greet the companions of Obet Pagdanganan in the DAR because you made this successful seminar-workshop happen. I greet the farmer-leaders, cooperative chairmen, barangay officials. And that is because Laguna is a large province, a large part of the city is rural so we have land reform. And in other areas we provide lot awards for the urban poor. So those are the two types of land reform we see in Laguna: urban land reform and rural land reform. So that means if that’s how the reform is going in Laguna, that’s how the reform is going throughout the Philippines.

In your seminar, you made many resolutions — things that the farmers will do and what is needed from the national government. And I saw in your list that you need marketing assistance. So I want to tell you, as part of our gift to Governor Lazaro, we have five million pesos for a trading center here in Laguna.

It’s so good here in Laguna, even though many want to cause trouble in Manila, I can’t forget you. It’s so good to come here especially since it’s the governor’s birthday. In this gymnasium, goodness, we can’t count how many times we’ve been together here, right? Our work here in Laguna continues.

What I ask of you, friends of Laguna, is that you don’t fall for false news or the urging of groups that want to discredit and overthrow the government.

If every Filipino were as diligent, clean and green province, clean and green capital town, land reform, industrialization, if all Filipinos worked together and were as diligent and accomplished as much as Laguna instead of causing trouble, surely our country would progress faster.

What we are doing now, giving aid to the poor of Laguna, land reform, projects for social reform for our small barangays or towns, the trading center assistance because that’s what the farmers here agreed they really need, this is a way towards the unity and reconciliation that I desire for our country. And that’s something I really wanted to achieve here. Because they say Laguna is part of Edsa Tres. There! Mayor Ejercito is still here. But look, Mayor Ejercito is here even though I am the guest of honor. So what we are doing in Laguna is a spirit of reconciliation from Edsa Dos and Edsa Tres. Laguna is also a model for reconciliation.

And because we see those symbols of Edsa Dos, of Edsa Tres here, this is a very good time and opportunity for me to express again my desire to heal the wounds of our disunity. Many of these are caused by the large gap in the living standards of our rich and poor, which causes disunity. I heard during the days of Edsa Tres, they said, those are the rich, they are the ones siding with Gloria. The poor are here. The gap between the poor and the rich is really the source of much disunity. That’s also what the communists say, that’s also what the MILF says. So we want part of the healing to be fighting our common enemy, which is poverty, and not each other.

That’s also why we continue to strive to provide food on every table. And I thank Laguna because despite having many industries in the 1st and 2nd districts, you still produce, you still plant food so that the entire Manila and Luzon have food on every table. Thank you to the people of Laguna.

And what we are doing now, for example, you farmers, you are now owners of your own land, this is because the government greatly values the dignity of every Filipino, that is why we are making such an effort to give you your needs, such as a proper and decent property, so that you are the owners of your land, you are the masters of your land.

As Obet said, I am the son of the father of land reform. So, from the very beginning of my term as president, I really wanted to eradicate poverty and finish land reform. When I assumed office, the first statistics we saw regarding land that had not yet been distributed under land reform was one million hectares. So, if we want to eradicate poverty within ten years, we should distribute at least 100,000 hectares. But we can say, thanks to Obet, with the combination of land to the tiller and leasehold, we have far exceeded our targets for land reform. Congratulations, Obet!

So we need reform, land reform, both in the farms and for the urban poor. But, we also need unity.

So today, on Governor Lazaro’s birthday, this is my call to all of you — we come together for the progress of Laguna, which is a major source of progress for the entire Philippines. I hope that we in Laguna will also lead in reconciliation, in unity, because that is where we will see if we can surpass the targets of land reform that guarantee land for those who till it. I hope we can also achieve the goal of reconciliation and unity of Laguna and the entire Philippines.

So our countrymen, let us unite, let us work together. Unity is what our country needs. That is my birthday wish for ningning, I hope that is also her prayer for our country.

Thank you very much and happy birthday once again, Governor Lazaro.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Farmers’ Forum and Awarding of Certificates of Land Ownership to Farmer Beneficiaries. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140702/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7451&Itemid=38