Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Senate President Drilon. Thank you for your introduction. Thank you for your help with my needs, with my bills in the senate. And thank you for your support and the support from all the residents of Iloilo, I won here in the last election, I had a majority of half a million. Thank you very much to all of you.

Secretary General of Foreign Affairs Honorable Rafael Dezcallar, bienvenido a Filipinas. Thank you for arriving last night and leaving tomorrow back to Spain just to attend this event here in Iloilo.

Señor Embajador Sagaz, muchas gracias por amartanto a Filipinas. Thank you for being the son-in-law of Iloilo; thank you Madame Bubut Sagaz for being our additional bridge to Spain. The grandfather of Madame Bubut Castellano Lapuz-Sagaz was a Spanish soldier who came to be assigned in Iloilo and thereafter married a Filipina. And now his granddaughter married the man who would someday become the Spanish Ambassador. Indeed, a personification of the close ties between the Philippines and Spain.

Governor Niel Tupas kag tanang opisyales diri sa Iloilo province, salamat gid sa inyong expressions sa suporta sa akon; Mayor Jerry Treñas, thank you for the support not only of the people of Iloilo city and the officials but also of the city mayors of whom you are the leader; my Cabinet members from Iloilo, Secretary Gonzalez and Secretary Villa; presidential adviser for Region VI Lito Coscoluella; let me also greet the spouse of our speaker, Mrs. Gina de Venecia as well as the spouse of our Senate President, Mrs. Drilon; not to mention Mrs. Tupas; and I would like to also greet the sister of Iloilo, the people of Guimaras represented here by Governor Nava; members of the Spanish delegation; visitors from all over Iloilo, all over the Philippines even all over the world.

Good morning to all of you! Buenos dias a todos!

As Senate president Franklin Drilon said, Spain used to be a colonizer but is now our friend. Spain became our colonizer in 1521 but Spain became our friend in 1999 on June 30th. In 1999 on June 30th, as our friends from Spain said, was the day when the last hold out among the Spanish soldiers in Baler, now aurora province, gave in and accepted the Filipino troops and Filipino governance.

And in return for that gesture, President Aguinaldo signed a decree declaring those 33 Spanish soldiers who made the last stand in baler, as friends instead of prisoners of war. As he granted them safe conduct to return to their homeland that marked the beginning… The end of a colonial relationship and the beginning of a great friendship between colonizer and colonized. Since then our friendship with Spain has grown and grown. We are the best friend and favorite sister of Spain in Asia.

Spain’s official development assistance in the Philippines is the biggest in Asia. and I understand from Secretary General Dezcallar that big as it is compared to their other projects in Asia, they are even willing to double it.

But deeper than the material assistance as Governor Tupas says, runs the vein of cultural bonds forged in blood and kinship, and Madame Sagaz is the personification of those bonds of blood and kinship. In religion and art — and I’m very happy to hear about one of Spain’s forthcoming ODA projects in the Philippines — to set up technical and vocational schools for our out-of-school youth that will give them the skills that will let them also practice restoring Spanish monuments in the Philippines. And there are so many monuments of that kind right here in Iloilo. There is also our links in literature, architecture, fashion, food. And aside from our cultural links there are also are economic links.

Spain is known for the production and distribution of alternative sources of energy such as wind and solar energy. So many times have we gone to different parts of the Philippines to inaugurate the solar power projects of Spain together with the department of land reform headed by Iloilo’s own, Secretary Villa. Then the ongoing project on solar energy of the PNOC and BP solar Spain is an important step in the direction of spreading solar power in the Philippines which is so crucial to our economy today because we face a looming crisis, if the surge in the price of crude oil in the world market is unabated.

Imagine the price of oil is today — 61 dollars per barrel. Eighteen months ago, it was only 30 dollars per barrel. And 36 months ago, it was only 10 dollars per barrel. How much the price of oil has gone up in the world market and this is a very big shock to our economy, and I know this is true for the rest of the developing world. And I think it is providential that Spain is with us to help us become more independent of imported oil for our energy.

The challenge of the Philippines becomes greater each passing day as we are faced with the rising cost of fuel at a time when we need to boost the acceleration of our economy.

We’re very grateful to Spain for all their assistance. Because for the past many years, we could only have these kinds of projects including the hospital project — that is one of Spain’s pet projects for the Philippines — only with loans.

Because before Senate President Drilon, Speaker de Venecia, your senators and your congressmen helped me with the new tax reforms, our country was like a household earning only seven hundred pesos — where 300 pesos had to go to the sari-sari store to pay for previous food bought; 250 pesos had to go to one extra worker for the cottage industry; and 150 pesos has to go to the elderly parents living in the countryside. Our taxes of 700 billion pesos before the tax reforms went to: 300 billion to service old loans; 250 billion for salaries; 150 billion for local government IRA. Where would we get the money for hospitals, for energy independence, for schools? We had to borrow and then add more to our debt service.

We had to get out of that vicious cycle. And I thank Congress, Senate that they gave me now an extra hundred billion pesos so that we can have these things without always relying only on foreign loans but relying on ourselves.

That was phase one of our economic reform agenda. And with that completed, I am committed to moving up this nation from a state of political and economic deterioration to an era of renewal and change.

This year’s observance of Philippine-Spanish friendship day must not only be about an interwoven past. And yet it is so pervasive in our country. As pervasive as that, our relationship with Spain today is also part of a continuing search of exciting opportunities that stem from a strategic alliance connecting two major continents and two very very old friends.

Today, I am happy to celebrate Philippine-Spanish friendship day in Iloilo, the in-law city and province of our Spanish Ambassador.

Two years ago, the first time we celebrated Philippine-Spanish friendship day, it was in Baler because it was on the occasion of the coming down of the soldiers in Baler that became the source of the declaration of Philippine-Spanish friendship.

Today, it is not about soldiers giving in to other soldiers. It is about love, kinship, friendship, brotherhood. That is what Iloilo represents in Philippine-Spanish friendship.

And so today, this is a great city and province from which to make the call to the whole country and across two great continents: viva la mistad Filipina-España! Mabuhay!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Formal Opening of the 3rd Philippine-Spanish Friendship Day Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412080453/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5066&Itemid=38