Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Secretary Cabral, and to our women in the Cabinet who are responsible for taking care of the women who need care.

Let us also greet a member of the Cabinet who is here, Secretary Pingkoy Duque. (Applause) Earlier, when we were there… We came from an inaugurated bridge, passed by a hospital and someone in the hospital said, “Many people are sick here.” and Governor Lazaro said, there is a lot of typhoid fever now so Secretary Duque is here to take care of those with typhoid fever. (Applause)

I already mentioned Governor Lazaro. Let us also greet Governor Lazaro, one of the most senior among our growing number of women governors in our country, governor of the historic province of Laguna, the women governor, Governor Ningning Lazaro; (Applause) And here in the city of Calamba, we thank our host, our host city mayor, Mayor Jun Chipeco; (Applause) As well as his very young colleagues at work, his very young son, Congressman Timmy Chipeco; (Applause) Vice-Mayor and the councilors who are also very young here in Calamba; (Applause) And let us greet our two legislators who are with us today. One of the growing number of women congresswomen, Congresswoman Ivy Arago (Applause) and Congressman Dan Fernandez. (Applause)

Let us greet all the board members, Vice-Governor Hernandez and the mayors who are many here. Sorry that you are standing because the place is full so even your seats are occupied. And all our other officials here, General Obañana and the soldiers and police who are taking care of us. Our scholars and awardees whom we gave awards to earlier. For example, those from Self Employment Assistance from Siniloan, we greet you all and the women of Siniloan. Those we gave equipment to for use in their training at TESDA and we also greet the representatives of TESDA here, the tricycle drivers who learned to repair their own tricycles and our massage therapists who have many opportunities here in Calamba and there in Pansol in our spas. And to all of you, women of Calamba and the province of Laguna, happy Women’s Month to all of us! (Applause)

The theme of women’s month this year is — “CEDAW of the Nation: Treasure of Women.” CEDAW of the nation, not the cry of the nation. CEDAW is C-E-D-A-W, Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women, under the United Nations. CEDAW is the treasure of women all over the world because it defends the rights of women all over the world under the United Nations. That’s according to Mayor Arcillas of Santa Rosa, (Applause) There is also a large delegation of women here — “CEDAW of the Nation: Treasure of Women.” CEDAW of the Nation is also a treasure of Filipina women because due to our effective implementation of CEDAW, many women have had livelihoods like the women of Siniloan whom we gave awards to earlier, those wearing pink. (Applause) And because of our thorough compliance with the program for the rights of women, we were honored by the U.N. last year as a country with significant reduction in discrimination against women. And we were also invited to the World Economic Forum and given an award as the only country in Asia in the top ten in the world in gender parity.

Because we are on schedule in promoting the U.N. Millennium Development Goal to reach gender equality by 2015, along with other goals to eradicate extreme hunger and poverty; achieve universal primary education; reduce child mortality; combat HIV and AIDS, malaria and other diseases; ensure environmental sustainability; and build a global partnership for development. These millennium development goals, this is the content of our medium-term development plan. That’s why development guru Jeffrey Sachs said that the Philippines’ plan for our economy is the best development plan he has ever seen.

And that’s why we are sixth in the world in gender parity. (Applause) You know, only New Zealand and the four Scandinavian countries are ahead of us, then we are the best in women’s rights. In Asia, we are the only one that has closed the gender gap both in education and in health. And we are only one of six in the world that has closed the gender gap in health and education. (Applause)

For example, in education, we are leading in gender equality in literacy rate and enrollment rate, be it primary, secondary, or tertiary. In fact, women – sorry, Mayor Chipeco, Congressman Chipeco, and Congressman Fernandez – women only surpass men in simple literacy rate and functional literacy rate. (Applause) Filipina women also lead in enrollment rate and also in net enrollment rate because the participation rate is better and the drop-out rate of women is lower than that of men. And that’s why more women are completing their education than men.

Even in scholastic achievement, women also lead. And as you go up to higher grades in primary school, women increasingly lead in achievement rate.

In health and longevity, the Philippines also leads in equality. Filipinas live longer than Filipino men. (Applause)

And most surveys indicate a decline in the mortality ratio in the Philippines. But of the eight millennium development goals, we are on schedule with seven; the eighth is the one we really need to work on. We need to work to further lower the mortality rate or maternal mortality rate.

So this is what we are doing. The government addresses maternal health through a two-pronged strategy: one is health services to pregnant women for safe motherhood; and the second is natural family planning.

There was a survey conducted in 2006, and according to that survey of married women within reproductive age, 15 to 49, 50.6 percent are using family planning. Most use contraceptives, with a few using natural family planning. But we want to, because our country is a Catholic country, and according to studies, a major influence on our decisions about family planning is our religion and our culture. We are promoting natural family planning so that this 50.6 percent practicing what is called responsible parenthood can be raised to 60 percent by 2010 through increased training in natural family planning.

For safe motherhood, we are shifting to facility-based delivery instead of home-based delivery because many maternal health problems originate from those who give birth at home. So, to encourage more people to go to the hospital to give birth, isn’t that right, Pingkoy Duque, can pregnancy now be covered by Philhealth? And the hospitals, the health services, in fact, have been devolved to local governments, so one of the big problems of Governor Lazaro, as he said earlier, is that although Laguna is rich, it has a very large population, and he feels the weight of the health services, the hospitals that need to be built or expanded because there are so many district hospitals and provincial hospitals here. So although health services have been devolved, I have instructed Secretary Duque to help local governments upgrade hospitals. Turn primary hospitals into secondary, then secondary hospitals into tertiary. What does a secondary hospital mean? Am I right, Pingkoy and Espie, because you are both doctors? Secondary hospitals are those with gynecological, obstetric, and surgical services so that mothers can give birth in those hospitals.

Earlier, we passed by a hospital and I asked, “‘Ning, is that the provincial hospital here in Calamba?” No, she said, it’s different. But she repeated her problem with her hospitals and said that here in Calamba, there is also a district hospital that needs help. So today, we have brought a check in celebration of Women’s Month. (Applause) We have a contribution to the hospital, to the district hospital here in Calamba, but I hope we put it into beds, equipment, and rooms for maternity. (Applause)

We were the first country to allocate funds for programs for women, and we will allocate funds to hospitals but specifically those that help women, along with what we are doing with the CEDAW.

When I was a senator, I authored the law promoting the participation of women in productive and income-generating activities. That's why we want to strongly implement SEA-K and microfinance for women. And as president, we signed a law providing protection for women and youth from violence.

So what we should do, if the CEDAW of the nation is a key to wealth, we should focus on it; we are focusing on economic growth because it is the only way for anyone, whether woman or man, to rise from poverty.

So this month, let's focus on expanding activities for CEDAW and development. CEDAW, and not shouting, is the fight against poverty.

Happy women’s month to all of us! (Applause)

Thank you very much. Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the Women’s Month kick-off ceremony. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123217/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1073&Itemid=38