Thank you very much mike for introducing me, and with Mike Varela introducing me, I’m sure this is gonna get into the front pages of the Manila Bulletin.

Conrad Marty, President; Joe Alejandro, Past President; Butch Francisco, District Governor and my fellow in Makati Central; members of the various rotary clubs of the Makati district; ladies and gentlemen.

It’s always been a pleasure for me to speak before my fellow Rotarians. For one thing, you lead the way in community service. For another, especially Butch and the other members of Makati Central, you were my first campaigners way back in 1992.

The last six years was a subject matter of my economic conference just a few days ago, and Mike was there, Mike Varela. And what I can say is that the last six years have not been easy for us, but our determination to implement hard-to-swallow yet necessary economic and fiscal reforms under the leadership of Gary Teves, our Secretary of Finance, these reforms gave us a winning streak of 24 quarters, uninterrupted quarters of growth, the longest in our history. The meaning of this is that our reforms have brought our economy to a sustainable level, no longer subjected to the boom-and-bust cycles that used to affect us in the years past.

Our credit outlook upgrades; our stable interest rate – I wouldn’t even say stable. In fact it is going down, and today is the lowest ever in history — our strong peso; our bullish stock market; our increased OFW remittances. In fact, may I say our OFWs sort of remain stable at eight million Filipinos outside the Philippines. But from about seven billion dollars before I became president, it’s gone up to almost 13 billion dollars today, because our OFWs now have higher paying jobs. And because their income has been increasing, the remmitances have grown so much, their families now represent the new middle-class that make up the market in our economy. They drive our spending in the malls. They drive our real estate market. Ten years ago, the OFWs would send money home to buy a tricycle or a jeepney. Today they send money home to buy a condominium on a single-detached housing unit.

I mentioned this because when I was in Singapore, just a few months ago, after the ASEAN-China Summit in Nnanning, I went by Singapore because we had not been in the radar screen of Singapore for a long time. And I could see, talking with Mrs… Madame Ho Ching, who is the wife of Prime Minister Lee Shien Loong, but at the same time she’s also the head of their National Development Corporation or Temasek. She’s so excited about India, about China, because they have a very big new middle-class. The unspoken word there is that in the Philippines you have a small upper class and you have a very large lower class. But the middle-class is not there that represents the market. And I explained to them about our OFW phenomenon.

And I was just reading an analysis of one of the most important stock analysts in the wall street. He said that these OFW remmittances, and I might add that make up the new middle-class among their workers, is one of the factors that makes our boom this time sustainable.

We have soaring tourism and great hotels coming up. Like Marriott is already under construction in… Right in front of NAIA. And then Shangri-la is putting up its best ever hotel in Boracay. I say best ever because right now Mactan Shangri-la, where we hosted the ASEAN Summit, is considered the best hotel in Asia, but Shangri-la is gonna put up an even better one in Boracay. And several others. Banyan tree is choosing between Bohol and Busuanga, Palawan on where to put their airport… Their hotel.

Because tourism is soaring, and there we have increasing investment inflows, two billion dollars of direct investment, a record in history, and I’m sure many of you here have made millions of pesos in the stock market this past year.

All of these are signs of an economy getting bullish by the day. Some of you were in the economic briefings of our economic managers. Some of you because you’re businessmen, you read the business pages, you read about them. But among the many statistics they gave, let me just say that last December, we kept our fiscal deficit down to 3.9 billion pesos, the lowest we’ve seen in years.

And our whole year deficit last year was what we were hoping would be our deficit for this year. So we’re one year ahead of our deficit management schedule. That’s already the advance schedule made by Gary Teves. Actually, what we achieved last year was my schedule for 2009. But Gary moved that to… last year’s schedule to 2007 but we got it last year.

Now we can say that our children… Or we can say to our children that indeed, the government is investing in their future, not borrowing more and more to leave them in debt.

And I think, you know, I gave this date today for this big meeting. Actually, Mike was inviting me for February 20th, but that was the proclamation rally of the senatorial candidates in Pampanga, so I moved it to this day. And then I got an emergency — not really. Yeah, a frantic call — that I must be in Davao in order to witness the signing of finally the agreement of the farmers on how to use the Coco levy funds. And that was such an important event because they’ve been meeting 20 years for this. So I said, “Mike, can we move this rotary date again?” And he said, “no, because all the district governors have already cancelled their own meetings. We’ve made a reservation such that…” So, I said, “Okay, Mike. I’ll just move that affair to 10:00 o’ clock in the morning, and go on with your activities and I’ll arrive at 1:00 o’ clock to make my speech.” Fortunately, I arrived at quarter to one.

And I think it’s good that the proclamation rally in Pampanga moved it to today and that Mike insisted it stay today because today’s newspapers give us very good news from you, the business community. Today’s newspapers all report that business optimism is the highest in 11 years.

The bullish outlook across the business sector speaks not only of the strength of our economy but of our political stability. Despite the political noise, enterprise is rising above the babble and moving our nation into an era of optimism and confidence not seen in the recent past. By intensely and firmly focusing on our economy, our administration is signaling to the whole world that we are in the race for the gold and we intend to say there. For each day that confidence rises, the Filipino people move up the ladder of competitiveness, backed up by government programs to grow the economy, expand the infrastructure, and plow back the gains for social benefit.

I believe that soon we will be able to close the elementary school classroom gap. I’m not talking about high schools because we’d rather send the children to private high schools by giving them high school vouchers and assisting the private high schools.

This is an era of strong profit for enterprise. That’s what the message I’d like to give to you, the business community. But it’s also an era for strong payback to the people in terms of better education, cheaper medicine. You know they say that our macro-economic gains don’t get to the poor. Well, 50 percent of the people in the surveys say that they have been able to experience low-priced medicines.

In 2001, when I started a program for half-priced medicines, only seven percent experienced it. What’s the difference between 2001 and today? 2001 we had all of the determination and the political will but we didn’t have the money. So in 2001, we had a hundred million pesos to provide PITC to trade in these half-priced medicines coming from India. And even at that they encountered difficulty getting the release. Today after our tax reforms, we’ve been able to allocate one billion pesos rather than one hundred million pesos. And that’s why the number of Filipinos feeling the benefits of half-priced medicines has going up from seven percent to one-half of the population.

That’s one of the things that contribute to a stable cost of living which is one of the things we want to achieve and we want to be felt by the year 2008.

Another factor that goes into the stable cost of living is our gasoline prices. We were ahead of other countries to bring down gasoline prices because we didn’t have to wait for the oil prices in the world to go down. Our peso was becoming strong, so even when the oil prices were still going up, we were bringing the oil… The gasoline prices down. And I thank the jeepney drivers because… And the bus operators because they have passed on their savings to the consumers by bringing down the passenger rates.

And even food has gone down in price. The other day, I was talking to a housewife, she said that the beef that used to… That she would buy for 150 pesos, she now buys for a 130 pesos. And all of these examples are what we mean by that macro-economic indicator called a low inflation. And as we strike up the momentum of economic confidence, we continue to drive good governance, law and order, and clean, orderly and peaceful elections.

I’m grateful to the local officials, who’ve been working with us, to continue on the path of reform, social justice and economic development. And not only… On the one hand, we have the local officials who’ve been helping us through this in the countryside. On the other hand, we have the strong international alliances, which have allowed us to forged new partnerships that have led to billions in investments, as I said two billion dollars, an unprecedented amount. And REZA is here allowing us to pay our IMF debt in full.

One of the things we were scared of was that now that we’ve paid the IMF debt in full, maybe REZA… That means REZA has to go home. But no, there’s still work for IMF to do here to advise us as a friend and as a stockholder of the IMF.

But I can only point the direction and I cannot do it alone. And that’s why I’m here speaking before all the Rotary Clubs of Makati to be able to challenge the business community, to where most the Rotarians belong, to take a bigger stake in the country’s future.

The partnership between the government and the private sector should focus on new ideas to propel our economy forward, not basking on old complaints that only hold us back. And as I said, while direct foreign investment and capital market investment have been increasing, we need more domestic investment.

The stock market at a ten-year high, foreign direct investments at all-time high but we cannot say the same. I mean even if foreign investments are the highest in history, in contrast domestic investment is not growing as fast. And therefore… In fact, it managed to grow two percent in 2006.

So we must step up the vote of confidence in our economy from domestic businesses, and we need you to put a bigger stake in our nation’s fortunes. A future based on more jobs, stable prices and peace and order.

As I said, the time is ripe. Interest rates are at an all-time low so it’s time for you to go to the bank and get your funds to start a business or expand the business you’re in.

The peso is strong which means your capital inputs and your raw materials are cheaper. It’s really time to have a… It’s really a great time to start a business and you have the market with you, the strong, sustainable middle-class represented by the families of our overseas Filipinos.

So my fellow Rotarians, my message to you is “lead the way.”

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Special Joint Meeting of the Rotary International (R.I.) District 3830, Metro Manila Rotary Clubs. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151415/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1869&Itemid=38