Thank you very much, Congressman Robes. (Applause) Thank you for your introduction of me and thank you also for your invitation for me to come here. And thank you also for your agreement with the Parliament of Victoria so that qualified people from here can get jobs there according to Australian standards.

Thank you also to Governor Jonjon Mendoza for your very kind words and thank you to the congressmen. Thank you for passing a large budget, the largest in history: 1.4 trillion pesos for 2009. So thank you to Congresswoman Ning. (Applause) Thank you to Congresswoman Chavez and thank you to Congressman Pancho and thank you to Congresswoman Lorna because the largest budget in history that they passed is what will fund our needs in the economy, the environment and education including the Bulacan Polytechnic College. (Applause)

And here we also greet the former congressman, Mayor Roquero (applause) and we have many senior statesmen of Bulacan here. Former Governor Josie Mendoza is here and former Congressman Lito Sarmiento is here. So all in all, everyone agrees on the future of our next generation. Congratulations to all of you! And to the officials of Bulacan Polytechnic, congratulations on the first anniversary of your campus in San Jose del Monte! May you be able to provide the right skills! For example, for Victoria, to your students. And we welcome the representative from the Parliament of Victoria, Mr. Smith to our shores in the Philippines. (Applause)

We hope that this campus will be able to prepare students for the things that Congressman Robes arranged with the Parliament of Victoria. But, of course, we also long for the day when going abroad is a career option, and not the only choice for a hardworking Filipino. These are our plans for the economy. These are designed to allow the Philippines to break out of that cycle. That is why we remain so stubbornly focused on the economy. We need to spread the wealth and keep the people working here at home. So, we are creating appealing employment opportunities by focusing on the development of priority sectors. For example, in Metro Manila which is just next to your barangay, there are many call centers there. May there be courses here at Bulacan Polytechnic San Jose for courses like that with good salaries.

We have created almost 7 million jobs in the last 7 years. If it weren't for the reforms we implemented in the past seven years — and our congressmen now and our former congressmen all helped with these reforms — our situation would be much worse now like other countries that are suffering greatly now in this global credit crunch. Instead, as the expert agency Standard & Poor said: “The Philippine economy is a relative island of calm in a very stormy sea of global uncertainty.”

A global economic crisis is what drove up the price of food, rice and oil here and around the world. During these troubled times, the role of the government is to help insulate the Filipino people from these price shocks and economic pressures.

However, the strength, because the strength and resilience of our people and our economy compared to others is still not enough consolation for every Filipino who is paying a high price for basic goods. I know the burden you are facing from high prices and high inflation. I know you are worried about job security and what your salary can buy. We are also concerned. That is why we are working hard to lower the price of food and gasoline — which thankfully is going down — and to continue to increase jobs and investments to continuously increase job opportunities for more of our citizens.

And hopefully this school, this campus will help prepare our youth for jobs. Your government is doing everything to ensure that there is always food on every table, and to protect your income from rising prices of goods. We are also taking care of your health, public services and education, including the Bulacan Polytechnic. (Applause)

Aside from being an important industrial center, Bulacan is still a source of rice. Our farmers are getting the investments they need. The government's support for agriculture continues, the largest support in our history. If previously the government bought less than 100,000 tons of palay from our farmers, now it is being done at one million tons. That is what the government is buying now from our farmers. So may they be encouraged to increase rice production so that all of you here will not lack rice and can buy it at the right price. As a result, we hope that inflation is going down and will continue to go down. The price of rice, which has begun to fall, may continue to fall. And we expect that in this way, what your salaries can buy will increase. And by continuing down this path, we will increasingly be keeping our best and brightest, not having to go abroad but having the option to go abroad or to stay right here in the Philippines if they want. Closer to families, closer to friends, helping to build communities, like this community, and providing the next generation of leadership.

It is very important to uplift our country and prepare it for the next generation – the economy, the environment, and education.

Earlier when I arrived, many of the reception were youth. I asked, “Are you students at Bulacan Polytechnic?” “Yes,” they said. I will end with a message for them. The youth hold the energy to realize dreams, it is time for the next generation to get involved in the life of the community — Oh, sorry. Wait a moment, let me mention Vice Governor Alvarado who is here representing not only himself but also Congresswoman Marivic Alvarado. (Applause)

Anyway, it is also time for our children to speak, act, and be responsible for our fate. Work within the system to improve the world. Use the opportunities like this Polytechnic College provided by the government, family, and country to become doctors, lawyers, farmers, those working in health care, and leaders in high tech and clean technology and many other noble professions. (Applause)

We are calling on the youth, the next generation of Bulacan who will benefit from what Bulacan Polytechnic in San Jose teaches, and also the youth of the entire country. We call on you to participate in the fight against the poverty brought about by global storms. Study hard. Finish your courses promptly, and may you be able to work immediately, abroad if you want, but here too if you want. May you have a career choice. Do not waste the opportunity because education will be the strong foundation in times of crisis.

The country needs the help of the next generation, as well as the current generation. By working together, we can overcome the current global storm. We can return to the path of rapid development.

To all of you, thank you and here are all sides of Bulacan.

We are united in offering ourselves to the education of the youth of Bulacan.

To all of you, greetings! and thank you very much. (Applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 1st Founding Anniversary of the Bulacan Polytechnic College and Groundbreaking Ceremony of its proposed 2-Hectare New San Jose Del Monte Campus. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134757/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=4546&Itemid=38