MAKING ASEAN GLOBALLY COMPETITIVE

I appreciate that your meeting is being held in Manila at a time when the Philippines is on the move. And on the part of the Philippines, let me assure you that we shall continue to work together for an ASEAN economic front that can compete with the rest of the world driven by you, by private enterprise and secured by durable strategic alliances.

On the part of the Philippines, we have made unpopular but long overdue choices that have been very tough politically, but it is a course that is both morally right and economically sound. Our reforms are investments today for a stronger Philippines and a stronger ASEAN tomorrow.

As you all know, we are preparing to host your 4th summit alongside the Philippines’ hosting of the 12th ASEAN Summit in December of this year.

And in preparation for that, I bid you the best in this particular meeting, in this meeting that you have now where you are mapping out your work plan for the rest of the year and drawing up a ten-year action plan that is truly important and strategic consistent with our regional goals.

The Philippines shall continue to be a strong player in strengthening the ramparts of regional integration, regional security and business partnership. In some of our previous meetings in ASEAN, sometimes I would notice a disparity between what the B.I.S. leaders tell us in the summit and what we talk about. Countries being assigned to this and that industry, but when we leaders talk about it, it’s not something that we have internalized. I hope that in this ASEAN summit, we’ll really be able to weave our respective strategic plans — the governments and the private sector.

Today is a sad day for the Philippines. We had a landslide in Southern Leyte and I thank all of those, many of your governments and even the private sector, who have expressed to us your sympathies and also your willingness to support us in this effort.

On the other hand, we also had some piece of good news yesterday. And we were very happy over our country’s upgrade in the U.S. anti-piracy watch list. Philippine excellence in all fields will be protected in the long run by our adherence to global intellectual property standards. We will keep on improving until we are finally out of the watch list completely. Fighting piracy is fighting poverty because it enables Filipino excellence and enterprise to rise in the global arena. It enables expanding opportunities and jobs along the way. Upholding intellectual property rights promotes diffusion of knowledge, develops local talent and creativity, and at the same time encourages more investors from ASEAN and other parts of the world to endow your strong qualities in the Philippine market.

We appreciate the help of civil society and private groups in this vigilant campaign against piracy and we must not relent in our combined efforts. I think what we were able to do together — governments, civil society and the private sector in order to improve our rating on anti-piracy efforts is something that we should be able to duplicate in ASEAN. In the ASEAN meetings we have already incorporated the inputs or the participation of the business sector and civil society. But I hope that they will be real working together and not just a ceremonial submission of conclusions.

We are matching gains in the Philippine economy such as a strong drive in the law and order front and we expect this to multiply confidence, investments and jobs.

The stirrings of a new dynamism are evident in Southern Philippines — which is the part of the Philippines that is closest to ASEAN geographically — as we push the frontiers of peace and development forward. We were able to do this because of help from our ASEAN friends such as Malaysia, which has been hosting and facilitating the peace talks; Indonesia, which has been espousing our cause in the organization of the Islamic conference as the chairman of the committee on the eight that monitors the compliance of our previous peace agreements; and also countries like Brunei that contributes forces to the international monitoring team on the ceasefire.

And even as we work and make peace a formality because it’s already a reality on the ground with the MILF, we shall continue to mop up the last enclaves of terrorists who lurk in the remote jungles. And here again, we have great synergy among ASEAN governments since 2001 when we started a tripartite agreement — the Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia — to share information against transnational crimes including terrorism. And now, this agreement has spread among other countries in ASEAN as well.

Today, the export markets afforded by North America, Europe and Japan remain strong, but the allure of our own region is even stronger — everybody wants to be a dialogue partner of ASEAN. That’s why we might even have 20 countries represented in ASEAN in this coming summit. As the agenda of ASEAN economic integration expands into East Asia, the active interplay of all public and private stakeholders becomes all the more crucial.

The Philippines on our part stands ready to do its part in elevating our grand alliance to bolder visions, bolder horizons.

The Filipino people have shown courage in accepting the need for higher taxes today to pay down our debt so that our children will live debt free tomorrow.

And in these efforts, we are inspired by the successful efforts of our neighboring countries in ASEAN. And as far as the Philippines is concerned through a boost in our credit ratings, a stronger peso and increased investments hopefully among them from our ASEAN friends, some of the gain of the pain is already being felt. On my part, I spend every working day, every waking day on education, health, infrastructure and the rule of law, among others.

The Filipino is also the good citizen of the world, ever striving for excellence and new horizons, conscious that the spirit of enterprise will always be crucial to the betterment of all.

I want to take advantage of this podium — and the fact that I’m president — to seek your support for the ASEAN trade exposition that will be staged simultaneously… It will be staged simultaneously with your meeting in the south, in central Philippines where the 12th ASEAN summit will be held. I know you will enjoy the experience.

Let us even be more determined to unite in the face of new challenges. And as I bid you Mabuhay, I also want to say Mabuhay to my former boss in the Department of Trade and Industry, Secretary Joe Concepcion, whom we are awarding tonight. In fact, we used to call him Mr. ASEAN and the award that he is getting tonight simply formalizes that nickname we have been giving him.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].