Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Toast for Independence Day Vin D’Honneur

[Delivered at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang, June 12, 2001]

Thank you very much.

Her Excellency, former President Corazon Aquino; the Vice President and Secretary of Foreign Affairs Teofisto Guingona; Chief Justice Davide; his Excellency Archbishop Antonio Franco; your Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps; heads of specialized agencies of the United Nations and other international organizations; members of congress; members of the cabinet; other government officials; the armed forces chief of staff and the major service commanders; ladies and gentlemen:

We celebrate today the 103rd Anniversary of Philippine Independence amidst great changes taking place in the state of affairs among and within nations.

The economic fulcrum has shifted to North America, Europe is largely at peace with itself — a happy change after being the center of two world wars — the middle east continues to face and present challenges, Latin America seeks progress through closer cooperation among its member states, democracy is encouragingly taking hold in areas in Sub-Saharan Africa, and Asia, the region where the Philippines belongs, strives for economic recovery even as new powers arise in the region.

There is a lesson to be learned as we examine the success and failure of nations at nation-building and this is that nations with a free and united people, and energized by effective governance, have the best chance of survival even under an adverse international situation.

For a combination of freedom and unity among a people, who are pulling together in the same direction to the cadence of a leader’s call, creates a powerful, if not inexorable, force for creativity, productivity and achievement.

Therefore, as my five-month old administration takes on the task of reviving our economy and addresses the inherited problems of insurgency and crime, we are also laying the foundation for the long-term change of the Philippines into a nation of inner strength and resolve.

Unity is the theme of this year’s independence day celebrations. This is also the basic theme that underlies my program of governance. Unity among our people must go hand-in-hand with the democracy we enjoy if our nation is to move forward.

Thus, we are embarked on a program of strengthening the moral fiber of Philippine society through leadership by example and the inculcation in our people, particularly the youth, of a deep sense of nationhood as well as the values of integrity, hard work and perseverance.

Thus, we are also embarked on programs to address poverty and the lack of education among many of our people so that no sector of society will feel alienated or separate from the rest.

Thus, we are also extending our hand of peace and reconciliation to those who have taken up arms against the government because of their political or ideological beliefs.

I am also happy to note the willingness of both the administration and opposition members of the Philippine congress, as well as our local officials, to work together for the nation’s good, a sure sign that the political healing process has started.

I am also gratified to witness the collective resolve to deal with the threats to law and order which equally lessen us all.

Right now, we cannot confirm the report which was made over a radio station in Mindanao about the supposed killing of a hostage. The military has alerted its intelligence network in Mindanao to get a verification of the Abu Sayaff’s claim that they have beheaded Mr. Guillermo Sobero.

If the Abu Sayaff’s claim is accurate, it only emphasizes the fact that it is a merciless, ruthless group that has no qualms at all in murdering an innocent person for the sake of ransom money.

We condemn in the strongest possible terms this reported beheading of Mr. Sobero. To murder and even behead a helpless person is as ruthless as it is cowardly.

The reported murder of Mr. Sobero only strengthens our resolve to decimate once and for all this cold-blooded bandit group.

Sabaya’s statements that the beheading of Sobero is a “gift” to our government on the occasion of our independence celebration, that our troops should fast look for the headless body before it is eaten by dogs, that they did the dastardly act to prove they are not “kids” making empty threats underline the ghoulishness and viciousness of the Abu Sayaff.

They emphasize the depths of cruelty which this group is capable of. It shows that this terrorist group has trampled and will trample on all the values of humanity. Sabaya has even trampled on Islam, when he threatened to behead even the Ulamas, or religious leaders, for appealing to him to release his victims.

We acceded yesterday to their request that a Malaysian citizen participate in the talks with them, after they threatened to kill an American hostage if we did not do so. After we made the announcement, the terrorist leader Sabaya even announced over radio that they would no longer push through with their threat to kill a hostage.

With his claim he has beheaded Mr. Sobero, Sabaya does not even honor his own word.

Nonetheless, I am confident that as a united people, we will surmount our difficulties and achieve the progress we so desire through our own efforts and in active cooperation with all your governments and peoples.

On this note, Excellencies, allow me to offer a toast to the understanding and friendship among our peoples and to the health and success of the heads of state of your respective countries.

Mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the Toast for Independence Day Vin D’Honneur. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409213559/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8637&Itemid=38