On the 42nd anniversary of Eastern Samar, we have many things to congratulate your for.

First, your dramatic reduction in poverty. It’s faster than the national average. It’s the highest decrease in Region 8.

Congratulations, Gov. Evardone, and congratulations, Cong. Coquilla on your election and forthcoming achievements.

Eradicating poverty is the central mission of this government and our society. As we enter the holiday season, it is essential that every person of means helps those in need. The government is doing everything in its power to be a catalyst for this process. Rice is not only a staple for our people, it is symbolic of our ability to deliver on our promise to feed those less fortunate. We are committed to ensuring that the needy throughout our nation have access to affordable rice during this important holiday season.

Congratulations on the 125 Tindahan Natin outlets in 21 towns to sell affordable rice. Eight of them are in Borongan.

Last night, I instructed Sec. Arthur Yap to set up 50 more Tindahan Natin outlets before Christmas. Gov. Evardone and Cong. Coquilla will choose the locations.

We can’t say that we have moved forward as a nation if we don’t lift up the poor and hungry amongst us. Let us be a society measured by our ability to live by our faith.

Our long term vision is for the Philippines to reach the verge of first world in 20 years. To do so, we will need a robust middle class, world class infrastructure and strong institutions of government.

We are cementing the WWII-era Guiuan airport’s runway and apron. Earlier today, I inspected the Jipapad-Lapinig Road being constructed by the AFP Engineering Brigade out of the President’s Social Fund. We have also improving the Arteche-Lapinig.

Yet in the near term, we must address the very real issues of hunger and poverty that affect us here and now.

Ayon sa survey na lumabas noong Lunes, those living in poverty have declined. But we must accelerate the trend to eliminate poverty more aggressively. That is why, during the holiday and beyond, we will do everything in our power to bring rice to those who need it most and work hard to protect the poor from high prices.

Congratulations also for focusing on the development of your most precious resource – our people. Your lowest town literacy rate is still an admirable 91.95%. Five of your high schools were in the top 20 of the most recent National Achievement Test—with Bobon High School and Hilaboan High School placing 1st and 2nd. Congratulations to them.

Education is a core value of Philippine society and family life. The hard working men and women of this nation put their family first. The best gift a family can give to a child, and any nation can give to its people, is access to a good education.

Education is the foundation of economic prosperity and individual liberty, justice and self worth. That is why we will continue to invest in new school construction at the elementary school level.

Congratulations to Eastern Samar for enjoying the ideal student to classroom ratio of 30 to 1. We are constructing nine more school buildings. Four of them here in Borongan.

We will continue to bolster our college scholarship program for those high school students ready for higher education.

Teachers are the backbone of our educational system. Without these selfless men and women, our children would fall short of their dreams and aspirations. We are deeply indebted to the hard work and dedication of all of our teachers. Their work is noble and patriotic. They deserve the praise and respect of every Filipino.

Congratulations to Borongan City for defeating insurgency. Congratulations to the AFP for dismantling several guerilla fronts of the Eastern Samar Regional Party Committee.

Through the end of my term, we aim to provide increased political stability, continued economic growth and sustainable peace and order. We will not let the nation slip into election year instability. We want this to be an era of peace, reassurance and hope.

The people can be assured that we lead with a steady hand to guide the nation to a new election and new leadership. We will not falter in keeping our hand on the tiller of the ship of state.

Our goal is to leave this nation stronger and more stable. To provide even more jobs and build more and better schools. And to lift up the poor through investments in infrastructure, healthcare, better housing and improved social justice.

Many thanks for your support and congratulations!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). 42nd Anniversary of Eastern Samar and Provincial Anti-Poverty Summit. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140020/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2286&Itemid=38