Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines On Bright Minds Read Program

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, March 23, 2006]

BRIGHT MINDS READ

‘Education for all’ is a dream of all Filipinos and I’m glad that McDonald’s charities and the partners that were announced today are giving their all-out support. Thank you very much, Mr. Yang.

Your Bright Minds Read program has been so successful that I understand from just 14 schools in 2002, you have now spread the project to 37,200 public schools nationwide. You will spread it by 2008.

With the Department of Education as your original partner, plus the League of Corporate Foundations now—Adarna publishing, I understand—National Bookstore, United Print Media Group, and now the Makati. Princess Urduja JCI, the PNCC Skyway and Petron Foundation who’s helping us in so many other ways as well for the children, a new and more dynamic era in elementary education is in the offing. This means we can be assured of more good readers among our elementary school pupils by the time I finish my term in 2010.

You and I know that all our economic gains may not be here for long if we fail to prepare our young for the age of Philippine enterprise. McDonald’s came up with this Bright Minds Read Program aimed at developing not only genuine love for reading among children from the first grade level onwards, but also the development of comprehension and critical thinking skills, correct grammatical structures and decoding know how. And that’s what they have shown us in their presentation this afternoon on the owl and the pussycat. Congratulations! Children.

I’ve known McDonald charities for quite a long time now. Kenneth, introduced the charities to me and said that indeed they concentrate on little children. And they have helped build so many daycare centers. I told Kenneth he should build so many daycare centers even if, you know, you have the McDonald’s there so that when they go to grade one, grade two, grade three, they’re use to go into McDonald’s store already to buy your hamburgers.

And they’ve helped in a lot of special school feeding activities. So I’m very happy that they have this other more software program as well. And indeed we need to have learning and reading skills among our children. And I’m glad that part of the bright minds read program is that you produce even the instructional material references. It saves the Philippine government and the Department of Education money that we should spend therefore on textbooks rather than on reference books. And I’m glad that this saves us money because we do need to have enough textbooks for our grade school students.

Yesterday Secretary of the Budget Nonoy Andaya released the 500 million pesos that I instructed him to release for textbooks and instructional materials. And I hope Undersecretary Borancing that this will be mostly for textbooks because we have so many additional reference materials that are being provided by members of the private sector like McDonald’s and their partners.

Indeed, if we want to make sure that we continue with a good world class Filipino worker, well-educated and skilled we have to spend on basic education. And thus in our medium-term development program, we are determined to close the classroom gap by 2010 by building 6,000 grade school classrooms every year by adopting double-shift classes, by distributing high school vouchers to provide assistance for private high school students, by providing scholarships to poor college and vocational school students, and by providing every high school with computer linkage.

We’ve already built more than 14,000 classrooms since my new term began in 2004. And we have provided 73 percent of high schools with computer and computer labs. We’re able to do this because we’re enabled by a strong peso, by strong investments including McDonald’s, by mild inflation, by a budget deficit that’s way below ceiling. The reason why I can continue to keep telling the department of budget to keep releasing about 500 million pesos a day is that as of the end of February we’re 7.7 billion pesos ahead of our deficit management ceiling.

Thus, we have increased savings to spend on education and instructional materials especially textbooks. I’m also very happy to be able to say that with this we can spend more for infrastructure. And we’re very happy not only with the increased investments but also with the increased tourism, with a bullish stock market, and with the possibility of reducing our debt to GDP ratio by 56 percent in 2010. And to ensure that our gains are sustained, we are now initiating charter change to put a stop to poisoned politics.

We want to give greater emphasis to values formation in elementary education and I ‘m sure the Bright Minds Read Program can be of great help.

So once again, I would like to thank McDonald charities for all that you’re doing for our children because what you are doing for our children is for our future.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].