Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the oathtaking ceremonies with Presidential Anti-Graft Corruption Chairman Dario Rama and Bureau of Customs Commissioner Antonio Bernardo

[Delivered at the Reception Hall, Malacañang, March 18, 2002]

Good morning.

I would like to congratulate our new Presidential Anti-Graft Chairman, Dario Rama, and our new Bureau of Customs head, Antonio Bernardo, for accepting the challenge I have given them: be at the vanguard, together with Commissioner Rene Bañez, of our government’s war against graft and corruption.

This fight against corruption is one of the principal thrusts of the government. Indeed, one might say, fate has thrust such a goal upon me.

My late father President Diosdado Macapagal was known as the incorruptible, and I must continue the work he started decades ago. Also, Edsa 2 which catapulted me into this office was all about People Power against corruption, a historic fight against graft in the highest levels of government. I cannot but follow this Edsa spirit, this courage and determination to fight corruption.

We do not have to go over statistics on how huge a problem corruption is for our country. Some say it has pervaded every nook and cranny of our bureaucracy, so much so that it eats up a big chunk of taxpayers’ money and businessmen’s expenses.

Many adult Filipinos have, sometime in their lives, an actual encounter with corruption. The tong for some real or fabricated traffic violation. The fee for the swift issuance of a document for an importation or a business permit. The 10 percent or even more paid for a government contract. Protection money for illegal numbers games.

Corruption is one of the major obstacles to reducing poverty, the overarching goal of my administration. It reduces government resources for alleviating the plight of the poor, and instead finances the luxuries of an unscrupulous rich. Because it is an additional cost to business, it not only weakens our companies’ competitiveness. It even makes goods and services the poor need more expensive.

As soon as I took over, I launched this fight against corruption — starting with my family and top officials. I issued a proclamation prohibiting agencies of the government from doing business with my kin. I have no cronies or drinking buddies. Malacanang’s transactions are transparent.

I instructed my entire government to formulate and institute anti-corruption mechanisms, among them the setting up of an open, internet-based procurement system for government supplies and the reduction of signatures in regulatory activities, which have been a fertile field for graft.

But this is only the start. I am instructing the new PAGC Chairman Rama to submit in a month’s time the commission’s concrete program to fight graft and corruption. The same instruction is for Commissioner Bernardo for the Bureau of Customs. Commissioner Bañez submitted his program long ago, and has been carrying it out, resulting in achieving internal revenue collections higher than target, as acknowledged by the international credit risk agencies that have upgraded the Philippines’ rating. I congratulate him and urge him to continue his work, which, impressive as it is so far, still has additional potential for optimization.

We need not just studies, but actual results. Corrupt officials must be identified, then immediately suspended, and charges filed in court. I need results in a few months’ time. Our people are even clamoring that we have to catch big fish.

Corruption is so clearly a problem that ordinary citizens and even students have organized NGO’s to fight corruption. Representative of one such NGO — cleverly named “walang ku-corrupt” — are with us today. I applaud their efforts. It is not only civil servants who have the duty to fight corruption. It is the duty of all our citizens. The help they extend to our officials and agencies fighting corruption will be invaluable.

I want our government to be remembered as a successful anti-graft administration. And I expect the PACG to be at the vanguard of such a war on corruption,  and the bureau of customs and the Bureau of Internal Revenue as shining models for  victory against graft.

Our nation has tarried so long in taking on this bull of corruption by its horns. Let us clean up government once and for all. We owe this to the future of our children. Tungkulin natin ito sa dakilang manggagawang Pilipino.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the oathtaking ceremonies with Presidential Anti-Graft Corruption Chairman Dario Rama and Bureau of Customs Commissioner Antonio Bernardo. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230237/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7628&Itemid=38