Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 1st Philippine-Russian Business Forum

[Delivered at the Cebu International Convention Center (CICC), August 7, 2009]

Thank you Secretary Remonde for your introduction.

To my dear friend, Honorary Consul General of Russia, Mrs. Armi Lopez Garcia, congratulations for steering this organization and this assembly!

To my other dear friend, Governor Gwendolyn Garcia, thank you for being here inspite of a very important day tomorrow; the Honorable Charge d’ Affaires of the Russian Embassy, thank you for being here tonight also, this is a very important event for us and I hope it’s an important event for your country; our visitors from Russia, welcome to the Philippines!; and the participants from the Philippine side, welcome as well to this beautiful convention center that Gwen Garcia built for the ASEAN Summit a few years ago, thank you.

The theme says, “ New Ties, New Markets, New Ways.” I would agree with new markets, new ways, but then maybe the ties are not necessarily that new. In the 19th century the Russian Grand Duke Alexis visited the Philippines.

In the 20th century, Manuel Quezon, who became the first President of the Philippine Commonwealth, traveled on the Trans-Siberian Railway from Vladivostok to Moscow.

So, I hope what we will have now will be renewed ties. I hope this centuries-old history of travel between our two countries will be revived and multiplied by this assembly.

We were in Russia recently, with Governor Garcia and Honorary Consul General Garcia.

After all, Russia is one of the world’s largest economic powerhouses of the 21st century, together with the other BRIC countries: Brazil, India and China. And because geographically the most part of Russia belongs to Asia, we consider the fact that three of the BRIC belong to Asia and that is one of the drivers of growth of our region.

And indeed, we are fortunate to have these drivers of growth in our region, especially in the light of what has been happening to the world economy these past twelve months. I’ve often said the past twelve months had been a year for the history books. Financial meltdown in the West spread throughout the world. Tens of millions lost their jobs; billions across the globe have been hurt, the poor always harder than the rich. No one was spared.

We have learned a number of lessons as a result of this global economic crisis. The first has to do with the value of what we did before the crisis. In the Philippines, namely, to get our fiscal and financial house in order to prepare the nation to weather times like these. This involved making tough decisions on raising revenue, cutting down on tax cheats and smugglers, reining in our budget deficit, and working to balance our budget.

Next is that we made a conscious decision to bring increasing balance to the economy. We worked to expand and diversify our trading partners to spread the risk and diversify our economy. And that is why this is important — new markets. We want to increase our trade relations with Russia. At the same time, we worked to build up new industries such as the BPO industry, where today the Philippines is a global powerhouse, as well as to develop our mining sector, of course, in a sustainable manner.

And I’m sure Russia understands what we mean by sustainable manner because when we were in St. Petersburg one of the things we learned is that the carbon footprint of Russia is very small — you are a responsible people as far as environment is concerned. And I was so glad to hear from the speech of Honorary Consul General Armi Lopez Garcia that indeed among the industries that you are promoting it’s BPO and mining.

The most important thing that we have learned though is that our economies are all closely interconnected. We sink or swim as one.

When the world faces unprecedented economic challenges, countries must work together to forge stronger relations, to keep trade open and to make greater strides in integrating the global economy so that we emerge from the crisis stronger than before, and so that we instill global systems that ensure that such a global crisis does not happen again.

That is why we welcome Russia and the Philippines working together.

During these challenging times we must stand up and be counted, continuing to work together to build a future that is based on mutual trust, respect and understanding.

I see here my old professor, Ernie Pernia, and I hope he will agree with me when I say that the story of the Philippines in 2008 is that of a country that weathered a succession of global crises in fuel, in food, then in finance, and finally the economy in a global recession, never losing focus and with economic fundamentals intact.

Last month our credit rating was upgraded, citing the resilience of our economy. We are one of the few nations in the region to have withstood the onslaught. Last year and up to the first quarter of this year we kept our growth positive. So, I would like to conclude that our economy is stable and strong. Inflation now is at the lowest in 22 years and we are ready for the economic rebound, especially with a new market, renewed ties and new ways of working together with Russia.

We consider Russia indeed as I said as one of our neighbors because a large part of you is in East Asia. We want to strengthen our economic ties and bring down trade barriers with each other. One of the most important barriers we seek to bring down is the barrier to travel.

I am happy to note the successful results of our Air Services Consultations in Manila last year. We have authorized our Ambassador to sign the resulting Philippine-Russia Air Services Agreement. I count on the Russian business community and the Russian Embassy, and our Honorary Russian Consul General to follow up with your Ministry of Transport to already give the clearance to the Department of State and Policy in Civil Aviation to sign for the Russian side.

I ask the Honorable Charge d’ Affaires, is there a problem? He said, it’s really technical. And they’re trying to match the ministers to sign. I said I have no problem with that. I will send my transportation minister anywhere anytime just so that the two ministers can sign that agreement together.

I can just visualize how much tourism will grow when we have that Air Agreement because already Russia and the CIS countries are our fastest growing tourism market. Everytime I come to Cebu, almost everytime anyway, I always see in the… there in the apron a Russian plane, for Cebu is indeed a favorite of Russian tourists as it is the favorite of international tourists because Cebu is the number one destination for international tourism in our country.

So, we welcome you our friends from Russia and we welcome more Russian tourists to enjoy our sunny weather and our people’s warmth, especially the Russian winter is about to come. We are an ideal counterbalance with your winter.

In this ever more globalized world, we must accept that no nation can remain an island. And I am glad, and this event tonight shows it, that the gap between our two countries has been closing slowly to our mutual interest.

So, I thank all of you who are here, who are helping the relationship between our two countries move up to the next level.

So, to all of you, thank you for being here. Enjoy your stay in the Philippines! Let us have renewed ties. Let us have a new market in each other. And let us have new ways of working together for our mutual interest. Congratulations and welcome again to the Philippines!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 1st Philippine-Russian Business Forum. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412100359/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25925&Itemid=38