Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Opening Program of the 16th ASEAN Farmers’ Week Celebration and Joint Convention Rural-Based Organizations

[ Delivered at the Grand Caprice Convention Hall, Grand Caprice Hotel, Misamis Oriental, May 22, 2008 ]

To our delegations from the other ASEAN countries, welcome to the Philippines and to Mindanao.

Your presence here today affirms the commitment of the Philippines and not only as one country but as a member of ASEAN, to realize shared goals with our ASEAN brethren for the agricultural advancement of our region. And when I say our region, I don’t only mean the region of Northern Mindanao. I mean the region of ASEAN, especially in agricultural training and extension. This is one of the thrusts of ASEAN.

And as our previous speakers have said, our meeting this week is timely because of the global clouds on the horizon that are driving up the price of oil and food, particularly rice which is a staple food in the ASEAN.

We are totally sensitive to the fact that a large segment of our population is price sensitive. We feel deeply for our poorest who, one minute, are doing well and moving up the ladder but then, almost overnight, are subjected to pain and setbacks as a result of high fuel and rice prices.

On the issue of rice management, this is not only a national problem, it is not only an ASEAN problem, it is a global problem that we have seen coming. In the Philippines, we have worked to head it off for some time now. Our response is based on three fundamental needs: one, to ensure supply. We have reached out to our ASEAN neighbors who happen to be among the big rice exporting countries long before the shortage hit. And we have as well invested heavily in rice production efficiencies in which agricultural training and extension is important and also in new strains, especially our hybrid.

Number two fundamental need, to make sure distribution of rice gets to the people who need it most efficiently and cost-effectively. To this end, we have moved to utilize distribution through churches, faith-based organizations and the schools, especially in our food-poor provinces. For instance, I saw a delegation from Shariff Kabunsuan, that is one of the provinces where we have — and tell me if it’s not working — a food-for-school program where we distribute rice to the children when they go to school so that they can bring it home to their families. This is in addition to our own government distribution network.

Lastly, we must be vigilant so that unscrupulous traders do not price gouge and exploit the situation. We are making sure that anyone caught robbing the people of rice is punished, and in fact, Cagayan de Oro and Region X, Artie, were our first cases that was cracked by the Department of Agriculture.

From the day I took office, we have been focused on our economy and modernizing every aspect of the economic underpinnings of the Philippines. This includes agriculture from, as I said earlier, the development of new hybrids, to investments in irrigation, to dramatic increases in loans to help our farmers purchase the needed equipment, among other activities.

And lately, we have directed our government to crackdown on price gouging and increase the supply of rice where necessary. For instance, in provinces that are poor but don’t produce their own rice, like Dinagat Island we have to supply them with additional rice.

In the case of Misamis Oriental, because you are a high-value crop producing province, your people have the income to buy the rice that comes from other provinces. But there are those who are very poor and still don’t produce their own rice, so that is a very important target where we must make sure there is supply of rice.

Also, I have directed our officials since long ago to invest more in planting and agricultural modernization. And that is what Artie Yap was saying earlier, when he introduced me and finally provide rice subsidies for the poor. Our program that we call FIELDS — F for fertilizer; I for irrigation and infrastructure; E for equipment, education and extension; L for loans; D for dryers and post-harvest facilities; and S for seeds — is our summary of our agricultural modernization program. This has allowed us to increase our rice production by more than the population growth rate of 2.0 percent. What’s our rice production this year, Artie? Five percent? 5.69 compared to our 2.0 percent growth rate in population. This is a result of our ongoing economic, including agricultural, reforms.

These efforts will ensure that we will be able to improve the livelihood of each and every Filipino in this country in the longer term, including the Filipinos represented in our Congress today.

We have yet to determine the long-term plan for the National Food Authority, but it would be a mistake to shift all of our attention to long-term policies at the expense of near-term efforts to stabilize the situation and put food on the table for our people.

For today, definitely, there is still a role for the National Food Authority. And because of their work and the hard work of our farmers, for now we have the supply issue well in hand. The price, of course, is another matter. But then, as I said clearly, this is a global phenomenon and this global phenomenon is a global wake up call that we must address both individually as a country and collectively as ASEAN.

We must realize that we must spend considerable time as we are doing today and in the months ahead not just resolving the situation in our individual countries, but dedicating ourselves to the regional and global discussions on what must be done for emerging nations such as ASEAN on the vital issue of food security.

We must work together to resolve this — work together in the country, work together in ASEAN. That’s why we should all work with the International Rice Research Institute, which happens to be located in the Philippines, to explore ways of meeting the future needs for rice in the Philippines and that of other rice-producing countries in ASEAN.

These techniques range from ensuring that farmers are aware of and can use the latest techniques in crop establishment, to making sure that social safety nets are in place. We must work together in the Philippines and in ASEAN to improve agronomic practices, to enhance the ability to utilize rice varieties more effectively. It’s not enough that we have hybrid rice seeds that have a specific way of planting and cultivating the hybrid rice. And also to promote rice breeding because many want to plant hybrid rice but where will they get it, so rice breeding is very important and, of course, the subject matter of ASEAN’s very close coordination building training capacity. If we work together on these priorities, this will help prevent any global food crisis in the longer term.

And so because we are all together here to determine, indeed to work together, we remain bullish on our country. We remain bullish on our region, the ASEAN. We are optimistic about the future.

Let us all be deeply committed to being a force for good and a force for food security in the Philippines and the ASEAN.

To all of you thank you and welcome!

Source: Adamson University Library