SPEECH DURING THE 106TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE MARTYRDOM OF DR. JOSE RIZAL 30 December 2002, Rizal Park, Baguio City

Ladies and gentlemen, my beloved countrymen.

Today, we are honoring Rizal. Our national hero is the most gifted Filipino who ever lived, truly the pride of the Malayan race.

A century ago, he made the ultimate sacrifice for the Filipino people, giving up his life at Luneta field. Jose Rizal’s martyrdom led to the creation of the Philippine Republic in 1898.

In the hundred years that have passed since Jose Rizal was martyred, the world has undergone rapid change.

Throughout the world, it is now clear the transparent, open and democratic societies give to the fullest opportunities for individual merit and effort to bloom.

These societies have created a culture that allow their citizens to use the advances that technology and Information Age have brought in order to create a better life for both individuals and collective society. In these societies, the result has been the development of mature politics, strong government institutions, and the generation of the material benefits undreamed of during Jose Rizal’s time. These are the main elements of a strong and modern society, the Strong Republic that I dream of for the Philippines. We’re still far away from that dream but it is within our reach.

Indeed, it’s ironic, that ours is the first Republic in Asia. But over the last decades, it has become one of the weakest, steadily left behind by its more progressive neighbors. The fundamental reason is the persistence of an outdated social system wherein vested interests and traditional politics have stunted development towards a strong and modern society. Thus, our country is now only a bit better but the category of backward countries wherein powerful, selfish interests are able to exploit poverty and ignorance to maintain the status quo or impede open progressive development.

Throughout the world, we see sad examples for these countries and, invariably, they are in economic decline, becoming breeding grounds for strife, conflict and even terrorism, but I am optimistic that this will not become our national fate.

I believe this because I see around me the emergence of a new generation of dynamic and progressive leaders, whether in politics, in business or in civil society. They will be our agents of change.

Thus, I believe that we can create a strong and modern Philippine Republic but it will take personal sacrifice from each one of us.

As we honor Jose Rizal today, it is fitting that I ask each Filipino to make also sacrifice for our country. Our country needs our help.

In recent years, our fundamental weaknesses have been revealed in ways that are worrisome to broad sectors of our citizenry.

In the economy, even since the Asian crisis in the 1997, our public revenues have been steadily declining in relation to the size of our economy. This has led to persistent budget deficit.

In society, we have become a nation deeply divided, symbolized by the polarity between EDSA II and the May 1 siege barely three months after EDSA II.

And in governance, there is now too much politics hampering good, productive governance.

The convergence of the national stresses such as these has led to the sense of gloom that many of our citizens now talk of. There is a feeling of too much negativism and conflict in our society.

In the coming weeks, we will be launching a series of powerful, positive actions that will improve the life of our people.

Major announcements will be made in January.

However, we also know that we will soon enter the political period leading up to the elections in 2004. My reading on the political winds tells me that the 2004 election may well go down in history as among our most bitterly contested elections ever. This is because of the deep social and political division that we now have.

If this is true, then sincere efforts to launch programs will run the risk of being derailed by political fighting leading up to the elections.

The government in place after 2004 may merely end up inheriting a country as deeply divided as ever. Consequently, we may end up stalling national growth for a few years more as a result of lost momentum.

In view of all these factors, I have decided not to run for President during the election of 2004.

If I were to run, it will require a major political effort on my part. But since I’m among the principal figures in the divisive national events for the last two or three years, my political efforts can only result in never-ending divisiveness.

On the other hand, relieved of the burden of politics, I can devote the last year and half of my administration to the following:

First, strengthening economy; to create more jobs and to encourage business activities that is unhampered by corruption and red tape in government.

Second, healing the deep divisions within our society.

Third, working for clean and honest elections in 2004.

If we achieve these, my successor as President will be in a good position to lead the Philippines through the next decisive steps for the strong and modern society. United, we can see this dream come true within our lifetime.

Thus, I appeal to each Filipino to help in this endeavor. Following the example of Jose Rizal, let us think of country and not just of self.

Thank you and Happy New Year.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library