Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Secretary Brion for your introduction. And thank you for all that you have been doing for industrial peace.

Chairman of ECOP, Mike Varela; President of ECOP, Jun Ortiz-Luis; Donald Dee; Freddie Yao, chairperson of the organizing committee; Francis Chua and the members of the federation who are hosting this lunch; chairmen, presidents and leaders of the business industry attending this conference; and of course, congratulations! To our new Lakan ng Kalakalan, Don Emilio Yap, a pillar of Philippine business and media.

Congratulations! Also to the Kapatid awardees headed by Unilab. And thank you Unilab for your ongoing 7.5 billion-peso expansion.

I’d like to also acknowledge our special citation to Buena Mano. And to thank everybody that are participating in what Serge Ortiz-Luis told me that you will be spreading your technology transfer to some of the areas recently liberated from the NPA. Thank you very much for that.

Last year, your theme was “Survive, Compete, Excel.” Today, it is “Reaching Out: Competitiveness, Partnerships and Reforms.” And this conference is a great opportunity for partnership, partnership between business and labor. And those are what we gave out as awards today. Reaching out small entrepreneurs to micro entrepreneurs; big entrepreneurs to small entrepreneurs. And partnership between business and government to renew our partnership and continue our close cooperation to meet vital issues such as infrastructure development, labor-related concerns, drumming up the optimistic outlook of economic zones such as the bill I signed into law yesterday restoring lost incentives to investors, liberalizing the cement industry, and maintaining confidence in reaching a balanced budget.

We should really get together, labor and business, large business and small business and micro business, business and government on infrastructure development. And that’s why I’m happy to share with you a piece of good news, a report that I received from the PNCC president today that tomorrow the PNCC board will ratify the joint investment proposal with Citra for the continuation of the skyway project called stage 2.

This will certainly make it more convenient to travel to Unilab and other areas in Calabarzon. And it will make our city prettier because you see all those unsightly post when you are passing through the skyway, now they will begin to be completed.

But of course, ECOP is primarily concerned with labor management partnership. And speaking of labor-related concerns, let me affirm our belief in the regional tripartite system of wage setting. I am happy to hear that representatives of the regional wage board are here, I think first time you become part of this conference. And I want to congratulate you that through the tripartite setting, you have accomplished the third highest wage increase in the Asia-Pacific region.

Meanwhile, our search for more non-wage benefits for our workers continues without let-up.

Our partnership, business and government and labor, has gone through many economic reforms. Through hard-fought economy reform battles we have led together, the Philippine economy has finally broken loose of its lethargic economic legacy. New revenues — as mentioned by Francis Chua — better collection and a crackdown on tax cheats along with fiscal discipline has put the Pphilippines on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. And the world is taking notice. We thank, of course, Unilab — that’s a Filipino investor. But aside from Filipino investors, just last night, I got a call from Secretary Peter Favila — he was with the Shanghai world trade group — and they gave me the good news of a forthcoming two billion-dollar tourism investment in the BCDA. And that was confirmed to me this morning in a visit by the Chinese ambassador.

Indeed, I believe, and I think we believe, the Philippines is one of the best values for money in Asia for investors.

There has been a surge in investments, exports — notwithstanding the strong peso — our export growth in January was 27 percent. Congratulations! To Ford and other exporters. And of course, job creation. Where aside from having the third largest increase in wages in Asia-Pacific, we also together created 1.16 million jobs January last year to January this year.

We are working to ensure this will be sustained. We are committed to consolidating the gains in new revenue by making long overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure. This includes billions of pesos in education, health care and training along with billions in new bridges, roads and ports to upgrade the competitiveness of the Philippines. And that’s why I’m glad your theme says, “Reaching Out: Competitiveness, Partnership and Reforms.”

I take great pride in the discipline of our administration to focus on the economy and our overall economic health. I’m personally proud of the fact that external debt is declining at a rapid clip, optimistic that we will balance the budget on schedule, and that we are making sure to use the gains to invest in vital social and economic needs.

The new freeport zones, particularly Clark, will continue to spur investments in our super regions in Luzon, level the playing field in business, and most of all, create well-paying, modern jobs for our people. In Clark economic zone, I have visited, of course, contact centers and BPO for we all know the jobs are well- paid. But I have also visited ,for instance, a very modern toy factory where the artisan in the Kapampangan has come out so beautifully and they’re well-paid as well.

As more infrastructure is being laid and political stability dawns on the Philippines, we continue to liberalize the investment climate, including liberalizing the cement industry, so that when you build your factories and we build our roads cement will not be so expensive. So we liberalize the economy in a way that further energizes the economy, revs the engine of local enterprise — as many of you who received the awards are local enterprises — and fuels hope and optimism all around.

On the forefront of social returns, we’ve been building more than 6,000 school buildings per year during my administration; giving out 50,000 high school scholarships per year since we started the scholarship voucher system for high school; 400,000 housing units will be built between this year and 2008; we will send potable water to 300,000 households — and I thank Manila water for reducing your water rates — we will also be providing millions of free insurance premiums and more Botika ng Barangays distributing low-cost medicine; and 2,000 new Tindahan Natin outlets selling low-cost food items. These are what we call non-wage benefits or wage goods for our workers.

We’re prepared to invest one trillion pesos for transport, agricultural and ICT infrastructure to move our infrastructure-to-GDP ratio closer to the Asian norm of 4.5 percent. As an example of transport infrastructure, yesterday and the day before, I was attending to the infrastructure for upland vegetables, 70 percent of which come from the cordilleras. In the cordilleras, the bulk of the vegetables come from Buguias ang Kibungan. Buguias is on the Halsema highway and so we have rebuilt and modernized the Halsema highway. It used to take a whole day to travel from Buguias to Baguio. Now it only takes a couple of hours.

Now, we are working on the other side the secondary road where Kibungan is. The other day, I went on that road which they usually call the cordillera massage. And now that we have built the Halsema highway, we are building that cordillera massage, rebuilding it. It’s been so rugged for so long. When Ii was going through the road, I came across a gasoline station and the gasoline station was named rugged road refilling station. And when I was going back to Baguio, I met a jeepney. And you know, where they put the destination on the side of the jeepney window it said, destination dusty road. So, that’s where the vegetables have to pass from Kibungan. So now we are also repairing that road the way we have modernized the Halsema highway.

After that, I went to La Trinidad. And I want to thank DOLE for putting up a plantation in Benguet. And the DOLE officials were in La Trinidad because the government has put up a pre-processing center where they can pack the vegetables and refrigerate it so that during the peak harvest time when all the vegetables are coming out and there’s danger of perishing or selling it at bargain basement prices, now they can store their vegetables there and sell them to the lowlands throughout the year.

In the La Trinidad center, we sent off a refrigerated van so that the vegetables can travel refrigerated and this van traveled — again, provided by the government — traveled to Capas, Tarlac where it was unloaded and distributed to Central Luzon saving about 20 pesos in transport cost.

That is what we mean by agricultural infrastructure, because a lot of the cost in agriculture is in post-harvest losses. Now the farmers have more income and they can also pass on the price, the savings to the consumers. There’s about a 20-peso difference all in all. But we are talking about farmers, we are talking about labor and management, salaried workers. Earlier, as I came in and I saw in the signatures, informal sector representatives of the business sector. Indeed, in our country, there are many informal workers or family workers or self-made entrepreneurs, and we have to serve them as well. Almost 2.5 million new micro entrepreneurs have been served by the escalation of microfinancing, and 93 percent of them are women borrowers.

And Ii want to take this opportunity to congratulate ECOP for your big enterprise-small enterprise program. It’s a worthy break for guiding your small brothers and sisters in business, and for institutionalizing good business practices through partnerships, which are the basis for the yearly Kapatid awards and now the Lakan sa Kalakaan award of Don Emilio, the very first awardee of Lakan sa Kalakalan.

We want to partner with you on our pro-poor programs: the Tindahan Natin, which specializes in selling low-cost rice and noodles; the Botika ng Barangay, which specializes in selling half-priced medicines; the price reductions in LPG; the price reductions in water rates — again, thanks to Manila water — the price reductions now in electric power rates, to name a few. We have been accelerating these with the private sector, with our workers and the ordinary Filipino in mind.

And I’m very happy to say that many of our partners are here in this ECOP conference today. Indeed, ECOP has led industry well in this task. And I am sure ECOP will continue to lead the country to new horizons of competitiveness, partnerships and reforms.

I believe nothing is impossible with ECOP by the side of this government.

Thank you ECOP for being a true partner for growth.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the 28th National Conference of Employers 2007. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151047/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1963&Itemid=38