Thank you very much Dr. King Aguiluz for introducing me. And thank you very much to our parents who spent and toiled so that our students could graduate today. You may now be seated because you have toiled for years so that your children could graduate today.

Our graduating students — oh, they’ve already graduated — our graduates, congratulations to all of you. And to Miguel Aguiluz and all the different officials of AMA, congratulations as well because once again this year here in Metro Manila four thousand young people have finished their studies. Four thousand of you are here so there are so many of you. But, according to Dr. King Aguiluz, even though you are four thousand, the many who graduated didn’t go to Mendiola to complain that they don’t have jobs. It’s good to know that you aren’t prone to demonstrating.

With the number of graduates today. They call this a U.P.-style graduation. I am from U.P. and in U.P. with the number of graduates, they no longer go on stage to receive their diplomas. Because it’s not the diploma you’re receiving from the President that’s important. The diploma you offer to your parents like what Mr. Corpuz did, that’s what’s important because your parents worked hard, toiled so that you could graduate. Now in our Philippine culture, now it’s your turn to work hard, to work, to earn a living so that your parents can have comfort, so that your younger siblings can follow in your footsteps and so that you can also start your own families and start the cycle like what your parents did.

That’s exactly the thinking of the AMA youth.

Now one chapter of your life is over. The next chapter is more difficult than the past one. Now the hardship of your parents, you will experience it.

I always say that the future of our country in the 21st century is Information and Communication Technology. And likely many of you, that’s what you’re expecting, but many of you entered AMA four years ago — I wasn’t president then — so you entered for different reasons why you entered.

And at that time, four years ago, because it’s 2002 now. In 1998 they weren’t yet talking about the new economy. The new economy, the economy of information technology was discussed in the years 1998 and 1999. So, this idea is very new. So, likely many of you — why did you enter? — maybe you already saw that there’s a bigger chance even if it’s whatever you want to enter — be it secretarial, accounting, where students start at the bottom. There’s more chance for those who know how to use a computer than those who don’t. That’s what you thought. You didn’t yet think that you would really enter the world of information technology. It was just about the time when you entered college, 1999 or so, that the future of the world and the future of the Philippines became clear. So, you have a headstart.

In fact, one of the advantages of the Philippines in information and communication technology is because of the many computer institutions, computer schools. So, computer companies are coming here but because many of you entered, not to enter computers but to enter other offices, at least knowing how to use a computer is an advantage.

As you went through school, as I see it, you've already read that the future is computer tech… ICT, you've read about the high salaries in call centers and software development, many of you will say — oh! I am a graduate of computer science. I will apply to information technology companies. That is the failure of many because they didn't enter just to enter I.T. but they left and decided to enter I.T.

So we need to understand. If we say that the growth sector of the future is information and communication technology and we have human resource development, not all computer science graduates should go into ICT. Because, you can still enter banks, offices, accounting firms, department stores, written establishments. But you have an advantage because you know computers. But let's not think that because you finished computer science, you will enter an information technology enterprise.

Because if we look at the world of ICT, that's a big range. Bill Gates himself explained this to me. Because Bill Gates is helping the Philippines improve our information technology education. He said, there are so many opportunities in ICT itself. So, the call center is the simplest and software development is the most complicated. That is if you are in ICT. But let's ask ourselves if we, as computer science graduates, are sure to be in that range — call center up to software development — not necessarily for now. Because we are just starting now that our country has chosen to enter information technology. So, it is a new industry. Many jobs are being made available but not as many as the number of computer science students graduating. Computer science has many other possible paths, not necessarily ICT for now.

So, what are ICT companies looking for now? Because before, I used to say, in manufacturing you spend a hundred million to hire hundreds. In information technology, you spend five million dollars to hire thousands. Because information and communication technology is labor intensive but skills intensive. So, if the cheapest, but the cheapest but a good starting salary is the call center, what are call centers looking for? Not just that you know computer science, you must also be good at English. So, you may pass the computer science test, you might fail in English, in speech. So now, different schools are having what they call a finishing school for call centers and that is advanced English speech education.

So, this is what I can advise. Well, I will use this opportunity because I am at AMA, the biggest and oldest computer school in Asia. I use the opportunity to talk to other computer schools. So that students will not be disappointed and upon graduation, it would be good if they are advised to go to a finishing school for speech. I hope they will put a finishing school for speech right in the schools themselves. So, I don't know if AMA already has one for speech? I would… That is what should be done. If that's what you're going to enter. As I said, you can enter banks, retail, department stores, Jolibee, that's okay too. But if you really want to enter ICT, aside from computer science, you must speak good English.

Now, let's go to the other side, to the other end, software development. Because that's where the biggest salaries are earned in ICT. Of course, a lot is also expected from what you can give. And since it’s top of the line, chances are a starting student won’t be there yet. You will learn through experience. Although, in Silicon Valley, many students immediately entered software development. Why? Because of creativity. You know, the exceptional students who are very creative that sometimes they are better than their teachers. That's what they call blue jeans millionaires in Silicon Valley. That's one. Well, we remember the love bug, right? That's the best example, sadly, of a student with creativity who can go straight into software development while still in school. So, but we should also know that the one who was able to discover the cure for the virus, is he from AMA too? Also from the Philippines. So it also had the same creativity. So, there are students who are creative enough even in school and upon graduation, they can immediately enter software development. But I guess out of 2,500 how many would be like that?

Now, in the middle, between the call center where you need to have good English, and the software development where you need to be so creative, or you need to have more experience in the industry to gain the creativity, those in the middle, the programmers. Now, there are many requirements for programmers. However, just because you finish your computer science does not mean that you are a certified programmer. You must be certified in specific languages, in specific systems, certified for Microsoft, certified for Suns, certified for Java, so that is also something we expect from computer schools to establish certified programs for programmers. That's what I expect.

So that's what I can say to our computer schools. To ensure that your graduating students have jobs, they must be more competitive than others who will compete for the same jobs in this new sunrise industry. Add English speech courses and increase the certified programs for programmers, and develop the creativity among your students. That is one way how we can be sure that when a student graduates, their chance of entering the world of information and communication technology increases.

In the meantime, as I said, there are others — there are banks, there are stores, there are offices. But if we want to go where the money is we have to be prepared extra for these things.

And because the Philippines, they say, has the second biggest computer school population in the whole world. Well, if that’s the case we have to avoid the temptation of the schools becoming diploma mills. So it should be ensured that the students pass the certification. That’s why CHED, the chairman of CHED, Ester Garcia, was tasked to look at all these computer schools so they won’t be diploma mills.

This happened before, you know. With the seamen, the marine schools. What’s it called? The schools for… The marine technology schools? Those… Because there was a lot of demand for our seamen, many established schools for seamen. Many of them became diploma mills. This tarnished the reputation of our seamen for a while. So there was a massive reform and many seamen’s institutions were closed or given a deadline to make specific reforms to upgrade or they would have to close. Thankfully that happened on time and when the International Maritime Organization made a white list, the Philippines was still included in that white list. In other words, if you graduated from a Philippine Marine School, you can still enter as a seaman.

Now, the number of computer schools is increasing, and diploma mills are appearing. We will have to go through the same cleansing process. The information technology people asked Ester Garcia, the chairman of CHED, have you cancelled any schools? She said, I haven’t cancelled any schools yet, but I have cancelled specific programs in different schools. That’s what’s important.

And you, students, you’ve finished and you’ve made it through. As I’ve said, you have your choice, but if you want to enter ICT, the remedy for that is to take some additional units. If you want to enter a call center which has that glamorous job, then you take up English courses. There are finishing schools there. I know, in Clark because there are so many call centers in Clark. They have Clark — I don’t know what they call it — but they call it a finishing school because they know how to speak English. But they have a Call Center Academy. And the biggest thing added there over computer science is to speak English properly.

Those who want to really become programmers, well, AMA itself offers certified programs. So if you, if you graduated with a computer science degree and still want to enter ICT, then maybe you can re-enroll in AMA itself and take up a certification course, a program. That’s how you’ll find jobs in information technology. Of course, a certification program is more expensive than an ordinary computer science degree. But what’s the difference in the salary you’ll get or the chance that you’ll get a job? I remember when the Asian Institute of Management was new, the tuition was very expensive. But only because of the reputation of the Asian Institute of Management diploma, when business manager masters graduated there, their first month’s salary already covered a semester of their expensive tuition.

So these choices, maybe your parents, if you decide that you’re really going to enter ICT, will suffer a little because you’ll be sent back to school and the tuition for a certification program is more expensive. But with that added time, when you graduate, maybe we’ll reach a point where your first salary will cover a semester paid for the certification program.

So this is what I want to advise our youth. Because the world, the real world is really harder than the world of school. I remember when I was a young graduate, I immediately became a teacher. And they asked me, why did you enter teaching? Because I want to stay in school. Because the school is such a caring, caring institution, not like the world outside, it is so harsh. But whether we like it or not, we have to go out into that harsh dog eat, dog world. But we must be prepared, and I am very grateful to ama because King told me now — our students are very well-prepared.

Therefore, to all of you, graduating students or graduates of AMA, congratulations to all of you and thank you very much to your parents.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the First Commencement Exercises of AMA Computer University. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225811/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8310&Itemid=38