Thank you very much, Secretary Romulo.

Thank you very much, Bishop Eddie Villanueva; thank you, Manolet Dayrit, Roy Golez, Ed Manda, Didi Domingo, Milt Alingod; thank you, Bishop Eñiguez; thank you, Bishop Magbanua; thank you Bishop Tindero; thank you, brother Dan Balais; brothers and sisters; fellow Filipinos, thank you for formulating this timely appeal for a sacred gathering; thank you for your very active participation in the government's campaign against the threat of SARS.

My Manolet Dayrit and I visited the vacant barangay in Alcala, Pangasinan earlier. We thank the Lord because Barangay Vacante is now SARS-free. Manolet and I went to Barangay Vacante to thank the villagers for their spirit and sacrifice and patience. The sacrifice of Filipinos both here in the Philippines and abroad are stories of our most cherished values. They are there for the greater glory of God.

Adela Catalon and her father died embraced by intense love through a father and a son. Isn't that how Jesus Christ loves our father God?

Now, we have JP, the caregiver who had to give his life in Singapore while serving his fellow human beings. Isn't that like Jesus Christ who gave his life so that we may live in the Lord?

Let us entrust to the Lord those who died from SARS abroad who need to be brought home as ashes. Those who died are examples of quiet heroism to their family and relatives and to others in the foreign lands where they served.

Let us praise the Lord because our citizens are heroic. They are heroic where they should be and let us praise the Lord and ask that He continue to enforce our collective alertness like the prayers made by our elders earlier.

And I want to thank the Lord because SARS, although a disaster, also created a wonderful unity in our nation behind our government. Glory be to God!

I, as president as Bishop Eddie said, a Christian president open to the Lord, entrust our country to the care of the Lord.

Give me your prayers also that I may continue to always follow the Lord wherever He leads me, reaching beyond our country, seeking help from foreign leaders while talking to the most humble Filipino in our own land. Please give me prayers that the Lord may grant me grace to do all the Lord's commands to me in order to gather our energies and abilities around a purpose that our country — the people of God — may win in this fight.

In the midst of all this, I pray, let us pray to the Lord to clarify the spirit of all the people, so that the entire people, the entire nation, may give full cooperation wherever they are.

Brothers and sisters in the Lord, let us not worry, the Lord is always with us.

My prayer, my presidential prayer is based from psalm 144 verses 12 to 15. A beautiful summary of God’s glorious program and vision for every nation and surely for our beloved country. May I read from the new living translation and the new international version:

Verse 12: “May our sons flourish in their youth like well-nurtured plants; may our daughters be like graceful pillars curb to adorn a palace.” Brothers and sisters, this speaks clearly of a vision of happy, strong families, and if I may add, SARS-free families.

Verse 13: “May our farms be filled with crops of every kind; may the flocks in our fields multiply by the thousands even tens of thousands; and may our oxen be loaded with produce.” Isn’t this, people of God? Isn’t this verse a clear picture of economic prosperity which our people all long to enjoy?

Verse 14b: “May there be no breaching of walls, no forced exiles, no cry of distress in our streets.” This, brothers and sisters in the Lord, speaks of social peace and public justice.

Verse 15: “Blessed are the people of whom this is true; blessed are the people whose god is the Lord.” This is the foundation of all that we dream and long for our beloved Philippines. A full commitment to God and his righteousness. Without his help, we can never make it.

Community of the Lord, let us pray:

Our heavenly father, as President of the Philippines, I come before your presence in behalf of our beloved people. I praise your name for you alone of all wisdom and power, honoring glory belongs only to you. You determine the course of world events. You control the destinies of nations. It is you who changes times and seasons, who sets rulers and authorities and also removes them according to your will.

I acknowledge with thanksgiving your glorious plan for our beloved Philippines. I agree that indeed according to your words of prophecy, the Philippines will become a strong republic, a prosperous nation that you will use to bless other nations. But Lord, we know that your destiny for us will only be fulfilled if we as a people totally commit our lives to you, Repent and turn away from our sinful ways and acknowledge your Lordship over our nation.

So even now, in behalf of our people, I ask your forgiveness for all our sins. Forgive us for our disobedience to your laws and command, for the sins of idolatry in all forms, for corruption especially in government, for greed and deceit especially in the business realm, for rebellion that has bred violence, for our disunity, divisions and selfishness, for lack of strong will to enforce our own laws, without fear or favor; for marginalizing the poor and depriving them of justice and opportunities to better their lot; for pornography, marital infidelities and moral permissiveness. Lord hear, lord forgive, Lord act.

Now as president, I solemnly offer into your hands our beloved Philippines that may we become the blessed nation you desire for us to be. I pray that you establish your lordship and authority over every Filipino citizen and every Filipino family. That every home will be the center of love, harmony, strength and formation of biblical values — the basic unit for a strong republic.

I pray that you spare our people from the SARS plague and other diseases, and that you continually cover us with the redeeming blood of Jesus. We claim the healing grace of Jesus for our people for you said that by his wounds we were healed.

I pray that you establish your righteousness, integrity and fear of God over every branch, department and office of the government, we cast away the spirit of corruption, dishonesty, injustice and other forms of immorality that have plagued us for so long.

I ask that you continue to expose all anomalies, grafts and scandals. I pray that you intervene supernaturally for a lasting climate of peace and order to reign upon us especially in Mindanao. I cast away the spirit of violence and lawlessness that has bred kidnappings and other crimes.

I pray that you release a miracle favor upon our economy, for the continuous growth of businesses, entry of good investors, more entrepreneurs, more business opportunities, multiplied production in the agricultural and manufacturing sectors that will fuel the engines of economic prosperity. We claim your promise that if we obey you you will blessed us and give us an abundance of all things. We will no longer borrow but lend. We will be the head not the tail. Help us lord to make Jesus Christ the lord the foundation of all areas of our lives, our conduct and that in all our ways, we acknowledge him. Even now, i thank you for the answers to these prayers.

Thank you for prosperity, health and victory for our people. Thank you for strength and unity. Thank you for peace and justice.

I declare the Philippines a strong republic that belongs to Jesus Christ and to Jesus Christ alone.

Jesus is lord over the Philippines. Amen and amen and amen.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Special Prayer Rally on the SARS crisis (Nation’s Call for Sacred Assembly). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412201404/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6325&Itemid=38