Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Bishop Tendero. Thank you for inviting me here to be with you. Thank you for introducing me. Thank you for being a member of the Constitutional Consultative Commission to draft our new charter. And congratulations to you and Mrs. Tendero on your silver wedding anniversary.

Mayor Trinidad and Mrs. Trinidad, Mrs. Tolentino, Mrs. Cadiang — well, I’ve already greeted Mrs. Tendero — thank you for joining us in the Inter-faith Summit that was held in Cebu a couple of weeks ago.

To all of you, the women of PCEC in Luzon, extraordinary women, exceptional women, let us praise the Lord for so many exceptional women. You are extraordinary women, women of blessing. You are among those who are more blessed among the women of our country because you use the talents given by the Lord to serve God and serve the people.

All of you are extraordinary, exceptional because you chose to walk the path of God and bring His grace to Philippine society.

Now, join me in praying to the Lord, first as worship. Many of us — no, not you — many ordinary folk pray when they want to ask for something, but we must pray first and foremost to worship the Lord. I remember I was here with you in 1999. I was still Vice President then. So now, thank you for the opportunity that we are together again now that I am president and we can pray together, first in worship and second to thank God for His blessings that we often forget to emphasize because we emphasize our complaints.

Let us thank the Lord, for instance, that the peso hit a 3-month high against the dollar yesterday in a highly “energized” market otherwise hampered by street protests. This peso hit a 3-month high because our dollar reserves are at their historic high and we thank the Lord for that.

Our economy continues to look up because with the grace of God this government is closely and consistently focused on the economy. As we are poised for the implementation of tax reform with strong safety nets, global confidence in the Philippines is resurgent. Nomura international, that important credit rating agency of Japan, which is also the largest lender to us, has upgraded its investment recommendation of the Philippine bonds from underweight — our bonds used to be underweight so we had to pay very high interest rates — to neutral. So now we are on par with many borrowers in Japan.

The foreign press is taking a keen second look at our prospects for stability and growth. Our gross domestic product, the measure of our production for the third quarter, is expected to be stable at 5 percent over the same period last year despite the political noise. We’ve created the mineral development council, an inter-agency to oversee the development of the country’s mineral resources by inviting reputable investments to bring in more jobs. Dell, one of the largest and most important call center or customer care agencies in the world, has announced that it is setting up a major customer call center in the Philippines, along with many others that are already establishing themselves here. And we must seize every moment for future prosperity. We are at the threshold of an economic take off and every sector of the society must focus more weight on building the momentum for growth.

When we say that every sector should give more attention to sustain the momentum of development, this includes the sector of women.

I thank the Lord that there are exceptional women, like the women here today, you, and like our women police officers who yesterday showed patience and accepted violence, beatings and wounds on the streets in order to enforce the law and maintain peace and order.

I condemn those who intentionally harmed them and other police officers, even men who were practicing maximum tolerance. These traitors, pretending to carry a flagpole, actually had spears, weapons they threw at the police. We saw it on television, didn't we? The deep and wide wound of the police officer who was victimized. That is only a sign that we must strengthen our republic. Thank you.

I consider… I consider my presidency as a mission given by the Lord to me to help fight poverty and fight the elements that weaken our republic, preventing our economic take off.

I turned to the Lord when I saw the problems of our worsening poverty because our republic is weak, and because our republic is weak, we are afraid to fund the needs of the people for development and the personal needs of families, so we continue to borrow and borrow. We are afraid to make our own reforms in our economy so that we can finance it on our own efforts. We are too weak to rely on our own capabilities to fund the needs of our development. So we continue to sink into debt. That was the dilemma I saw when I became president.

Because when I was here in 1999, the comfort of my duty. At that time, in fact, I was number one in performance rating and satisfaction among all public officials and public figures. But now my situation is serious and heavy, and I need to turn to the Lord even more.

I turned to the Lord when I decided to make the difficult reforms in the political and economic system. I am grateful that Bishop Tendero accepted my request to join me in how we will make reforms in our politics. I also needed to turn to the Lord to have the courage to make the reforms needed for the economy that will initially require sacrifice but will ultimately give us the ability to achieve the needs of the people – jobs; infrastructure that will attract investors, who in turn provide jobs; sufficient classrooms for our students; irrigation; food on every table; electricity in every barangay; clean water in every town; affordable medicine; capital for business. Not only for large businesses but also for small businesses like microfinance.

I specifically mentioned microfinance because it is something our exceptional women can do in serving the Lord and serving society. Microfinance has already helped two million women since my administration began in 2001. We want to continue to support three million small women to have their own small businesses. These small loans, microfinance, the largest of which is 100,000 pesos. But usually 3,000 pesos to a woman. But we have many stories of someone who borrowed 3,000 pesos for a tricycle three years ago, now they have a fleet of tricycles. That is the success story of these microfinance programs.

These microfinance programs are almost all women. This microfinance has a 98 percent payment rate. Higher than the payment rate of large loans in banks. This microfinance has a high repayment rate even without collateral usually. What is used in place of collateral in microfinance? In this microfinance, what is used in place of collateral is unity and good character. Because five women will have a joint obligation. One's debt, everyone's debt. So they will make sure the debt is paid. And beyond that, the difference from large loans with collateral is that values formation is also emphasized to borrowers, the character of obligation. I remember here in Pasay City, right, Mayor Trinidad? We went to a microfinance center where the conduit was the center for transformation, a Christian group, 98 percent repayment, joint obligation and very strong values formation because every… Or regular prayer meetings and praying to the Lord.

So you, exceptional women, many of you I think are already in microfinance and many more can be conduits of microfinance because that is what we are striving for, the role of women in our desired development.

And because you are Christian women, we are not only asking for your implementation of microfinance but also your continued prayers as I strive to implement peace and order, I strive to implement programs to fight poverty in order to strengthen our state and build a strong republic that can take care of the weakest of its citizens. And while I was preparing last night what I would ask of you, and this is it, the message of the Lord came to me — “Whatever you do to the least of your brethren, you do it to me.”

To all of you, thank you, extraordinary women, women of blessing, long live!

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Philippine Council of Evangelical Churches, Inc. Women of Blessing Grand Rally 2005. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092303/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5198&Itemid=38