PRIORITIZING THE FIGHT AGAINST TRAFFICKING

I ask for this event today because this is what I felt could be our contribution to the celebration of Philippine-American Friendship Day on July 4th.

I was asking myself, how do we commemorate Philippine-American friendship? Because our friendship covers so many aspects. We have, of course, the very high-profile partnership in the war against terrorism. We could have celebrated that. We have a long standing and still vigorous partnership in trade and investment. We could have celebrated that.

But I thought today we should bring to the fore something that as Ambassador Mussomeli said is very close to the heart of president bush and very close to mine as well — which is why we passed such a very good law — and that is the cause of protecting our women and children against trafficking.

The fight against human trafficking is a fight against poverty. Last night, I met my Cabinet and we all renewed our determination to stay on course on our key economic and social programs.

I’m going about the business of the people. If my opponents feel that the best thing for the nation is to tear it down, so be it on their part. But I’m focused on hope and the future, not on petty politics.

My faith and the Good Book say to turn the other cheek, and I have. I have only love and compassion for the nation, even those who would do me ill. I will focus on the people’s business. No one will deter me from that mission. And I think all of you here because you are with me on that mission regarding the rights or our women and children.

The global horizon presents little comfort regarding our bigger mission to fight poverty. An economic tsunami from rising oil prices combined with increasing interest rates is hitting the developing countries, and we must respond to this.

As part of our response to rising oil prices, yesterday, we demonstrated a bus using CNG as fuel, which is half the price of diesel. The mother gasoline station that will pump CNG will arrive in the Philippines in the middle of August to help us nave some relief from the high oil prices. It will be set up in Batangas. And the first 70 of 1,000 CNG buses will also arrive at ah out that time to service Southern Luzon and Metro Manila. We hope this will provide some relief to our suffering masses because of the imported high price of oil.

On the part of our response to increasing interest rates, which requires doubling our efforts to reduce our debt, I’m pleased with the information reported to me yesterday by Speaker de Venecia who just arrived from Italy and the Paris Club, that in our campaign for a large scale debt-for-equity in new development projects for the Philippines and for some other 100 heavily indebted medium-income and poor-income countries worldwide to achieve the U.N. millennium development goals of cutting poverty in half by 2015, we achieved significant progress and in the case of Italy a recent breakthrough.

Speaker de Venecia reported to me that the Italian Government has in a letter officially expressed its support for the Philippines to use debt conversions in order to fund the fight against poverty and the pursuit of the millennium development goals.

Speaker reported to me in that letter, and I read the letter too, the Italian government will support the Philippine proposal to augment the percentage of the debt previously restructured within the Paris Club that can be the subject of conversion.

He further reported that the president of the Paris Club has created a technical committee to reevaluate the entire debt relief program for presentation to the Paris Club’s 21 members.

While the Italian position is definitely a breakthrough, the Paris Club’s creation of a technical working group is also a likely breakthrough since the core of the Paris Club is made up of the most powerful G8 nations — the world’s richest nations whose decisions heavily influence global debt policy.

I look for the day when-these efforts of ours will bear so much fruit that we can use debt relief to augment our resources against trafficking. In the meantime, we thank our friends from the NGO community. We thank our friends especially from the United States that has made it one of its major concerns — the fight against trafficking.

It is justifiable to put trafficking near the top of the list of where we should put our resources. Trafficking is both a curse on the poor and a transnational evil. As a transnational evil, the fight against trafficking runs beside our global fight against terrorism, money laundering, and other transnational crimes.

I ask for this Philippine-American Friendship Day celebration to focus on anti-trafficking because I want to use this as an occasion Ambassador Mussomeli, to say that I recognize that the Philippines needs to do more against trafficking. And I want to tell you, I want to tell the world, I want to tell our countrymen and countrywomen that we are determined to be delisted from the international watchlist.

I recall our Anti-Money Laundering Law. When it was passed, it was also touted as one of the best, if not the best money laundering laws in the world. But passing a good law is one-hair of the job, implementing it to the point that we are delisted from watch list is the other half. We have been delisted from the money laundering watch list and now we will be, we shall be, we are determined to be delisted from the anti-trafficking watch list.

And I’d like to let you know, Ambassador, NGO friends from the Philippines and the world that we know exactly what needs to be done. We have a good law. We have, as Ambassador said, probably the best after care service for the victims. I know that to achieve delisting from the watch list, we must be determined and we are determined to increase efforts to convict the human traffickers.

I’m taking this opportunity to reiterate the marching orders to our law enforcers and to our prosecutors through the secretary of justice. And while we respect and recognized the separation of powers, I seek the full support and cooperation of the courts.

We all know, the NGOs know that to prevent trafficking — because there is the enforcement, there is the conviction, there is the after care but there is also the prevention, and I am very happy about the work of the NGOs here supported by USAID — community education is the key to inform would-be migrants of the perils of entrapment even before they leave.

In this effort, I appreciate the report of Secretary Gonzalez about the information campaign, and I appreciate our private sector partners. Thank you to the Trade Union Congress of the Philippines. Thank you to the American Solidarity Center. Thank you to the USAID, thank you to the Visayan Forum Foundation. I would have wanted this event to be in Allen and Liloan, but we will go there one of these days. In the meantime, we launched it here. Thank you to the coalition against trafficking in women. Thank you to the other people’s organizations and community groups that are at the forefront of this campaign.

As I thank our NGO partners, I also ask our local government executives to beef up the law with local ordinances to prevent and suppress trafficking, and protect the victims.

And most of all, we must all develop and implement programs not only the good programs that Dinky and our DSWD friends have done to take care of the victims but programs that will prevent in the medium and longer term women and children from forcing themselves to become victims of trafficking. And in the end, the ultimate answer to this is jobs, livelihood, skills development, educational opportunities.

Speaking of jobs, over the past year, the number of jobless decreased by 200,000. And labor experts have told Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas that with such a large labor force, our being able to keep the unemployment rate to single digit is a feat in itself. There’s a lot of work to be done but the fact that we are making progress in job creation in spite of seemingly insurmountable challenges is clear evidence that our macroeconomic fundamentals are sound and our foundation for recovery is solid.

The Supreme Court, T.R.O. notwithstanding, because we have keen able to pass other laws aside from that the alcohol and cigarette taxes, the Accountability Reform Law. And the VAT is on a T.R.O. there’ll be a motion for reconsideration. So, we are still confident that the rule of law is on our side.

We are proceeding with Phase 2 of our reform agenda. This will ensure that our new revenues are used not only for reducing debt which we must do but also for investments in people. Investments against trafficking, investments in social services and job creation, investments in infrastructure that will bring in the private sector capital.

Achieving all these would strengthen family foundations wherein each and every member — women, children and all — are aptly shielded from the abuse of the worst kind. And that’s trafficking.

While we work on Phase 2 in order to make lives better, perceivably better for our people, I ask our people to be patient because the problems that we face have been with us since time immemorial. And it is only now that we are trying to gather in once and for all the resources we need to face those problems of time immemorial.

We must all push on. We must all pray. We must all work together as a people who would like to see this great nation become truly one Philippines.

Thank you all very much.

Source: Adamson University Library