Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, During a Visit to the New Town in Gen. S. K. Pendatun

It feels like just yesterday. I just want to greet all of you and… all of you who are here. The Governor during all except… That’s what I want to tell you. You know S.K. Pendatun. Diosdado Macapagal was President of the Philippines, Salipada Pendatun was the first Muslim Deputy Speaker in our history during his time. In fact, I remember when I was in Iligan, when we were still young, our father and we were together in school, they kept telling me to run for senator. I came here crying. I don’t know if he was crying because finally I came here, which he didn’t think I would really do, or because that day his population was 30,000, now it’s 45,000. And the report given by DSWD Secretary of ARMM, Secretary Karon, here in the entire ARMM… Or in… No, in Maguindanao… Ah, in ARMM, in ARMM, the number one with the most evacuees is in Pagalungan. The number two with the most evacuees is here, in Salipada Pendatun.

Pikit is not included because Pikit is not ARMM. Pikit is part of Region XII. So those three have a lot of evacuees. That’s why I said we will go to S.K. Pendatu, and I said Dinky Soliman and her counterpart in DSWD in ARMM will announce our relief and rehabilitation program for our evacuees here. So we are doing this program in the evacuation center itself to announce to you evacuees, those who want to go home can now go back to your places. Those who evacuated here, some said they will stay—liwat, 300 families? — 700 families decided to stay in S.K. Pendatun. That means, half of those who evacuated liked the hospitality of the people of S.K. Pendatun so they will stay here with you.

So with the 30,000 population, we will help all of you with rehabilitation whether you stay here or go back to your places. That is my message given by Dinky. Now, one thing I learned here in ARMM is that there are many unemployed. Perhaps throughout the Philippines, when you need many unemployed people, it’s Metro Manila and Calabarzon. Because many people go there because the income is high so they think there are many jobs. When they go there, there are no jobs. They don’t go home, they’re already in the squatter area so unemployment is high. There, unemployment is the highest, but almost equal here in ARMM.

So what I said earlier to DOLE, thank me also because that’s my policy decision. These who are taking an oath, I also want to launch that here. Those taking an oath, that’s one help from America, USAID. That’s the help for child labor. In other words, instead of the children working, their siblings or their parents should work, they will be saved from child labor. And that is really intended for Calabarzon because there are many child laborers in Calabarzon. I urged, move the money to the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao. This is emergency employment. Now, the emergency employment I was doing, I see when we ask DSWD, it’s difficult, difficult to find a house, to find training, to find someone to teach livelihood, these are out-of-school youth.

So, I will end my speech because this wasn’t really part of our program.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during a New Town Visit in Gen. S.K. Pendatun. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412200720/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6467&Itemid=38