ON TRACK WITH OUR GOALS

When we last met on the Millennium Development Goals, we were so proud of that Dr. Jeffrey Sachs described our Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan as one of the best, if not the best, he has ever seen.

Today, our country distinguishes itself once again, because we are among the handful of countries that have been able to do second progress report on the Millennium Development Goals. Congratulations! To everyone involved.

As you in this room all probably know, the Millennium Development Goals are incorporated in the objectives of the economic reforms reflected in that Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan.

And it’s good for us to make a second progress report especially at this time when we have just completed the first phase of our economic reforms so that we can fund the second phase of our economic reforms which will impact directly on our Millennium Development Goals. As most of you in this room are well aware, the first phase of our economic reforms focused on the passage of revenue-generating measures. And I thank our Congressmen for making that possible. It focused too on administrative reforms to improve tax collections. And I’m very happy to hear… We were very proud of the April collections. Now for the May collections, I’m happy to hear that once again our May collections are higher by 18 percent than the May collections of last year.

The first phase of our economic reforms also includes a conservative fiscally responsible national budget. And I’m also very happy to hear from Secretary Purisima this morning, the head of our economic team, that our budget deficit to date is way below the ceiling we have allowed for ourselves.

That first phase of the fiscal reforms… That first phase of the economic reforms also includes the opening of the mining sector and the thousands of jobs that go with it. And now having been able to generate from Congress and from administrative reforms about a hundred billion pesos to finance things like what we need for the Millennium Development Goals, we are now embarking on the second phase.

In the second phase, I will press forward by continuing aggressive economic and fiscal measures. The focus this time will no longer be on legislation hut to increase tax collection efficiency. And as I said, congratulations! To BIR for the 18 percent increase in collections over last year.

Second phase will also increase initiatives against graft and corruption. And as Dinky Soliman and Mely Nicolas will be meeting with the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference tonight, I am asking them to convey to the BBC my request for the Bishop-Businessmen’s Conference to monitor this development.

Second phase also includes launching an energy conservation and energy independence campaign, and keeping prices under control with consumer watch programs. But most importantly, Phase Two will be defined by bringing the benefits of the tough economic reforms of Phase One to the people. With more revenues on hand, we can now invest more in the vital social needs to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.

I was looking at the report of Romy on the Millennium Development Goals and I’d like to talk about a few things that are especially important to me, important enough that they were among the handful of resolutions that I discussed in the Independence Day address last Sunday. I said in that Independence Day that we would want in accordance with the Millennium Development Goals to reach the day na may pagkain sa bawat mesa . And that means talking about extreme hunger. When I say pagkain sa bawat mesa , that is translated into bringing extreme hunger and poverty from 34.5 percent in 1990 to 17.25 percent in 2015.

And last year, it was at 27.6 percent and this is with the medium possibility of reaching the 17.25 target and that is why we have to work very hard on the issue of extreme poverty and hunger. And that’s why I have asked my Cabinet members that this be a priority among priorities and for the BBC to help US monitor this.

I also talked about, in my Independence Day speech, about every child who is qualified being in school. That means by 2015, we would want to achieve a universal elementary participation rate of 100 percent and we also have a medium probability of attaining this target which is why I had to stress it in my speech. And this is where we will prioritize the budget of the department of education together with English, Math and Science teaching.

And so you can see that what we discussed in the Independence Day celebration are closely linked with the Millennium Development Goals. In fact, I stressed in that speech that we want to achieve the Millennium Development Goals especially in the areas of poverty reduction, nutrition and education.

It’s also good for us to get together at this time, so that I can assure you that I will follow our medium-term plan, I will carry out the economic reforms of Phase Two and beyond, I will pursue the Millennium Development Goals unswervingly and no one shall block the path of the presidency, not even my irresponsible detractors who wish to set back our gains and reverse our engine or growth and development.

For four long years, the agents of destabilization have been trying to take down the economic edifice we have been budding, but thank God, to no avail. For four long years I have taken personal abuse in the hope that reconciliation will bring about national harmony. But now, they are trying again, and they are going too far because this is their now or never. They want to take advantage of the unpopularity I’ve had to suffer in carrying out the difficult phase One of our economic reforms. It’s now or never for them because when phase Two begins to bear fruit and the Millennium Development Goals become visibly attainable, it will be too late for them.

But I have faith in God. I have faith in the competence and dedication of our lawyers and law enforcers to apply the rule of law. I have faith in the competence and dedication of our Cabinet members and civil society partners in working towards the Millennium Development Goals to make life perceptively better for our people. And I know that in the final analysis the Filipino people will hold on to their undying faith in the future of this great country and in our democratic way of life.

Consistent with the Millennium Development Goals, we are on track to beat hunger and poverty by 2015. I am especially gratified that our unemployment has gone down from 3.1 million to 2.9 million over the past year. At least we’re no longer running in place like a treadmill.

And I’d like to congratulate civil society, business, media, the youth and the academe for working together to meet the Millennium Development Goals, and to NEDA for monitoring our progress.

I want to thank the United Nations family in the Philippines, led by the very competent and dedicated Deborah Landey. Thank you for the support being given to the Filipino people. Tomorrow, Deborah will leave us for a more important and bigger job in the United Nations headquarters. I hope, Deborah that your work in the Philippines has been very fulfilling to you. It has certainly be valuable to us.

And as I end, Deborah, as we bid you farewell, we reaffirm our commitment to the Millennium Development Goals and assure you that we will direct our will and our energy, our minds and hearts towards the greater good of our country and the people under the greatest blessings of the Almighty.

To all of you, friends and partners in pursuing the Millennium Development Goals, congratulations! On the success we have achieved. So far, let’s continue to work together and be successful by 2010 and 2015.

Thank you all very much.

Source: Adamson University Library