Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During a State Dinner in Honor of President Jose Ramos Horta of the Democratic Republic of Timor Leste

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, August 12, 2008]

His Excellency President Ramos Horta, His Excellency President Ramos, Vice President de Castro, other officials of the Philippine government, members of the delegation from Timor Leste, ladies and gentlemen.

We’re gathered here tonight in honor of an old friend of the Filipino people, an international icon, a noble prize laureate. President Jose Ramos Horta has been to our shores on numerous occasions but we welcome him tonight on his first visit as President of his nation. He would have been here earlier, but six months ago, an assassin’s bullet almost put an end to his life and therefore causing his trip to be postponed for his recovery.

Since then, however, his land of one million people has been peaceful. Rebel leader was killed in the Presidential compound and 800 rebel soldiers have pledged allegiance to the government.

The Philippines is a natural partner of Timor Leste in many ways. Filipino religious missionaries, peacekeepers and development workers, minister to the needs of the Timorese people and stayed with them during the dark days of their struggle for independence at great risk to their own safety and welfare.

Today, the Filipino community in Timor Leste come from various backgrounds such as, aside from religious missionaries, include police officers who are part of the U.N. Police, international consultants and aide workers, U.N. volunteers and construction workers. A Filipino military general commanded the U.N. Peacekeeping Forces, a Filipino Police General led the U.N. Police in Timor Leste.

During the Philippine Independence Day in Dili, where President Ramos Horta was guest of honor, he graciously honored five outstanding Filipinos in Timor Leste. (applause)

During our Bilateral meeting this morning, we welcomed the opportunity to have all the technical cooperation and partnership that there can be. Major areas we are pursuing for partnership are education and training, labor deployment, infrastructure development, housing construction, oil and gas supply chain, construction supply chain, fisheries and air links.

This morning, we witnessed the signing of a Memorandum on the Training of Diplomats at the Philippine Foreign Service Institute. A Fisheries Agreement and an Agreement on Academic Cooperation which will be the loadstone of the Philippine commitment to Timor Leste’s long term development.

We hope that the Timorese scholars who will be studying here in the Philippines will be the future leaders of Timor Leste.

As I said earlier, the Philippines is an appropriate partner of Timor Leste in many ways.

On this note, I propose a toast to the continued good health and success of President Jose Ramos Horta and of the Timorese people.

Mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during a State Dinner in Honor of President Jose Ramos Horta of the Democratic Republic of Timor Leste. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412115559/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1641&Itemid=38