Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the 112th Inter-Parliamentary Union General Assembly

[ Delivered at PICC, Roxas Blvd., Pasay City, April 3, 2005 ]

CELEBRATING THE VIRTUES OF DEMOCRACY

Winston Churchill, one of the great leaders of the last century, once said that “democracy is the worst form of government except for all the others.” So on that note, I welcome you all here today to celebrate the best of the worst!

In all seriousness, of course, we gather at the 112th Assembly of the International Parliamentary Union to celebrate democracy. In particular, we celebrate the people here in this hall and across the world that dedicate their lives to building the institutions and traditions that make up the fabric of democracies the world over.

There is no calling in life nobler than to serve the people of one’s nation in pursuit of the Jeffersonian ideal of “life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.” I, for one, feel privileged every day, every single day to be able to serve the people of the Philippines and to be associated with democrats like you from all over the world.

And while we celebrate democracy itself, the agenda of this IPU reflects the long road ahead for many nations and peoples as we struggle to create a better life, provide more liberty and secure more happiness for our peoples.

The eradication of poverty, strengthening security in the face of terrorism while preserving individual liberties understanding the forces of globalization and the need to ensure that all our citizen, men and women alike, prosper together in equality are all pressing issues we’re trying to tackle together in this assembly and in our own respective countries.

Not every country, of course, shares the ideals of democracy. And not everyone living under a democracy shares equally in the promise democracy offers. That is our fundamental challenge.

Across the world and within our own Asian region, there are those who live in non-democratic authoritarian nations who have no voice, no liberty, and no economic opportunity.

And there are those who live in a democracy but are shut out by discrimination, poor education, lack of economic opportunity and oppressive traditions that have no place in a democracy. The Philippines is one such nation that’s poised for growth and success, yet is also on the frontlines of poverty, social justice and security concerns.

The Philippines rightly takes pride in being Asia’s first democracy. And since, I understand, we have the biggest delegation of women parliamentarians in the twenty-year history of the association of women parliamentarians, let me congratulate you and welcome you to the first nation in Asia to afford women the right to vote. In fact, we celebrate our commitment to a century of feminist activity with my designation of 2006 as the Centennial Year of the Feminist Movement in the Philippines. Of that, I’m proud, and I’m proud of my Filipina sisters and ancestors.

We’ve made anti-corruption a central pillar of our government’s fight to grow our economy and create jobs. And that is another challenge for our parliaments all over the world.

Economically, the fiscal situation of the Philippines is stable — thanks to the hard work of our Congressmen and senators — exports are surging, imports are up, growth is up and the stock market is one of the best performing in Asia.

My program to support entrepreneurs, together with my program to develop new lands for agri-business are central organizing principles of my agenda to create 6 to 10 million jobs in the next 6 years. To date, over one million women alone have future tor themselves and their families

And in the area of providing new opportunity for those who have historically been left out, there’s more good news. Half of our government employees are women and tens of thousands of women occupy the ranks of elected officials in our towns and cities. Women are taking up the call of participation in democracy and economic self-reliance and gaining control over their economic lives.

Yet our nation is still living in a world too often delineated between rich and poor; hope versus despair; growth versus stagnation.

This disparity in a democracy is our burden and a challenge we must individually and collectively solve today and everyday as we work within our democratic framework to improve the lives of our citizens.

Social justice and civil rights must go hand-in-hand with economic opportunity and political freedom. And I want to call special attention to the need for a strong, free and independent media to safeguard our democracies and keep their political leaders on the straight and narrow. Here in the Philippines and in other nations, journalists have been slain in pursuit of the truth. I salute these defenders or democracy and declare to those who perpetuate suck crimes — your days are numbered.

So today, I welcome you with open arms to a nation that believes in democracy, in the democratic movement and what the IPU does to help strengthen democracy the world over. History is with us, but we must make sure that the rising tide of democracy lifts all boats so that we may all sail to a prosperous future.

In that spirit, I declare this 112th Assembly of the International Parliamentary Union open.

Thank you.

Source: Adamson University Library