Thank you, Secretary Puno.

Vice president de Castro; President Cojuangco of the Public Safety College; Senior Superintendent Tira and all the officials, faculty and staff of the Philippine National Police Academy; Vice Governor Remulla and the other officials of the province of Cavite; Cadet Balais and all the cadets who received awards and all the cadets graduating today; Mayor Tolentino; members of the diplomatic corps; General Calderon; Fire Director Asignado; General Director Alit; members of the Cabinet: Secretary Bunye and Secretary Defensor and other appointive officials; to the staff, uniformed and non-uniformed officers and personnel and all the corps of cadets; to all the parents of Bagsay Lahi class of 2006 and all the guests of the graduating students today.

And of course to the PNPA Bagsay Lahi Class of 2006, I wholeheartedly congratulate all the members of this class and on your graduation with a bachelor of science degree, and on your appointment to the police. And I congratulate you for being the first set of officers graduating from this academy who are appointed as permanent officers of the Philippine National Police. I also congratulate those who graduated and are now entering the Bureau of Fire Protection and Bureau of Jail Management and Penology. I hope the day will come when more graduating cadets will enter these important bureaus.

As recounted by your valedictorian Benjamin Balais, you struggled through this academy upon the values of honor, discipline and excellence.

The discipline, I’d like to add a little something about that. In fact, in my past graduation speeches here in the PNP Academy, I quoted from ‘The Charge of the Light Brigade’ about the discipline of men in uniform, “that theirs is not to reason why; theirs is but to do or die.” And there are Supreme Court rulings that we remind, as Secretary Puno’s counterpart in the Armed Forces, Secretary Nonong Cruz, does, that when you have the right to carry a gun, you surrender your right to free speech. That is what discipline means in the uniformed services.

You hold guns, you acquire the right to carry guns because you are the champions of the community. We are talking about the soldiers – they are the champions of the people and the nation. The police specifically are champions of the community because you watch over the communities against criminals and other threats to peace in the community. Therefore be wary of vested interests behind seemingly attractive promises of reform that actually put to great risk the future of the nation.

I take this opportunity to thank the PNP leadership and cadet corps for your professional loyalty during the recent attempts to foment division in our uniformed services.

You have shown excellence. You have a good outlook on the times ahead if what Cadet Balais said represents your thoughts. Indeed, as he has adverted, you must be conscious of the changing demands of the times and enhance your knowledge and skills to respond to the various threats of our national security such as terrorism and insurgency and the related conduits for underground financing and political support.

Indeed, we must all be equally adept at defending the democratic way of life with skill, courage and determination.

As I said last week at your other counterpart, the Philippine Military Academy, if anyone thinks military or uniformed adventurism will be applauded and embraced by the people or the world, they are wrong. The Filipino wants progress not a rerun of the past. Everyone will pay the price of adventurism and it will be severe because it will impact on our economy and the livelihood of our people.

And as I said last week, we cannot keep sweeping disloyalty under the rug. But I thank you for your loyalty during trying times and I expect a bright future for PNPA Class 2006 in the public service following in the footsteps of your members. There is for example Jonathan Robert Rongavilla, who is among the topnotchers in the civil service professional examinations. ‘di ba? Ayun.

Your programs have also produced impressive results in the field of sports where an alumnus, PSI Pacalso of Class ’98, won a gold medal that I personally handed to him in last year’s Southeast Asian Games. maganda ang kinabukasan ng mga graduates ng Philippine National Police Academy.

I am very proud of you and I am very proud of the police force. And this is the reason why the police received their biggest major pay increase very early during my presidency. in the past, the police and the soldiers would be left behind when we would have pay increases for civilian employees. But now in this latest round of increase of 1,000 pesos a month everybody employed by the national government whether civilian, military or police are equal recipients.

You shall also be the beneficiaries along with the military of the massive housing programs that we have initiated as part of the expanded vat dividends. That is why I have directed Secretary Puno to review all the police camps in the country, including this campus, for the purpose of setting aside portions for police housing as to be implemented by Vice President and HUDCC Chairman Noli de Castro.

Aside from reserving portions of police camps for policemen and their families, I would like to let you know that you will all benefit — policemen, prison wardens and guards, fire inspectors and fire officers — you will all share in the housing benefits of the 1,600-hectare housing project, probably the biggest single housing project in the history of Philippine welfare, in San Miguel in Bulacan.

We will be allocating 400 hectares for the military, 400 hectares for the police and 400 hectares for the teachers, and 400 hectares for the rest of the government employees who make up the remaining one-fourth of all government employees. Because the military, the police and the teachers altogether make up three-fourths of the national government employees.

So I hope that with you secured that your families will have decent housing, and not like what many policemen have been suffering for these past years living in squatter areas, sometimes next door neighbors of the hatchet men of the syndicates, I hope that you will be able to do an even better job than I think you have already been doing these past years during my administration.

We have this massive housing programs because at last we can afford them due to the value added tax reform. And because we are now able to spend more money from our own resources because we have the taxes, we are catching up with the housing gap and also the employment gap that my administration inherited.

I reminded the chief of the PNP General Lomibao — who is out of the country right now – I reminded him that starting today the PNP should be open for applicants for 3,000 jobs. And you the graduates of the PNP academy will be the officers of these new recruits.

My prime concern, and I am glad to hear from your valedictorian, that your prime concern is your duty and responsibility to stand by the nation and defend it at all cost from criminals, terrorists, insurgents and destabilizers. I expect that our unity will continue towards a safer, more peaceful and more progressive nation.

I would like to pay a special tribute to our young men and women gapo ti amyanan nga addo nga graduates tatta nga aldaw. Kadda kayo amin young people of the north, congratulations! and thank you for choosing to serve in the police, the fire service and also the jails.

To all of you and to your parents, congratulations!

Maraming salamat.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 27th Commencement Exercises of the Philippine National Police Academy (PNPA) ‘Bagsay Lahi’ Class 2006. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412214346/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2415&Itemid=38