Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During a Meeting with the Confederation of Indian Industries (CII)

[Delivered at the The Ballroom, The Taj Mahal Palace & Towers Mumbai, Republic of India, October 04, 2007]

Thank you very much, Mr. Agrawala.

Secretary Romulo, Secretary Favila and our other Cabinet members whom I shall individually introduce in the course of my statement.

Ambassador Berner, Ambassador Mitter, Miss Agwadi, members of the Philippine delegation, the business community, members of the Philippine government from Congress and from the local governments whom I will also acknowledge individually during the course of my remarks; members of the Indian business community, ladies and gentlemen.

We would like to thank the CII for the chance to be together today at a time when India has become one of the world’s top economies and at a time when the Philippine economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability.

We cannot highlight enough the great strides that India has accomplished in recent years. Your impressive growth, largely fueled by a knowledge economy, is unique and worthy of emulation. It has made you the world’s fourth largest economy.

India is becoming an undeniable force behind global economic growth. Because of the growing markets of India and China, growth in Asia is transitioning from being export-driven to other regions and continents to being domestically-driven within Asia. We are delighted with the growth of India along with China to add to the power of Japan in the Asian continent.

There are political, economic and strategic implications for India and the East Asian region as a result of your newfound economic power. As India becomes a true political and economic giant, your obligations to your neighbors also increase, separate from your obligations to your own citizens. Ascendance into the world stage carries implications not just for economic development, but for the management of our environment on a sustainable basis, and for maintaining broader peace and stability in the region and the world.

That is why we support India’s “Look East” policy and your plans to integrate with both South Asia and Southeast Asia. And we hope this policy will include greater economic integration between the Philippines and India.

This state visit to India upon the invitation of President Patil reciprocates the state visit to the Philippines of President Kalam in 2006, and the participation of Prime Minister Singh in the East Asian Summit held last January in the Philippine island of Cebu. We hope these three visits coming within a span of two years will lead us toward closer political, security and economic engagement.

We included this meeting with the dynamic business community of Mumbai in our itinerary because of your importance in India’s fast growing economy and your importance to the Philippines. Mumbai is the base of most Indian companies that do business in and with the Philippines. And we are lucky that our honorary consul in the city is the very able and very respected Madame Rajashree Birla.

Traveling with us are top representatives of leading Philippine corporations engaged in pharmaceuticals, energy, mining, services, construction and other fields as well as leading Indian businessmen in the Philippines. We hope you will get acquainted with one another in the spirit of joint enterprise.

The Philippines, as acknowledged by Mr. Agrawala, is on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. Six years ago, no one thought we could get more revenues, cut down on tax cheats, strengthen the peso, move the stock market, pre-pay our debts and raise employment, but we have.

We are committed to consolidating the gains in new revenue by making long overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure. This includes, again as acknowledged by Mr. Agrawala, billions of pesos in new bridges, roads and ports along with billions in education, training and health care to upgrade our competitiveness and also to spread the benefits of development in order to fight poverty.

Our massive spending on health care includes importing pharmaceuticals from India as part of our program to cut in half the price of medicines commonly bought by the poor. The main importer of medicines from India is the government-owned Philippine International Trading Corporation. But we want to stress that PITC need not be the exclusive trading agent. We encourage private drugstore owners, traders and local governments to do business with Indian corporations. That’s why our delegation today includes local government executives and let me now introduce them: we have from the province of Camarines Sur, Governor Lray Villafuerte; we have also Mayor Rey Navarro. “good to see you, mayor”; and we have City Mayor Hector Villanueva as well as City Mayor Sherwin Gatchalian.

The private sector executives and the local government executives are interested in importing affordable medicine themselves.

Our delegation also includes members of the Philippine Congress. And let me again, now, introduce the members of the Philippine Congress: we have the Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives Congresswoman Girlie Villarosa; we have Congresswoman Zenaida Angpin; we have a congressman who is also a member of the Philippine pharmaceutical industry, Congressman Ferjs Biron; we have Congresswoman Janette Garin and Congressman Ed Zialcita. I’d like to address our legislators briefly and tell them that we appreciate their enthusiasm in producing for legislation that would make medicines in the Philippines more affordable just like in India.

Two days ago, the Philippine senate passed their version of this bill on second reading. The final passage of the quality affordable medicines act when reconciled with the version of the House of Representatives will be a major milestone in our administration’s efforts to promote better health and longer, productive lives for our people. The people have waited far too long for this measure to be enacted. We’re glad that there is now light at the end of the tunnel for millions of ailing Filipinos especially those among the poor.

When enacted into law, this bill will provide the legal framework to allow the production of cheaper medicines in the Philippines instead of just buying them from abroad. We share this good news — good news for us but I hope it’s also good news for the Indian business community — to encourage your pharmaceutical companies to set up production facilities in the Philippines so that you can keep your Philippine market. You will be able to keep your Philippine market by producing it there and you can even use your production facilities in the Philippines as a base to export to farther markets like northeast Asia, Australia and New Zealand.

Right now the balance of trade between India and the Philippines is lopsided in favor of India. But we believe that as India has become one of the world’s top economies with a new middle-class of half a billion people, your internal market demand and your domestic consumption can have a direct impact, a positive impact on us, the Philippines, in terms of job creation, balance of trade and investment.

The current surge of international investments in the Philippines has been anchored by the billion dollar plus investments in our country of several major international companies, including America’s Texas Instruments and AES, Korea’s Hanjin and Japan’s Marubeni. This is happening across the board in a number of industries. And we hope to receive more investments from India as well.

We appreciate that the Birla group established the Indo Phil group of textile companies in 1975, acquired an integrated fatty alcohol manufacturing facility in 2005 and inaugurated a business process outsourcing company last month. Mr. Agrawala has reminded us of the thriving garments industry in the Philippines where many Indians have invested since a long time ago.

And the list of I.T. and I.T. -enabled service companies in the Philippines owned by India is so long and getting even longer. We can’t even mention all of the names now. Also in 2004, one of our sponsors Mittal’s Ispat industries bought the steel corporation in Mindanao in Southern Philippines. And we hope after this visit, there will be more.

We offer a strategic location in a fast-growing region. Our workforce is well-educated, productive and English-speaking, very similar to India. This is an advantage not only for investments but also as a film location site for the largest movie industry in the world, Bollywood.

The Philippines is not only advantageous but a premier choice for film shooting because of its white sand beaches, enigmatic and mysterious rain forests, historical heritage sites, and crystalline scapes like lahar and sand dunes, so you can do your futuristic movies there. The Philippines is a fountain of creative and service talent. Production equipment, post- production houses and studios, sound stages and other technical and logistical requirements are available. Some members of the Philippine movie industry are with us today to pursue this exciting prospect.

We are cutting red tape to simplify the requirements for investing in or filming in or simply visiting the Philippines. We have a one-stop shop now in the Board of Investments where Secretary of Trade and Industry Peter Favila is the chairman of the board. And you only need to go now to one building in order to get all the permits that you need. This is the same as what we will do with filming.

And as part of cutting red tape, we have liberalized our visa policy towards Indian nationals. For too long we have had an anachronistic policy where Indians are considered as restricted nationals in the Philippines. But why would we want to restrict nationals from the fourth largest economy in the world. So, therefore, we have done the logical: we have removed Indian nationals from our list of restricted nationals.

Our liberalized visa policy, our white sand beaches combine with the beautiful smiles of our people to make tourism, especially eco-tourism, one of our growth sectors. We have with us our Secretary of Tourism, Ace Durano. He invites tourists and tourism investors to come over to the Philippines. And I am sure he will personally invite the Indian hotel chains, such as the Tata group and the Oberoi group to look at and consider the Philippines as a destination for their next projects.

From eco-tourism to developing a biofuels industry that helps our energy independence, create jobs and keep our nation clean for future generations, we are developing, as Mr. Agrawala said, and promoting our Green Philippines Agenda.

And we understand that two Maharashtra-based enterprises, Praj industries — whom I believe I’ll be meeting individually later — and KBK engineering have turnkey projects in the Philippines for the production of bio-ethanol. We want to explore joint ventures between the Philippines and Indian institutions to produce biofuel from sweet sorghum and Jatropha. And we have with us our Secretary of Energy, Angelo Reyes, to follow up on this investment opportunities.

Aside from alternative energy crops for biofuel, our agricultural and fisheries modernization program presents potentials for partnerships among agricultural and bio-technology companies in cotton and food crops such as maize and rice. And therefore we have our secretary of agriculture with us, Secretary Arthur Yap, to push for those investments.

We likewise invite Indian corporations to participate in the bidding for our asset privatization and to invest in Philippine government-owned-and- controlled corporations.

Most of the Philippine exports to India are industrial inputs like electronics, phosphoric acid and newsprint. But with India’s half a billion new middle- class, we hope we can do more trade in consumer products like fashion garments, fashion furniture, and the trendy virgin coconut oil. We hope that the Indian trading companies both in India and the Philippines will develop this market. And to make sure that we will be able to propagate these opportunities we also have our Press Secretary Ignacio Bunye with us today.

Native Filipinos and Hindus from India were already in contact by commerce during the age of the Indian Empires of Sri-Vijaya and Majapahit. In fact, the central islands in the Philippines are called the Visayan islands after the Sri- Vijaya empire. This was long before the Spaniards colonized the Philippines in the 16th century.

And today, here we are in the 21st century with India, as one of the drivers of the world’s economy. We are bullish on 21st century India. We are bullish on your ability to drive positive change in the world. We have the unique opportunity to learn from you, from your knowledge-driven development and create our own path to development. And most of all we want to do business with you.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during a Meeting with the Confederation of Indian Industries (CII). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412141144/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2243&Itemid=38