Thank you, Secretary Puno.

President Ramos and the other former chiefs of the PC and the PNP including now Former Chief Art Lomibao; the new Chief of the PNP, Director General Oscar Calderon and the other officers and men and women of the Philippine National Police; Congressman Espino and the other elected officials of the Philippine government; Cabinet members; AFP Chief of Staff General Senga and the other appointive officials of the Philippine government; ladies and gentlemen.

Art Lomibao will be hanging up his police uniform after thirty-eight years of exemplary service. His sixteen-month term as chief of police was one of the most event-filled and most challenging periods ever in the history of the PNP, as he himself said from day one.

And as he said, instead of a ceremony like this, what greeted him upon assuming the leadership of the PNP was the middle of a major attempted jailbreak. There was no ceremony, he had no speech, even I had no speech.

Troop commander, please give ‘Tikas Pahinga.’

So now I will begin my speech where I intended to start my speech on that day. I wanted to tell the story of how I saw Art Lomibao as Chief PNP material. Everyone knows he is brave, gallant, a competent professional. But there are many brave, gallant, competent and professional officers in the police. But what I saw was a different greatness and leadership potential in the police in a very dignified, humble, gentle and quiet manner. He followed orders to return to Region I after only one day of service in the CIDG. He didn't ask why, especially since the CIDG is considered one of the most powerful positions in the PNP next to the chief.

So when the position of CIDG became vacant again, there were other nominees to fill it, and I said: “The CIDG is not a prize given to those we want to please. We should put someone who is the right officer there. We should put Art Lomibao there.” and I have never regretted that decision, just as I have never regretted making him chief of the Philippine National Police.

Art Lomibao’s time was very historic. He faced terrorists, criminals, syndicates, destabilizers on top of building his legacy of police stations and he passed all these tests with flying colors because of his greatness as well as because he was supported by a growing league of professionals in the Philippine National Police organization.

Indeed, our law enforcement men and women are essential to upholding the constitution and the rule of law that are so important to our democracy.

We thank Art, and we also thank today for the acceptance of Director General Oscar Calderon as the new head of the Philippine National Police.

All PNP leadership under this administration has succeeded in significantly reducing the crime rate, countering destabilization, and also terrorism. And now I have chosen General Calderon to continue that direction, if not improve upon it. We are confident that he aspires to achieve even higher results in making the peace of mind of the people safer on the streets, in their homes and in their workplaces.

With his leadership credentials and record in fighting crime among the main reasons for his appointment, Director General Calderon, General Calderon is geared for a solid professional horizon in bringing the Philippines closer to the interests and aspirations of the people, and orienting the Philippine organization to the high imperatives of political stability and economic growth.

General Calderon was recommended by the police search committee since the time General Aglipay was Chief of the PNP. And the successions were chosen during that time to ensure the stability of the changes in PNP leadership and avoid the undermining that sometimes happens when the competition for the highest position in the PNP is too intense. Didn't you notice that this time almost no one was competing to become Chief PNP, because almost everyone already knew about the succession.

As a result of the early decision at the top of the PNP, the team has consolidated into a more compact, homogeneous group. This set up is inherently more effective than an organization that is bruised by intense rivalries that often accompany the immediate period before a turnover.

Next, a corresponding consolidation of the execution level within the PNP and with other institutions will improve implementation capabilities. This consolidation will revolve around several areas, including the strategic battle with the left.

The National Security Council, of which the Secretary of the Interior and Local Governments as well as former President Ramos are members, and where the chief of the Philippine National Police is a technical member, the National Security Council is already overseeing this consolidation through a series of draft executive orders — one of which is already being finalized and probably will be signed by me this week — with the objective… Designed among other objectives to create a PNP-AFP partnership in the battle against the left.

I am confident that General Calderon's extensive experience in police management will have a significant impact here in our executional consolidation.

As we run to the ground the armed core of the terrorist left, we will dismantle the fear they are forcing upon our people and defeat their objectives with the weapons of nation building. The PNP and AFP will end what is called revolutionary taxation and ensure that those forced to pay will be defended against revenge.

Meanwhile, the new police leadership will continue to diligently work to suppress crime syndicates – kidnap-for-ransom, bank robberies, illegal drug trafficking, smuggling, illegal gambling – from their underground trade.

I have no doubt that General Calderon will carry on the banner of service that is turned over to him today.

And to Art Lomibao, who has made so many personal sacrifices to do an excellent job, my congratulations and Godspeed! And maybe now you can get married.

Congratulations!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Philippine National Police change of command ceremony and retirement honors for outgoing Police Director General Arturo Lomibao. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212815/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2838&Itemid=38