Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the AFP Turnover of Command

[Delivered at the General Headquarters Grandstand, Camp Aguinaldo, September 10, 2002]

Thank you very much Secretary Angelo Reyes for you introduction. And thank you that when many were criticizing my choice of Benjie Defensor to be Chief of Staff, you told me I was doing the right thing.

General Roy Cimatu and the other former Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; General Defensor and the other generals especially the Major Service Commanders and the members of the Board of Generals; distinguished members of the diplomatic corps; Senator Loren Legarda-Leviste; the members of the House of Representatives who are here today; members of the Cabinet and other Presidential Appointees; men and women of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; distinguished guests; the two governors of the two provinces of General Defensor; Ladies and Gentlemen:

If I could have done it without doing injustice to Benjie Defensor, I would have extended Roy Cimatu some more, but it is time for Benjie to have the crowning glory of his career. Why would I have wanted to extend Roy Cimatu had it not been at the same time an injustice to Benjie? Because Roy in The four months as Chief-of-Staff showed once again the mettle that I saw and many saw in the fourth division commander under the leadership of then Chief-of-Staff Angelo Reyes that Fourth Infantry Division Commander who translated a General and vague order of all-out war into a meticulously planned and magnificently executed campaign that brought back conventional warfare in fashion.

General Sigaya, troop commander, give the troops “tikas pahinga.”

We all remember Roy Cimatu for overrunning 46 enemy camps in a relentless six month campaign. So that when I became president, I wanted to make Roy Cimatu Army Chief, but since I was still getting my feet wet at that time, Two months after Edsa 2, I listened to the advice that Roy was too junior even if he was so accomplished. And so I made sure that he would get his three stars so that he could become a Chief-of-Staff the next time around that the position was made available. As South Commander, Roy continued to impress both Philippine foot soldiers and American top brass with his once again excellent and aggressive campaign plans against the Abu Sayyaf. I remember the Commander-in-Chief of the pacific telling me that in my South Commander– Roy Cimatu– I have one of the best generals in the whole world.

And so when I appointed Roy Cimatu as Chief-of-Staff, I considered it as a continuation of his work in our most critical military mission: bring peace to Mindanao, enforce the peace in Mindanao. And as he had done the 46 camps in the battles against the MILF he worked as Chief-of-Staff to defeat Abu Sabaya and recover most of the hostages. That is almost equal if not equal to the 46th campaigns that saw the overrunning of 46 camps in Mindanao.

Even when I appointed Roy Cimatu as Chief-of-Staff and I gave him the mission to finish Abu Sabaya, even then I knew I could not extend him for too long, because there are other senior and deserving aspirants waiting in the wings. But i took comfort in the recollection that except for Pope John Paul who died immediately after his election as Pope, Pope John the 23rd was the shortest reigning pope in history. No more than five years in a post that is held for life. And yet this shortest reigning pope in history accomplished the greatest changes in the history of the Catholic church in history since the Council of Trent. Pope John the 23rd gave us Vatican 2 and ushered the spirit of ecumenism and modernization of the Catholic Church.

Like Pope John the 23rd, I knew that Roy Cimatu could accomplished very much in a very short period of time, and he did it.

Last night I watched Roy Cimatu on television. The theme question of the show in on-line was: did Roy Cimatu accomplished his mission? The texters agreed with me two-to-one: mission accomplished. Congratulations General Cimatu. Mission accomplished by the man I call the thinking general, by the man they call the Pacman and by the man that they also call as I found out last night aside from being the thinking general, also the smiling general. In other words, the complete officer and gentleman, that is General Roy Cimatu.

Now as he retires, he can add to his spectacular capture of the 46th camps the equally defeat and watery demise of Abu Sabaya. Add to this as a bonus the perfect teamwork with the police that resulted in the killing of Faisal Marohomsar in a perfectly planned and executed kidnap rescue. And as his swan song, the launching of Oplan end game, to finally finish off the Abu Sayyaf and begin to let prosperity replace terrorism in the Sulu archipelago, especially as I have… Several times heard Roy say especially in the troubled town of Patikul where Roy started his outstanding military career and now in whose battle of liberation we have as the last testament that Roy is bequeathing to his successor. These exploits of Roy Cimatu — bold in the application of science, innovative in the application of conventional warfare which he has again made fashionable, all these must become part of the doctrine of Philippine military warfare.

Long after Roy Cimatu has retired because of what he has contributed to the science of warfare his name will be there in the textbooks of our young soldiers studying to become great heroes and soldiers like him.

When Diomedio Villanueva was Chief- of- Staff, I gave the guidance to modernize our military doctrine. I said, we have enough great battles like the battles led by Roy Cimatu to inspire and serve as models and lessons for our soldiers. I gave this instruction during the stint of General Villanueva, I gave it during the stint of General Roy Cimatu, I am giving it again as General Benjie Defensor begins his stint. During the last air force day celebration, Benjie Defensor reported what he has been doing to follow my guidance about doctrine. And I have heard too some junior officers telling me that they are now learning Filipino doctrine in their training camps. I am happy that through the three Chiefs- of -Staff, since the time I gave my guidance about modernizing doctrine, this has been internalized.

This conscientious continuity of adherence to the Commander-in-Chief’s guidance on modernizing doctrine and other guidance, on other issues through three Chiefs- of- Staff, through four if you include the guidance I was giving General Angie Reyes when he was Chief-of-Staff. All this continuity of following guidance and following it with internalize conviction belie the critics’ charge that short term in the office of the chief of staff are anathema to stability in the leadership of the Armed Forces.

These critics who criticize short terms are wrong. They are wrong. They do not appreciate the principle of professional continuity in the military command. The command as an institution and not the command as persons. This critics are wrong because they presume that leadership in the Armed Forces is politicized. Leadership in the Armed Forces is not politicized, it is professional. This critics are wrong because they underestimate the loyalty and professionalism of the men in uniform.

It is no great consequence how long a chief-of-staff serves his tenure. What is important and indispensable is the permanence of values, standards and norms in the Armed Forces.

But while values are permanent, doctrine must modernize and change with the times. While my guidance of modernizing doctrine has been internalized by the leadership of the Armed Forces through three commanders from when I first gave it, I believe it is time to institutionalize this throughout the organization. Thus I am lodging the task of reviewing and modernizing doctrine to the deputy Chief-of-Staff of the Armed Forces.

This modernization of doctrine should take into account what is called the post-military affairs revolution thinking regarding the changing military mission brought about by the growth in the power of the criminal, terrorist and other armed non-state organizations that now challenge traditional nation states in many parts of the globe.

The 20th-century U.S. model of civil-military relations and task allocation, in which the military looks outward and law enforcement agencies do the domestic chores, is breaking down everywhere.

The last “revolution in military affairs” occurred in the 1980s, consisting of high-tech warfare as in the desert storm. But this revolution started twenty-years ago and more is over now. A new paradigm is prevailing.

To quote a military scientist Ralph Peters: our national security problems have more to do with innovative behavior than with military-technological competition. The advent of criminal and warlord parastates is a far more urgent challenge than funding the B-2 Bomber Boys Club. We are witnessing multiple simultaneous revolutions and devolutions in worldwide social and governmental structures, and millennia-old patterns of human organization are collapsing.

We face a world in much of which the 19th -century manner of organizing and applying the power of the state has become the least relevant of all thinkable manners. Far from the conventionally armed and recognizably structured forces our analysts imagine as future opponents, we confront, today, creatively organized enemies employing behaviors and technologies ranging from the stone age to those at the imagination’s edge.

Our understanding of an approach to international relations and the use of the military is based upon an assumption of the ubiquity of the nation -state. In much of the world, however, the nation-state might become irrelevant. In much of the world, traditional structures of government coexist nervously with emerging systems of resource allocation and human organization, from techno-capable crime networks to the machete-swinging clans of warlords, from anarcho-capitalism through economic migrations to the re-emergence of the virtual city-state in places like Cali, Sarajevo, and Kabul.

Criminal organizations, to stress only one of the growing and largely ignored threats to our national security, increasingly have more power than other states especially the failing states.

Today, with the efficacy of many formal government in worldwide decline, criminal organizations are becoming new forms of government for want of a new and better world.

This has powerful implications for state-craft and military activities. Over the past few decades, the doctrine of third world militaries has been to evolve toward the 20th-century U.S. model of civil-military relations and task allocation in which the military looks outward and law enforcement agencies as I said do the domestic chores. This model as I said, is breaking down everywhere. Criminal, terrorist, other armed non-state organizations have grown too powerful and adept-in extreme cases, we have seen the emergence of criminal-enterprise armies. And we have seen that here in the Philippines.

In the emerging wars against criminal ghost states, parastates and criminal-enterprise armies, the modernization of our Armed Forces will allow us to possess the material tools for the job. But even if we modernized the material tools of our Armed Forces, we would still lack innovative methodologies and adequately contemporary laws unless we modernized doctrine. To address the broad range of emerging threats, yes, we need new weapons. But we also need new rules of engagement. And I am glad that the military has begun to do the new doctrines. And now, we must manualize them.

Criminal and terrorist organizations, local and international, must be regarded in “peacetime” as combatants during wartime: the goal is to degrade them, to neutralize them until the survivors quit.

The roles and missions of the Philippine military are changing, but the changes must go beyond the legacy of the 1980’s revolution in military affairs. The Philippine Armed Forces after all are already involved in struggles against organized crime, local and international.

Fighting drug cartels and combating other criminal “ghost states” is the moral officer’s nightmare, full of impossible restrictions, gray areas, and daily opportunities to embarrass the flag and demoralize the force. Drugs and drug-related violence have killed more Filipinos, wrecked more lives, and cost us more in real peso terms than did the Mindanao war in which Roy Cimatu displayed his heroism. Our cities have been raped, and generations of the poor have been lost irretrievably– that constitutes a threat to our national security.

But if “General Pacman” is a difficult act to follow in meeting this and the more conventional threats, our new chief of staff, General Benjamin Defensor, can certainly fit into the challenging shoe. For Benjie is a professional’s professional, a pilot with the heart of a poet, didn’t we all listen in rapture as he delivered his induction address with such poetry? But Benjie, has the heart of a poet but the instincts of a true fighter. Once again, a true officer and a gentleman.

Since i have bet Benjie I have continually increased my impression and admiration for his professional conduct. It was not easy for him to be at Edsa two, but he was there. I thanked Angie Reyes for sharing with him that moment of truth. There have been other moments of truth for Benjie but he has proven his loyalty to the service, and the flag, and the constitution countless times, including, I must reveal, the days leading up to may one of 2001. Someday, maybe I can tell the story of how Benjie help me prepare for the mayhem of May 1. And that is why we were ready. There should be no doubt left in our minds that Benjie Defensor will uphold the constitutional mandate and sustain the unity of purpose and singularity of direction that now drive the Armed Forces.

Benjie has consistently been known for his innovative spirit and his strategic finesse. His “first force” strategy for the Philippine Air Force, developed in response to my call for a definition of AFP doctrines, is among the solid testaments of the high quality of his leadership and talent. Benjie is indeed, an innovator. He is a pioneer. He is a trailblazer.

For instance, he is the first Ilonggo to become the Chief-of-Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. And as he said earlier, he is one of only three chiefs of the Philippine air force to become head of an institution that is so predominantly dominated by the army.

In facing old challenges, the traditional challenges of the military. In changing the new challenges that have come up with the new threats to national security, I am sure as we have heard in his speech that Benjie Defensor will bring a fresh perspective. I, therefore, ask everyone from the Armed Forces of the Philippines to give your full support to your new chief-of-staff even as I ask you to sustain the courage, the loyalty and the professionalism that are now an indelible mark of the great Filipino soldier.

To Roy, congratulations for a mission magnificently accomplished to cap other great exploits in the history of your career and our own military history. And to Benjie Defensor — fly high. Bring us to new great heights of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. And bring those heights to the service of a strong Philippine republic.

Congratulations and thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the AFP Turnover of Command. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409211710/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8392&Itemid=38