Thank you very much, Secretary Reyes. And the first among the Chiefs of Staff that have served in my administration.

My predecessor as president and the predecessor of General Defensor and Santiago as Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, his Excellency President Fidel Ramos; a dear friend of the new Chief of Staff. In fact, the one who alerted me a long time ago to the virtues and qualifications and bravery of General Santiago, Speaker Jose de Venecia; I congratulate and thank the other members of Congress who are here today. I thank them because they are here I’m sure to express their continuing support for the Armed Forces of the Philippines; I also thank the local government officials who have come to join this installation of the new chief of staff, they represent the local governments of the communities where General Santiago spent very important parts of his career; of course, I congratulate the now most recent former Chief of Staff General Benjie Defensor; I would like to greet all the other uniformed officers both of the Armed Forces and of the police; and as I greeted President Ramos, all the former chiefs of staff who are also here to greet a new member of their very exclusive club; I greet all the officers, men and women of the Armed Forces of the Philippines including the ladies of the Armed Forces, the wives of our brave officers and soldiers whose support has been so crucial in their bravery and their courage.

To all our countrymen, good morning. And now I asked the Commanding… Troop Commander Teneral Teodocio to give ‘tikas pahinga.’

Once again today, we observe the tradition in the changing of the guards. I have presided over the ceremony several times now. I presided over the change of command from General Angelo Reyes whom we call the philosopher general to General Diomedio Villanueva who served as our Chief of Staff for more than a year. I presided over the change of command from General Villanueva to General Roy Cimatu whom we call the thinking general. I presided over the change of command from General Cimatu to General Defensor whom as we all see is the poet general. And now, I am presiding over the change of command from General Defensor to general Santiago, the Chuck Norris, the Delta Force of the Philippines. Each of these chiefs of staff have their own distinct and remarkable personality, but I think they have one thing in common. All my choices for AFP Chief of Staff have shown outstanding leadership, loyalty to the constitution, and faith in the chain of command and the commander-in-chief. That is why I am unperturbed by criticisms of the short terms of the last two chiefs of staff. For it is leadership, not time that is the sole measure of command.

And I shall continue to judge the command only by the high standards of merit and professionalism.

I believe that there is no essential relationship between the brief stints of our last two chiefs of staff on the one hand and the stability of the Armed Forces on the other.

Our last two chiefs of staff are our best argument that the length of command is not the most relevant trait of good military leadership.

Under General Benjie Defensor, the AAFP started to untie the “Gordian knot” of local terrorism, insurgency and poverty through successful military operations against the Abu Sayyaf and the local communist movement, and I enjoin General Santiago to continue untying that “Gordian knot.” The move of General Defensor was reinforced by closer coordination in intelligence and operations between the AFP and the PNP, and the civic action campaigns to win back a large number of rebel and terrorist sympathizers.

When Benjie Defensor accepted his post, he promised to make the AFP perform as “one force” for the country’s defense and security. And in fulfilling his promise, he demonstrated brilliance and innovation in making the force faster, smarter and deadlier. The “one force” that Benjie promoted precluded relying just on ground forces or almost totally on ground forces to achieve military victory. Having come from a major service other than the army, Benjie was more conscious of making all the services equal partners in a campaign plan. Thus, his spectacular victories in the Sultan Gumander battles are significant contributions to doctrine especially on the role of the air force as the first force in softening the enemy targets.

Under Benjie’s leadership, “Oplan Hurricane” dealt a big blow to terrorist and insurgent forces in the Lanao provinces. This Oplan secured the communities by preventing hostile acts that could have been launched from a newly-built enemy camp.

I am proud that Benjie has met his goal of the entire Armed Forces as “one force” — faster, smarter, deadlier and more poetic.

The poetry was not only in the term that he call his operation “gordian knot.” The poetry was in his blending of conventional and unconventional approaches which resulted in significant arrests and breakthroughs in our anti-terrorism and anti-insurgency campaigns.

The arrest of Miel Gracia Laurenaria, Ceferino Borlaus and Lydia Tuastumban, the capture of the NPA headquarters in Bag-gao, Cagayan Valley, the coming in of 150 NPA regulars of Quezon province are good examples of these.

I was also privileged to preside personally over the coming back to the fold of the entire backbone of the rebellion in Rizal province. So significant coming from the center of gravity of the insurgency in a highly strategic area so close to the seat of government of the republic.

Better AFP-PNP intelligence and coordination unearthed information vital to our national and global anti-terrorism campaigns. This network, this teamwork led to the exposure of new links between local terrorist groups to the Jemaah Islamiya which is further linked to Al-Queda.

But Benjie showed his versatility also when he convinced 308 rebels to give up their fight, with the oldest MILF leader, Kumander Bantac, setting the example.

Under Benjie Defensor’s leadership, our forces have pushed the Abu Sayyaf back to their point of origin. And I expect each of them to be accounted for in due time.

With Benjie’s encouragement and guidance, air force intelligence operatives did him proud by capturing Abdulmukim Edris, the foreign-trained mastermind of the Zamboanga City bombings before the latter could blow up key places in Metro Manila.

And, even today, just as Benjie was going to turnover the command to the new chief of staff of the Armed Forces, even today his troops, our troops again delivered a major military victory against the rebels in San Quintin, Pangasinan. A good going-away present for General Benjie Defensor as outgoing Chief of Staff.

The adverse global environment has provided opportunities to address our national security concerns. Nine-eleven, the subsequent war on terrorism, and the looming war in Iraq have all combined to dampen the world economy. But even before 9-11, we had already been waging a war on terrorism. You will recall that the Abu Sayyaf was able to generate at least 20 million dollars in ransom from Sipadan, which strengthened their capability for terror. But with our decisive response to 9-11, we gained foreign allies in our war against terror, which enabled us to neutralize the notorious Abu Sabaya in June of this year, and to degrade Abu Sayyaf strength from thousands to a couple of hundred there in Patikul.

Benjie’s sharp tactical gains have been counterbalanced against good strategic sense. He has played an active role in the evaluation of the AFP basic doctrine and the accompanying doctrines development manual.

I am glad to know that most of the division manuals have been approved and are up for deliberation by the AFP doctrines board. I have had positive reports from junior officers about these developments. Even as they also give me positive reports about their appreciation that for the first time in history, the soldiers will be sharing the same Christmas benefits as the civilian personnel in our government.

The modernization of the AFP would not be complete without a doctrine appropriate to modern times. The practices of the 20th century cannot apply to all the problems of the 21st century. In the great battles that our Filipino soldiers have waged including the great battles of Sultan Gumander are at least as rich in lessons as the historical battles of the world. And warfare must take new approaches to effectively respond to the whole range of new threats spawned by new technologies and the vagaries in the global political and economic scenario.

As I said when I installed Benjie Defensor as chief of staff, the modernization of doctrine should take into account the post-military affairs revolution thinking regarding the changing military mission brought about by the growth in the power of the criminal, terrorist and other armed non-state organizations that now challenge weakened traditional nation states in many parts of the world.

We need this modernization, not only of the AFP but also of doctrine because we need to build a strong Philippine republic. For the last 100 years, we have failed to build the strong republic. We were the first republican state in Asia. Yet today, we have become one of the weakest. Thus, we have to be honest to ourselves and find out what our basic problems are. Only then can we find the solutions.

I’ve been in office 20 months now, and the daily problems i have had to face are among the most difficult in our country’s history. But I gained experience and maturity from both my correct decisions and my mistakes. Thus, i can now face the future with greater certainty of what needs to be done. The starting point is plain talk and an honest recognition of our national weaknesses.

Why is our state weak? A state is weak if dominant classes or sectors control it or shape its policies especially those dealing with the economy. This is our decades-old fundamental weakness. From Bonifacio at Balintawak to Cory Aquino and FVR at EDSA, we have struggled to correct this weakness by bringing power to the people. As I said in my first State of the Nation Address or SONA: “we also see in our great revolutions — from Bonifacio to EDSA — a progressive advancement towards the ultimate goal to transfer power over the state from the traditional economic and political bosses to the people.”

Our task is to complete this revolution. And as I said in my first SONA: “the enemy to beat is ourselves. When we spread division rather than unity; when we put ourselves above country and profit above fairness. When we make politics replace patriotism in our country’s hour of need.”

What are the symptoms of the weak state that our generation of Filipinos has inherited? One is a large gap between rich and poor, a gap that has been exploited for political ends. Another is a political system based on patronage, and ultimately, corruption to support patronage. Another is, in recent years, the use of destabilization, black propaganda and character assassination as political tools of the trade. The common word in these is “politics” — too much politics. And that’s why I am glad that we have an Armed Forces that is above politics.

I am a politician, there are several in this audience who are politician, because all those who are in elected leadership, whether administration or opposition are politicians, and all exist within this system. Too much politics contributing to a weak state is a collective blame we must all share in. What is important is the willingness to change, and over time, this can happen.

The adverse global environment has aggravated our weakness. Following the 1997 Asian currency crisis, our ability to generate public revenues steadily deteriorated. The ratio of revenues-to-GDP declined from 19 percent in 1997, to 17 percent in 1998, to 16 percent in 1999, to 15 percent in the year 2000. This trend weakened us financially, limiting the resources we have to fund development and modernization, and increasing our need to borrow.

During my first year as president, we were able to arrest the decline sustaining the 2000 ratio of 15 percent into the year 2001. However, the decline has resumed this year, 14 percent revenue-to-GDP ratio because low interest rates while being good for business they have also led to lower taxes on interest income. Because while agricultural growth in exports is good for the farmers and good for those who work in our export manufacturers, the growth in the economy was in agriculture and exports and they don’t pay taxes.

Also, we have the low inflation rate, and while this is good for the consumers, low inflation reduce vat values, non-dutiable imports increased. And while it is good for the riding public to have excise tax free automobiles, when excise tax free automobiles dominated vehicles sales that also reduced our tax stake.

Another reason was that specific taxes on liquors and cigarettes don’ increase with higher prices. But most of all, we have had continuing problems of tax administration. Prompting me to tap the services of a classmate of General Santiago, Guillermo Parayno, PMA class 1970 to head the BIR. He’s not here today because I suppose he has to attend to a lot of problems in the BIR. But Dionnets’ classmate, Parayno, is preceded by his impressive record as Commissioner of Customs during the administration of President Ramos. And Parayno has shown his personal integrity, his technological competence, and the people skills to meet the targets set for the rest of the medium-term plan period. He is the right man for the job. Not the least reason of which he is from class 1970, the class of Dionnet Santiago.

Because now I have Parayno, PMA 1970, heading our revenue collections. I have Jun Ebdane, PMA Class ’70, heading our police force, our enforcement. I even have Roy Golez, Annapolis Class ’70 putting together our intelligence coordination. And now, Dionisio Santiago PMA 1970, heading the Armed Forces of the Philippines. We have four classmates in-charge of enforcing the law and enforcing law and order. And I count on the four of them to be interactive and to make all our rule of law agencies the “one force” that Benjie Defensor envisioned.

Focused, action-oriented and combat-honed, Dionnets Santiago has distinguished himself in various battlefields in Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. He conceptualized the formation of light reaction companies in all tactical units of the Philippine army, which has proven to be one of the most cost-effective strategies of counter-insurgency and counter-terrorism.

Dionnets is equally comfortable in the field as in the board room, having once served as assistant chief of staff for plans of the Philippine Army, a director of the National Security Studies, a trade attache at the Philippine Embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and an Attache at the Philippine Consulate in Seattle, Washington.

But, to me, the greatest part of Dionnets preparation for his present work is not really in his biodata. Most of all to me, from what I have seen of him, I considered Dionnets as the SoCom Commander — that’s why I call him the delta force and the Chuck Norris — but he was the SoCom commander who put his career on the line for the people in the events leading to January 19, 2001. And this is why I trust him with my life. And I trust him, I entrust to him the leadership of the Armed forces of the Philippines I join the men and women of the AFP in saluting the new chief of staff.

And as for Benjie, he is ready for his second career. And as Benjie goes off — not riding into the sunset, not even living just the life of a poet in retirement — as Benjie goes off to capture newer worlds, let us for the last time salute him as chief of staff and congratulate him for 33 years of excellent, unselfish and loyal service to the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the people of the republic of the Philippines.

Thank you very much, Benjie Defensor. Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the AFP Change of Command Ceremony. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409205933/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8442&Itemid=38