Thank you very much, Secretary Cruz.

Speaker De Venecia and the members of the legislature both the Senate and the House; General Efren Abu, our immediate past Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; General Senga, our new Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; the major service commanders of the armed forces; the different officials of the Philippine government who are both either elected or appointed by myself or my predecessors; excellencies of the diplomatic corps; former chiefs of staff; former secretaries of defense; officers, men and women of the armed forces of the Philippines; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen:

First of all, troop commander give ‘Tikas Pahinga.’

First of all, as General Senga said and as General Efren Abu also said, I want to thank our armed forces for your successful defense of our democracy, especially in recent months. And General Senga mentioned July 8, 2005. Thank you all very much.

Thank you for your steadfastness.

General Abu was supposed to retire several weeks ago, but I asked him to stay to ensure that the elections being prepared for in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao would be carried out. And I take this opportunity to congratulate the armed forces under the leadership of General Abu for the peacefulness of the elections in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.

May I also add that this is the first election in the autonomous region in which the President of the Philippines did not interfere. I chose to break tradition because we want to make true and meaningful the autonomy of the region of Muslim Mindanao and thus put forward and move forward the upholding of democracy and the rule of law. For as long as the rule of law is enforced by the integrity of the uniform and the professionalism of good soldiers, our nation will endure, our nation will survive any upheaval or crisis.

This ceremony is symbolic of the permanence of our high ideals as a nation and people. Ideals forged in blood and service over more than a century.

Today, we face not only domestic controversies but also an oil crisis of global proportions compounded by a global resurgence of terrorism.

You of course know your roles — soldiers of the Philippines — in the battle against terrorism. But even in the oil crisis, you are called upon to face material constraints even as you are called upon to keep the offensive and the initiative against the enemies of the state. For the rest of us in civilian government, we are called upon to break our partisan bickering and focus our national energy on the oil and energy crisis even as we assure and I assure as commander-in-chief that all the armed forces shall enforce the rule of law.

When I installed General Efren Abu as chief of staff last year, as he said, I bade him to implement specific instructions most lastingly for the legacy of the armed forces. I bade him to implement a fresh wave of reforms in the armed forces in line with the findings of the joint defense assessment with the United States and also the Feliciano Commission.

He lived up to my trust in his ability. General Abu even told us about what he did in these reforms. The trials he started and his overhaul of military headquarters especially the abolition of J-6. But also going beyond that, all these resulted in a leaner organization and a more cost-effective and transparent distribution and utilization of personnel, logistics and financial resources. Congratulations! General Abu.

And now, I welcome General Gene Senga to the helm of the armed forces.

And as I do so, let me tell you a personal story about him. A few years ago, General Senga was chosen by the board of generals to head J-2. One of the most important, most glamorous, most powerful, most sensitive positions in the armed forces. But as the assignment was being implemented, a top official of the national security establishment vigorously objected, thus, the move was unceremoniously aborted. I’m sure causing General Senga no small amount of disappointment and embarrassment. Nonetheless, his true mettle showed in that crisis in his career. He accepted the unusual not to say… The unusual, to say the least, the unusual change of instructions in midstream with a perfect discipline of an officer and a gentleman. And he moved on. He moved on to win the battle of Buliok and then to oversee the rehabilitation of that community.

General Senga may not have made it to J-2 but how he handled himself in that situation and afterwards, affirmed in my mind the conviction by many that he indeed deserves to be Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. Congratulations! General Senga.

I reveal this story because we need role models especially for the young officers. Especially at a time like this, as General Abu says, “when there are so many attempts to drive a wedge within the senior officers and the young officers.” Some of them, some of those who tried to do this tried to do this out of sheer sensationalism. But others tried to do this because of real effort to cause breaks in the chain of command.

As General Abu has said, “our mass media has been presenting to the nation different faces of the young officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.” We have seen of course the heroic faces of young officers who’ve sacrificed their lives in the line of duty. But we’ve also seen reports on young officers accused of conduct unbecoming of an officer and a gentleman and finding themselves in controversial roles.

All of these young officers have pledged themselves to serving the country through a difficult career in the AFP. But it is important at this point in time when there are so many efforts to drive this wedge. It is important for the leadership of the AFP, especially under someone who has personified the behavior of an officer and a gentleman under extremely difficult circumstances to himself and his career like General Senga, to define for the entire organization the correct path to be fostered. Idealism, self-sacrifice and courage are not the monopoly of youth, for I have seen in our senior officers like General Senga the same outstanding qualities. I’ve seen that in General Abu. I’ve seen that in many other senior officers.

Thus, I instruct the new AFP leadership under General Senga to engage in renewed dialogue with our young officers to show them that all officers, regardless of length of service, are equally committed to the values for which they have dedicated their lives.

Public attention is continuously focused on the unusual circumstances of those who engage in mutiny, or those who stray into criminality, or those who stray into political controversy. While notoriety and scandal may sometimes highlight the dark side of the military institution, like the dark side of other institutions in this degenerated political system — a system that has continuously degenerated over the years — we must constantly tell the tales of our heroes, senior as well as junior officers and enlisted men and women, who have sacrificed their lives so that the nation may survive. We must always remind ourselves, as General Abu said, “that the vast majority of the armed forces are still true heroes of the Republic of the Philippines.”

General Senga, I expect you to keep the Armed Forces of the Philippines within the constitution and do not allow any partisan quarters to undermine the chain of command.

I expect you to further reform and professionalize the command as your predecessors have initiated this effort.

I expect you to finish off the terrorists while supporting the peace process.

I have seen you in action. I have seen your military prowess as I said in the battle of Buliok and others. But I have also seen your commitment to the peace process in the rehabilitation of communities in the Liguasan marsh.

I expect you to help our country in the fight against poverty by upgrading the role of the engineering brigades in this fight whether in remote country roads or in major infrastructure projects that need to catch up with a quick deadline.

General Senga, may I say, as I’ve said to General Abu, I’m proud that he was my chief of staff.

Today, I tell you, General Senga, I am proud to have you as the new chief of staff, and I’m proud of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. Congratulations!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) Change of Command Ceremony. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412063022/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5110&Itemid=38