It is an honor to launch this year’s celebration of the four days of the EDSA 1 anniversary in the company of that small band of patriots in uniform who chose to draw their line in the sand 23 years ago today, led by then Secretary of National Defense, now Senate President Juan Ponce Enrile.

If the patriots had not acted when they did—planning boldly, improvising on the way, but always moving forward decisively—then this historical watershed might not even have taken place. And had the Filipino masses not taken their side so quickly, the patriots holed up in Camps Aguinaldo and Crame might have been crushed and the whole episode reduced to a footnote in history.

But our people took to the streets in their support, along the length of EDSA, from in front of Camp Crame and Aguinaldo, unarmed except for hearts burning with love for country and a sincere belief in God. Together, as one people, we reclaimed democracy.

The world embraced EDSA 1 in 1986. The world tolerated EDSA 2 in 2001. The world will not forgive an EDSA 3 but would instead condemn the Philippines as a country whose political system is hopelessly unstable.

Our political stability today is one of the reasons why we have escaped thus far the worst effects of the global recession. We must prevent the world crisis from becoming a Philippine crisis, and protect those most hurt by the global downturn.

Let us honor the boldness of the leaders of EDSA, the boldness of our ordinary countrymen, the boldness of our faith in God. Let us look back to those four days of EDSA 1, not to relive them, for history must move on, but to recall their lessons and refresh our spirit as a people against the new challenges of today.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 23rd Anniversary Celebration of EDSA One Revolution. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412105230/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=20965&Itemid=38