Thank you, Secretary Angelo Reyes.

Troop commander give ‘Tikas Pahinga.”

His Excellency President Ramos, former Chief PNP in his time; Chief PNP General Aglipay and the officers, men and women of the Philippine National Police; Congresswoman Nanette Daza who is our congresswoman here and the other elective officials of the Philippine government, including Governor Parouk Hussin of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao and Governor Ben Loong of Sulu; members of the Cabinet and other government officials, including the AFP Chief of Staff, General Abu; recipients of today’s PNP awards; I would also like to greet the recipients of the annual ten outstanding policemen from the Metrobank Foundation. And I thank the chairman of Metrobank, Chairman George Ty for making the awarding ceremonies earlier this morning an integral part of our PNP anniversary; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.

Our policemen and policewomen on your 14th anniversary, I commend the brave men and women of the Philippine National Police, from your generals down to the ordinary police officer patrolling our neighborhoods.

Earlier, General Aglipay reminded us of the orders I gave him five months ago. Your response to that order — to improve public safety, stop drug trafficking, fight corruption within your ranks, and wage an all out war against terror — lends honor to the flag that we raised earlier today.

Even our friends in the Filipino-Chinese community attest to your major triumph against kidnap-for-ransom which is now at a record low. Congratulations to all of you!

Today, I especially congratulate the Batangas police, the SAF and the T.M.G. who triumphed in a five-hour firefight yesterday and arrested a notorious kidnapper with an P800,000 reward and his seven cohorts. I pray for the quick recovery of our six policemen who were wounded in that five-hour firefight, including the two who are still in critical condition. Congratulations to all of you!

Congratulations, too, to our drug enforcers to whom I gave a special presidential citation this morning. The number of innocent lives saved by your cutting the illegal trade by half is immense and i bid you to continue your good work.

Congratulations, too, to our anti-terrorism enforcers. Many times you have managed to thwart the evil designs of terrorists even before they could act. The singular honor of the Philippines now chairing both the anti-terrorism committee in the U.N. and the counter-terrorism task force of APEC must be rightfully shared by you, the policemen and policewomen of the Philippines, together with the other law enforcement agencies, the AFP, and our ever vigilant communities. Congratulations also for that!

Now, to keep the momentum of your new aggressive drive against cybersex dens, I call on our people to report to your nearest police stations operations that taint the image of our women and threaten the morals of people across the world. Congratulations! On a good start and good luck! On a good continuation.

The ramparts of our national security must be held firm as our economy grows. In ten minutes at 9:00 o’ clock this morning, the NEDA, the national statistical coordination board will officially report to the nation that our GDP grew by 6.1 percent in 2004, the highest since the last peak of growth in 1996 during the time of President Fidel V. Ramos. Congratulations! To the police and to all Filipinos for this achievement in our economy.

Our institutions are humming the tune of growth.

I would like to thank Congress — Nanette, please thank Congress — for focusing on the task of putting our fiscal house in order. And I would like to thank especially our service sector, transportation and communication especially, and our trade services for picking up, complemented by our support to boost micro, small and medium enterprises.

I would like to especially congratulate the young professionals manning our call centers and outsourcing firms who are raking in the appreciation of our investors.

We, in the executive branch of government, must do our share, just as Congress and the Senate are doing their share in addressing the fiscal challenge by keeping food supply and prices stable, and cutting waste and corruption in government, even as we fully support the efforts of the supreme court, which stands at the apex of the criminal justice system to cleanse its rank of misfits.

Law enforcement is only the first rung of our criminal justice, but it is in the enforcement of the law in the streets that the people sense the sternness as well as the compassion of the law. And as General Aglipay says, the people want to feel a compassionate, respectful police even as we are strict in our law enforcement.

Overall confidence in our nation lies in the full trust in the law.

Our dedication as public servants to secure our people’s safety and protect them from scalawags, white collar or otherwise, must be unassailable.

The officers and personnel of the PNP must not be found wanting. Do not tarnish your badge with a stain of corruption.

Last night, I gave the order to General Aglipay as well as to General Abu, to replace the existing AFP/PNP contingent in Diwalwal with the 402nd infantry brigade and a select PNP unit. The Chief PNP shall also include the murderers Tata Sala and his brother Edgar Sala, who are the centers of gravity of illegal mining in Diwalwal. They will be included in the most wanted list and the chief PNP shall effect their immediate arrest.

Men and women of the Philippine National Police, remain true to your oath as protectors of our people.

On this day, on your 14th anniversary, I greet you all. And to General Aglipay, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate him for a job well done.

Long live the PNP!

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Monday Flag Raising Ceremony and 14th Philippine National Police Anniversary. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412082335/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3059&Itemid=38