Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the State Banquet hosted by H.E. President Pratibha Devisingh Patil of the Republic of the Republic of India

[Delivered at the Ashoka Hall, Rashtrapati Bhavan New Delhi, Republic of India, October 5, 2007]

Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.

Your Excellency, first of all, allow us to congratulate you on your election as the first female president of India.

And thank you for inviting me to make this state visit almost immediately after Your Excellency assumed office.

Thank you for reminding us on my father’s visit in India in 1961 when he was vice president. At that time, relations were defined by the cold war.

Today as we visit you, relations are defined by globalization, and India has become an undeniable force behind global economic growth.

Your impressive growth, largely fueled a knowledge economy, has made you the world’s fourth largest economy. Our country emulates your path to development.

As you have said, our economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability with some of the strongest macroeconomic fundamentals in 20 years. Six years ago, no one thought we could get more revenues, cut down on tax cheats, strengthen the peso and move the stock market. And no one thought we could reduce our deficit to almost zero, pre-pay our debts and raise employment, but we have.

Today, the Philippines is on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. Investments are pouring in — including Indian investments — the peso is strong, our stock market has reached historic heights and we’ve created six million jobs in six years.

We are developing and promoting our Green Philippines agenda which, like India, puts emphasis on a sustainable economic model that brings economic opportunity and a concern for the environment.

As our respective economic engines drive us to modernization, we are both resolved not to do so at the expense of our environment nor on the back of the poor. On the contrary, poverty alleviation is our common overarching goal.

It is natural for the Philippines to emulate India in creating our path to development, because as you have said, Madame President, Indian civilization profoundly affected the culture of the Filipinos long before the Christian era and certainly long before the Spaniards colonized our country in the 16th century. The early relations between the Philippines and the Indian empires of Sri-Vijaya and Majapahit were not political but rather commercial and cultural.

Up to today, 25 percent of the words in our tagalog language are Sanskrit terms. Among such words are “asawa” for spouse, “diwa” for thought, “puri” for honor, “lakambini” for princess, “wika” for language and “maganda” for beautiful.

The Brahmanistic elements in ancient Filipino religion and the names of our ancestors‘ gods and also the mythological heroes were of Indian origin. The term “Bathala,” supreme god of the ancient Tagalog, originated from the Sanskrit Bhattara Guru.

Many Filipino customs are of Indian origin. Among them: (1) placing a sampaguita flower garland around the neck of a visitor upon arrival as a symbol of hospitality and friendship. We experienced that when we arrived here in India; (2) or when guests throw rice on the bride and the groom after the wedding; and (3) when a childless couple goes on a pilgrimage to a holy shrine, believing that God will grant their prayer for fertility.

The sarong skirt and the turban of pre-Spanish Filipinos and the embroidered shawls of present-day Muslim women have Indian influence.

Yet beyond these links that bind us from the past, as you have said, it is our recent history that forms a deeper bond between our countries. We are two of Asia’s most flourishing democracies. Our workforces are both well- educated, productive and English-speaking. We both honor our overseas nationals for their sacrifice and dedication to their work, their family and their nation. We are both ranked the most attractive off-shoring destinations in the world. As you have said, these commonalities should serve as the platform from which we can take our relations to an even higher level.

Madame president, sixty years ago, when India gained its independence, our two countries forged a treaty of friendship. Today, sixty years later, earlier today, our two governments signed nine agreements that will set directions and lead Philippines-India relations to a new era in various areas of cooperation such as foreign affairs, defense and security, health and medicine, trade and investments, credit, energy including renewable energy, agriculture, tourism, and culture.

Indeed, we have a new age in the relationship between India and the Philippines.

So, ladies and gentlemen, please join me in a toast to the good health and continued success of Her Excellency President Patil and to the growth of India-Philippines relations.

Mabuhay!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the State Banquet hosted by H.E. President Pratibha Devisingh Patil of the Republic of the Republic of India. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412141127/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2241&Itemid=38