Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During a State Luncheon in Honor of H.E. Alhaji Dr. Yahya Jammeh, President of the Republic of Gambia

[Delivered at the Aguinaldo State Dining Room, Malacañang, June 21, 2005]

His Excellency President Ramos, Excellencies of the diplomatic corps, officials and members of the Gambian delegation, members of the Philippine government, Gambian and Philippine business community, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.

I’d like to begin by extending our warmest welcome to His Excellency President Jammeh and the whole Gambian delegation.

Your visit Excellency is a reaffirmation of our commitment to a more active engagement between our two continents in support of the new Asian-African strategic partnership. It’s my pleasure to welcome the President of Gambia as the first African president to visit the Philippines during my presidency.

I believe in strong linkages between the Philippines and Africa.

Your visit Excellency promotes goodwill between Asia and the large number of independent nations in Africa. And gives the Filipino people a chance to understand the problems of development of former colonies subjected to the rules of different colonial powers.

As developing nations we can support each other through cooperative efforts and with the assistance of common friends and allies through various tripartite or multilateral arrangements as we endeavor to produce ways and means to improve the lives of our people.

On this note, ladies and gentlemen, especially of the Philippines, I was so happy to hear the acknowledgement of His Excellency President Jammeh about the role that the Philippines played in their development since their independence in 1965. Their main export product is peanuts and the variety of their peanut is called Philippine pink. It is also called Brokos because it was brought there by a professor Brookes from the Philippines. And 70 percent of their experts have studied in the Philippines headed by no less than their incumbent vice president who studied in the Philippines.

And I am very happy that His Excellency President Jammeh said that they are our friends forever because of what we have done for them in the early days of the development of their new independent nation. And the friendship is significant, Excellency, because you are an influential member of the organization of the Islamic conference. And your support is valuable in our efforts to forge lasting peace with our Muslim brothers in Southern Philippines. With your support, the Philippines looks forward to a future of being one among you in the OIC.

We are committed to promoting understanding among various faiths and civilization in our country and in the world.

And I thank you Excellency for your visit which is a valuable contribution to that greater understanding and for the commitment that you have made that you will support fully our bid to be an observer, a permanent observer in the OIC.

Ladies and gentlemen of the Philippines, there is one additional very big gesture of friendship that President Jammeh has brought on his visit to the Philippines. And it bolsters my own faith that God the father or Allah as he is called in the Muslim world has perfect timing.

Yesterday, we were appalled to read about the unprecedented rise in the price of oil to 59 dollars per barrel. And I started my conversation with his Excellency, talking about how important it is for us to address that issue because we are poor countries heavily dependent on imported oil. And his Excellency, the President, gave me a wonderful piece of good news. Gambia has just discovered oil.

And because the Philippines helped out Gambia in its earlier days struggling as a nation. Gambia will help us out this time by giving a bloc for the oil exploration of our Philippine Oil Exploration Company.

So, this is a wonderful visit, a God-sent visit, Excellency. And because of this it is my utmost pleasure to ask all of you to join me in a toast for the continued success and good health of His Excellency President Yahya Jammeh, the relations between the Philippines and Gambia, and sustained partnership between Asia and Africa.

Mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during a State Luncheon in Honor of H.E. Alhaji Dr. Yahya Jammeh, President of the Republic of Gambia. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412081006/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5074&Itemid=38