Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Kuya Etcho for the introduction.

Senate President Drilon; Speaker De Venecia; Chief Justice Davide; Judge De La Cruz and the judges of the Republic of the Philippines; Secretary Datumanong; Justice Velasco; our senators represented here by the principal sponsor of the Judicial Reform Law, Kiko Pangilinan; congressmen – Nonoy Llibanan, the principal sponsor of the same law that I just signed, Deputy Speaker Raul Gonzales, Congressman Nonoy Andaya. I believe we… Do we have Congressman Cajes here and Congressman Angara Castillo, Congressman Danton Bueser; fellow workers in government; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.

It’s so providential that the Senate and the House were able to ratify such a far-reaching landmark legislation on judicial reform in time for my it here in your convention. And I thank them for it, but I think once again the Lord’s timing is perfect, and it was the Lord who timed this ratification.

I thank them for their work. It’s a landmark piece of work. I would like to congratulate not only them but all of you who worked for it including our justices who are here in the front row today. I’d like to greet them too. Indeed, it is a tribute and a recognition of Philippine society of the hard work that our judges are doing for peace, order and the rule of law in our society.

I know the trials and tribulations of being a judge, not because I’m a lawyer, but I have a cousin who is a judge, I had an uncle who was a judge. I had an uncle too who was a judge. And observing them through the years and observing many of you whom I know, I can see that many judges have placed future on the line. And even more than that have placed family on the line. And even more than that have even placed life on the line to fight crime and terror.

All these in return for what used to be until today a salary that is much lower from the starting pay of a brand new lawyer in a De Campanilla Makati Law firm — that is up to today. Today, it was my honor and pleasure to sign into Law R.A. 9227, upgrading the compensation of judges. The culmination of the good work that the gentlemen in the platform and the lady in the front row have been working so hard for to come up with the correct bill in the right format, in the right source of budgetary allocation.

I thank the members of Congress. They heard your voices. But even before they heard your voices they saw the mute testimony of the many Salas that had no applicants and they share our philosophy that justice also demands that those who deliver it should likewise participate of its benefits.

Many sectors ask for an increase in pay but not all sectors have a mute testimony of Salas without applicants. It just goes to show that what used to be in the law was not the correct level that would have an equilibrium between the demand and the supply of judges.

And therefore, what the market would otherwise have provided for if our society were to be completely free enterprise including government pay was recognized by our congressmen and our senators. And we thank them for that. We thank them for realizing which petitions for increase in pay are the most essential and which are desirable but less essential. There are those that we wish will happen. There are those that must happen, and they recognize what must happen is the increase in pay of our judges.

I too have many times advocated this increase in salaries and allowances of members of the judiciary. I’ve said this in such unlikely venues as the PMA Alumni gathering and the PNP anniversary celebration because at that time I said the soldiers are getting their pay increase, the police have gotten their pay increase. If we really want to complete the reform of law enforcement and the criminal justice system, the judges also have to have their pay increase. That is an integral part of our reform program.

Many of us and certainly I have long held that the most basic foundations of democracy are the rule of law and an environment of peace. Where the law commands little respect, chaos will not be far behind; where peace is continually threatened the law becomes meaningless in the lives of citizens. Where there is lawlessness and unpeace, there is no progress for peoples or nations.

The community, the jailer, the judge, the prosecutor, the law enforcer all have an indispensable role to play.

And the judicial reform law that we just passed and signed is one of the most important components of judicial reform. Other components are being done within the judiciary itself. And we to the extent that it’s possible to comment on interbranch independence, we would like to commend the judicial reforms being done at the side of the judiciary under the great leadership of Chief Justice Davide.

Earlier I said that the judges that I have observed have put their careers, their life, their future, their families on the line to fight criminality, and also in this day and age to fight even terrorism. Like all nations, we have to face the threat of terrorism but let’s stop terrorizing ourselves. Let’s keep the strength to jump forward day-to-day. We in the government including you when you do your judgments are doing something about the Jemaah Islamiyah in concert with other nations. And we will contain this threat, if not totally eliminate it. The death of Al-Ghozi and the recent arrest of Taufek Refke are proof of our collective determination and capability to end this threat.

This is an important event in our fight against terrorism. The signing of the bill into law today and the arrest of Taufek. We have exposed a large cell of the Jemaah Islamiyah here in Mindanao. Recent events show that their sinister plans are both deadly and far-ranging, both intended to threaten our country and to sow fear in the region.

I commend the judges who have been issuing timely warrants of arrest or rendering timely decisions of conviction for all of the things that we have had to do to fight crime and terrorism.

In as much as I talk about judges in PMA and PNP meetings, allow me to use a judges’ meeting also now to commend the armed forces, the immigration bureau and the PNP for the deep and excellent sleuthing that led to the capture of Taufek Refke early this month. He was trained by the infamous Al-Ghozi somewhere in the mountain vastness of Central Mindanao. Their curriculum: murder tactics, weapons to sow widespread fear and panic, explosives, among others. Reports have it that a large number of his cohorts in training have returned to Indonesia but he stayed here to become the moneybag of the JI in Mindanao.

We have identified his companions and we have sounded out the Indonesian authorities. In Cotabato City, again, with the help of a judge’s warrant of arrest, we raided a safehouse containing underground records of high intelligence value. Government operatives are pouring into Mindanao for the manhunt that will not relent until all these fugitives are accounted for.

The terrorists are falling one by one. This reduces the weight of terrorist threats across the broad range of targets in our country and across Southeast Asia. We are moving effectively to check terror as I said earlier in concert with our neighbors. Our ongoing constriction measures are eating up their room for maneuver. The peace process with the MILF will continue to isolate them. Our determined moves against poverty will drain their recruitment bases. We shall beat terror decisively and comprehensively. And when we say comprehensively all the way until conviction and that is the great contribution of our judges to the rule of law and the fight against terrorism.

I would like to take this opportunity also to commend the western police district for displaying the needed vigilance and taking firm action against residual threats connected with the Oakwood incident. The raid on the Magdalo safehouse is a clear signal to would-be destabilizers that they have nowhere to hide and they will be arrested one way or the other. What the WPD did should serve as an example to other law enforcement units. And of course, what they did is only the first step in a long chain of the rule of law which will find its way in the Sala of our judges.

And whether it comes to stopping petty crimes in the streets, to taking on the scourge of drugs, and even the greater challenge of terrorism, the judges are at the forefront.

With this new law on judicial compensation, we hope to bring justice to more people through the resolution of more cases as a result of making the judicial branch a more attractive option for lawyers. We also find in it a strong shield from temptations to which our judges and justices are always exposed.

This law is a worthy companion to the respect and dignity accorded to the members of the court and a manifestation of social justice, this time with the judges and justices as the beneficiaries of social justice. Above all, it is insurance… It is insurance that the rule of law will ever prevail in our land.

Of the three branches of government, the judiciary is the one that provides the people a sense of permanence and a constancy of direction. But this role is not easily performed. The credibility of judges is not one that can be openly wooed like that of politicians. It is a credibility gained from the competence in judgment, the impartiality of decisions, the swiftness by which justice is meted out and the probity by which judges lead their lives.

Yours is an institution that has been built for over a hundred years, a hundred two years. It is a fragile institution in a democracy or a republic that is not yet strong. It is an institution that can be eroded by the mere hint of suspicion or sudden attack.

Nothing, indeed, can help a republic endure more than strong institutions of law, as stated by your theme: “A Strong Judiciary: the Sentinel of Democracy.”

While the institutions are not yet strong, and we are hoping, in fact we are confident that the reform law that I just signed, that these gentlemen and the lady worked so hard to pass, will strengthen that institution of the judiciary.

I bear faith in your courage and fortitude as individual judges to live up to the challenge.

Judges of the Philippines, the people have great hope in you. And so on this day, as we begin a new chapter in the institution of the judiciary, to all of you, judges, I wish you the best in the performance of your duty. And as more judges join you now, because it has become more attractive to be a judge, I hope that there will be more speedier justice for the poor, for the rich, for the weak, for the strong. And thereby, you will be a vanguard in strengthening our Republic.

Long live the judges of the Philippines.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Annual Convention/Election and Seminar of the Philippine Judges Association. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615141404/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7382&Itemid=38