Thank you very much, Ka Blas.

Thank you very much, Mon. Thank you.

Thank you again. Cito and Ernie, officers and members of PMAP, ladies and gentlemen.

I’m very glad that providence brought me here with you today. Gaya nang sabi ni Mon, you invited me a long time ago. You invited me but then I saw that on the sixth… On the eight of this month would be the ASEAN Summit. And travel mean what it is, I would have to take a flight out of Bali this morning, fly to Singapore, take a direct… And then fly back to Manila. Which would mean the whole day of travel today which means I would not have made it. So that time long ago when you first invited me, I keep in mind this invitation.

But as it turned out, as I was leaving for Bali, I found out that the last flight, ah the last yesterday would end at about 6:30 pm and then I will be able to take the direct chartered flight from Bali to Cebu and arrive late last night in order to make it with you today.

Talk a little bit about what we’ve achieved. First and foremost in Bali, we signed what is called the Bali Concord II named after the Bali Concord 1 which established the ASEAN to begin with in 1976.

Now, in Bali Concord II, we signed an agreement that will determine the course of ASEAN for the future in the 21st century. Three important things came out of the Bali Concord II: number one, we will be forming an ASEAN Economic community before 2020. An ASEAN economic community is something like the European Economic Community before it became the European Union.

But aside from an economic community, we will be forming a security community. Because ASEAN is the site of transnational threats like terrorism in this 21st century.

And thirdly, because unlike other regions like Europe, South America, Africa, the Middle East, where the various countries are culturally homogeneous. In our region, we are not culturally homogeneous. We are ten countries made up of different cultures, different religions, different political systems, different social organizations, different histories, colonial histories. So we are so diverse and yet we have been at peace with one another including the period of ASEAN.

And we want to continue this so therefore the third aspect of the Bali concord ii is that we will strive to form formally a socio-cultural community. So this will be the great trends of ASEAN in the decades and the generations to come.

And I hope that this will, in the short time, provide for a stronger security, better economies, better trade and more jobs than in the longer run for surer more sustainable economic development.

I’m sure you as personnel managers know the importance of having conditions in the country and in the region even in the world that can create more jobs than lose them. And I’m very glad to hear from Cito that the good in this meeting is quite positive. For one thing you’re more than a thousand delegates, the biggest attendance in the history of PMAP. Congratulations to you!

Last year, you were eight hundred. Nine hundred. So therefore, there is a more than ten percent increase in the attendance. And Cito said that talking to many of you, many of you are hiring especially with the small and medium enterprises. I hope that this is a reflection of some of the things we’ve been able to achieve in just over two years of my administration. I hope this is a reflection of the fact, the statistical fact that in the first six months of this year, we achieved a GNP growth rate of 4.8 percent, faster than many of our neighbors in ASEAN and the highest growth rate since the 1997 Asian crisis. So, I hope that your positive outlook in your companies especially SME is a reflection of that.

And indeed, I know also that as personnel managers your main concern is how to grow the jobs and how to keep the jobs of the personnel that you take care of. I know that you have to deal with the personal and financial problems of the workers in your care. I know that sometimes especially during the Asian crisis and its aftermath, you have had to handle the painful job of informing the workers, some workers, that they have to be laid off. So you know that our historic problem has been the need for economic development to fight poverty, to create jobs and to keep them.

Historically, our economic development has been strong compared to our neighbors. I just thank the lord that in the summits that I’ve attended as president, it was evident during the two and a half years of my presidency and in the aftermath of the Asian crisis, that even though we felt we were having a hard time, the others were having a hard time. The others were having negative growths around us, even the richer countries around us, while we were having our steady growth. And as I said, climaxed by the first six months of the year where we got the highest growth rate ever since the Asian crisis.

But in this last summit that I attended, with the region now starting to recover, I saw that our neighbors are starting to accelerate their growth again. Malaysia who has negative in some parts of these past two years, now has a very high rate of growth, for instance. And this time we cannot afford to be left behind.

Unfortunately, we have this challenge not to be left behind at the time when the political season is here. I would wish that the political season would only start in February of next year. But the Philippines being what it is, and I think that’s part of the system, the cycle that we must change, the political system, always starts prematurely. Nonetheless, we cannot afford to be left behind, and through you I would like to give greater uncertainty… A greater certainty to the business and investors that you represent.

I would like to reassure you that our programs are devoted to strengthening the economy, creating more jobs, encouraging business activity unhampered by corruption and red tape in government. For instance, last night, I got word from the NBI that they’re willing now to advertise that it is now only in five minutes to get an NBI clearance because we have been working on their computerization over the last two and a half years.

Even if there’s political season, even if the headlines are about politics, I have instructed the bureaucracy to stay on track in the task of governance. And I myself am keeping a steady hand over the concerns of the state. And there’s one thing I’d like to ask you personnel managers, because you take care of so many people, I feel you can influence them, encourage them to keep their eyes focused on the challenges we face daily. I think you can encourage them that we should not allow ruthless politics to distract us from the all important charge of nation-building and also building up your own business organizations.

Politicians come and go but our challenges are here to stay. I have my challenge and that’s is to make sure that our country is not left behind again as the other countries now accelerate their growth after the Asian crisis. And for you the challenge is how to hire, fire, promote, demote, plan careers, develop potentials in such a way that your organization can survive and even flourish the future.

As personnel managers, you all would have experienced the pressure not to be left behind. Not to be left behind in the market in which your firm, your organization operates. And you know whom you can rely on in crunch time, somebody who has already gone down the learning curve, someone who has been experienced. Not someone with great ideas but to get… Highly get people to be in the team. Not someone who no matter how seemingly brilliant will need to go through a learning curve again.

As personnel managers, I know that you know that good policy is not necessarily good executions. And part of getting the job done, a large part of getting the job done is good execution. There are lots of good policies going around but to execute them requires experience as much or even more than reason. In fact, a wise man said, that reason may mislead you but experience never. As it is with your organization, so it is also with our nation.

Our historic economic problems cannot be blamed on any single president. Because our problems are fundamental caused by the economic and political system. In the more than two years of my presidency, i gained the experience necessary to understand what we need in order to change society in a way that leads to economic development and the elimination of poverty.

As I said in the first six months of the year, we achieved 4.8 percent GNP growth — the highest in our country since the Asian crisis. In so short a time also — and that’s why for me I’m going to attend an urban poor convention — we accomplished one of the most massive housing programs undertaken by any administration. And I hope the workers in your companies are able to join in that housing program while, at the same time — thanks to the hard work of people like Cito Lorenzo – we’ve been able to keep the supply and the price of food stable.

We had to contend with traumatic cases that have divided our nation. We’d have to face them squarely like the Estrada case, the Misuari case, the Marcos wealth, the coco levy. We’ve won victories in pinning down corrupt high-ranking officials. Some of them we were able to do so because we did an unprecedented lifestyle checks. We’ve launched an all out war against illegal drugs. And in just a few months time, in the last three months, we confiscated an unprecedented 8 billion pesos worth of drugs using less than a hundred million pesos of enforcement money and arrested drug dealers belonging to or leading in the Philippines the Triad syndicate who used to be untouchable several years before.

We are seeking a peaceful resolution to the Muslim insurgency, and were on our way to signing a permanent peace pact.

We cut red tape to make sure crucial infrastructure like the Roll-On/Roll-Off ferry program, new bridges and highways are built.

As personnel managers, I’m sure many of you do your conferences in areas like Boracay, and Ii hope that you’ll be able to use our roll-on/roll-off ferry system going there to see how we’ve cut red tape to make travel more convenient for our people.

We’ve began meaningful debate on changes in the constitution particularly on the parliamentary and federal form of government. What we really need however to develop our economy and create a stronger republic is to change our system. Maybe even change our constitution to institute true reforms in our way of politics and our economy. Aside from that reform, fundamental reforms, we also need to unify as a people.

We need to heal the deep divisions in our society. While we must have justice — and we have achieved much justice in the last two and a half years — we must also have reconciliation. We must put a closure to our past national divisions.

As personnel managers, I know you know the value of reform and the value of reconciliation. I’m sure you facilitate reconciliation all the time. I’m sure you have also experienced moments when divisions in the organization have become so deep that effectivity and efficiency are seriously jeopardized. and then you have to work on reforms in the system itself. It takes time to find this deep-seated reasons for division. It takes time to gain insights on how reconciliation can be effected.

And you as personnel managers know how much sleuthing and probing you have to go through to find the causes of the divisions so that you can work on the personalities as well as the system behind the causes if any.

And you as personnel managers so that you can’t do it from the peanut gallery, you have to be immersed in the team, in the experience of the players. You have to gain experience before you can be effective.

As I see you here in this 40th convention, and jubilee year, ruby anniversary. I see you here forming your craft, I get inspired, you are practitioners. You’re getting better and better with your experience. You’re improving your craft. You’re managing people better. You’re managing conflicts better. You’re promoting reconciliations better. You reform systems in a more mature way.

I’m inspired because I see myself in you as the personnel manager of the country. I too like you, I have gained experience, i have gained knowledge. Like you, I have clarified the mission of what has to be done for the country and how to execute it. For our country, just as you are doing it in your organization.

On the positive note that you are here in this very big unprecedented attendance in your convention, I ask you, lets support each other in undertaking each one’s role. And as we do this, we can move on to flourish our future.

Congratulations! And thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the 40th Annual Conference of the Personnel Management Association of the Philippines (PMAP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412193347/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7389&Itemid=38