Thank you very much.

Thank you very much Secretary Cabral for your introduction. And thank you very much as well, Mayor Echeverri for your warm welcoming remarks. Thank you very much, Congressman Malapitan because Congress is passing a budget that gives us the opportunity to build this project of ours.

Ladies, please all be seated.

Happy Edsa Anniversary to all of you.

Today is the fourth or final day of our four-day celebration of Edsa – February 22 to February 25. And we celebrate Edsa here among the common people because that is the true spirit of People Power.

And earlier, we helped lay two hollow blocks here at the school we are building. How much does this school cost? How many classrooms, Undersecretary Bacani? P8.6 million, which is part of the P200 billion we will spend on infrastructure this year, and six classrooms out of the more than 10,000 classrooms we will build.

Because we know that for the ordinary Filipino, family is everything and the future of their children is sacred, and that is why we are investing a lot in education.

This year, the budget that Congressman Malapitan and others crafted, which we will sign in the coming days, maybe the first week of March, allocates P160 billion to education. The largest percentage of the budget to go to education in several years.

So this is what we do, sometimes we inaugurate, sometimes we break ground, sometimes we add hollow blocks depending on what stage of construction our projects are in.

Now, we want all children to go to school and school is free, you see. So if you think about it, there should be no reason. But sometimes, there are families who are extremely poor, even though school is free, they don't send their children to school. These are the poorest of the poor in our country. And to help solve that problem, that even though school is free, because of extreme… they still can't send their children to school, we are launching this program ‘Ahon Pamilyang Pilipino’ (Rise Filipino Families).

What is this program? This is a program not for the poor but for the poorest of the poor. And as we've seen—cash is given. It will go through the LandBank of the Philippines atm so the president of LandBank, Gilda Vitug, is here. We gave twenty ATM cards today. But here in Caloocan, Espie? A thousand families were identified as among the poorest in the entire Philippines. Are those thousand here? Are they here? Oh, you are the ones in uniform, okay. And the amount given to you varies depending on your needs, depending on how many children you have and everything. But there is a condition—the condition is that your children must go to school. If they are young, if they are 5-years old or below, they should go to daycare. And if they are 6-years old and above, they should go to elementary school. And every month, the DSWD will visit you to make sure you are fulfilling the conditions. And this will be given to you as long as you fulfill the conditions and as long as I am president, every month.

Because we know that even if our economy is doing well, and in the history of our economy in more than a generation, this is the best it has ever been. There are still those who are extremely suffering and they are the ones who suffer the most, they suffer when the world, the American economy weakens, or the price of oil in the world rises, the ones who suffer the most are the poorest of the poor. So this program of ours ‘Ahon Pamilyang Pilipino’ is to help you get back on your feet, to allow your children to study. To go to health centers so your family is healthy. And in that way, your family can rise out of extreme poverty.

Therefore, this is the true spirit of People Power – to help those who are suffering the most, enduring long-term hardship, whether you are among the poorest families in our country or are suffering temporarily due to a disaster. Like what is happening to our brothers and sisters: in Bicol, in Samar, Leyte, in Mindoro. So, as part of the spirit of Edsa, we also ask those who are more capable to help our brothers and sisters who are suffering in those areas due to the heavy rains.

Those heavy rains came because, they say, of climate change – the weather keeps changing, the rain is excessive. Even though the Philippines is not to blame, climate change is global, our only response to that is to strive to take care of our nature.

Here in the barangays, here in the cities, our contribution to our nature or Green Philippines is conservation. Let's clean up the garbage. Let's make sure the water is clean, because that is what is needed for health.

We have a lot to do in the next two and a half years, that's where we will focus our efforts: to improve the economy and lift the poorest out of poverty to join in progress, education which is the key to the future of the next generation, and taking care of our nature. So that in the coming generations, our children of the present time will be healthier and more comfortable.

This is the spirit of People Power that we want to celebrate today.

Thank you very much. Long live Caloocan, long live the Philippines.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). PGMA’s Speech during the Building a School and “Ahon Pamilyang Pilipino” (APP) Program. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123327/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=956&Itemid=38