Thank you very much Secretary Dureza, our new Chairman of the Mindanao Development Authority. Congratulations!

Governor Yebes, Congressman Jalosjos, Congresswoman Carreon, Mayor Jalosjos and various officials here, various mayors, Dr. Valbuena and all our officials, teachers and students of the new Dr. Jose Rizal Memorial State University, good afternoon to all of you.

I am happy to visit you. I came here when I was still a new senator, I passed by from Dipolog to the airport going to Ipil, so I passed by here but today I have a chance and to visit your university especially with… and congratulations to Congresswoman Celia who is the principal author because Dapitan is the main campus of your university.

I visit you because we will continue to work hard as a government until I leave office. For that, we will promote the most important initiatives advanced by our government since I took office. We will focus on three parts:

First, to bring power and progress to each region, beyond the dominance of Manila. That is why we spent on big roads like what we are doing now with the Zamboanga West Coastal Road or Triple SSS B Road which we visited earlier. It is over 170 kilometers and we are spending over P4 billion pesos here. The most to benefit are the towns of Triple S B – Sibuco-Siraway-Siocon and Baliguian – all in the district of Congressman Cesar Jalosjos which are among the poorest towns in Zambo Norte.

I will not forget this Triple S B. When I was still a new senator – no, not new – when I campaigned for senator, I did not reach the district of Cesar Jalosjos because as a new candidate, no one contributed much to me, I didn't have a helicopter, so I couldn't reach it. And my relatives are here in Zamboanga del Norte because my grandfather, Juan Macaraeg, became manager of Sta. Clara Lumber which covered the entire Zamboanga Peninsula and his brother, who was his partner, married someone from Manukan in Zamboanga del Norte, so I have many relatives here and they introduced me to Congresswoman Celia Jalosjos and Romy Jalosjos before, who gave me a lot of support, so even though I didn't reach the third district – this is the third district, right? – I won here in Zamboanga del Norte. Thank you very much to all of you.

So I will not forget that I couldn't reach it because there was no road. And when I became a senator, I always came here with my relatives, with Celia who was still a sister… not yet a congresswoman, she was still the sister of Congressman Jalosjos, that was her designation before. So, we went to fiestas in all places, we reached Gutalac for their fiesta, we went to Labason for their fiesta, but until now, only because there was no road to Baliguian.

So, when I became president, I already knew the problem here, the problem in Western Zamboanga del Norte, which is one reason for the poverty of the province. That is why even though the cost is very high, I told the DPWH and the DBM that feasibility is not our consideration here, our consideration is our fight against poverty in Zamboanga del Norte, the road in SSS B – Siocon-Siraway-Sibuco and Baliguian – is needed. So now it's here, we inspected it and according to the Public Works and Highways they will try to finish this road by June of 2010.

So now that there is a road from Sibuco-Siraway-Siocon-Baliguian and here in this part from Tampilisan going to Zamboanga Sibugay, it will also go to Dipolog in Dapitan. And there in Dapitan, we upgraded the Dapitan Port in 2003, we made it a Roll-on/Roll-off Port so now the products from the district of Cesar Jalosjos can reach not only Dipolog or Dapitan but as far as Cebu and various markets. This is good for the farmers here in Western Zamboanga del Norte.

In our Western Nautical Highway, Dapitan Port passed through Negros Oriental, Panay Island, Mindoro Island until Batangas, that was our first Nautical RORO Highway and now we have three nautical highways.

Here in your province, before I became President, 416 barangays out of your 691 had no electricity. So only a minority of the barangays had electricity in 2001, around 200 out of 600. Now we have completed providing electricity to all barangays, which was completed in February.

Secondly, our focus, we will continue to promote the importance of the three ‘E’s’: education, economy and environment in our efforts to make progress sustainable and equitable.

Thirdly, let us continue to focus on our youth. Where are our students here? Okay, good. Focus, youth, on our country as our greatest hope for a brighter, better Philippines.

We have made much progress in many areas, but much more needs to be done. All the efforts of our administration are for creating a brighter tomorrow for the next generation of Filipinos. The youth of our country are our hope and inspiration. All we need to do is build a better life for every child in this nation.

While I am proud of everything our government has accomplished, the goodness of what has been done depends only on the nation's ability to continue to grow and progress. I hope that the progress we have made will not be lost; that whatever remains to be done, you, the next generation of our leaders, will do. As a nation, we should focus on our future and build on all the goodness that has been achieved, and strive even harder to face the challenges of the changes to come.

You are our children of this nation, the bridge between yesterday and tomorrow. For you children, we correct mistakes, we fight for change, and we strive to make a brighter day. We have come far as a nation, but there is still much to be reached. And the youth represent the dreams of our nation. To the youth, we offer the efforts of the government to advance the Philippines.

And in this world, the strength of education must truly be the backbone of technology. Especially here in Mindanao, technology is important for agriculture because Mindanao is the bread basket of the entire country, especially now. Before, there was no inspiration for productivity here in Western Zamboanga because there were no roads, so even though there were a lot of lobsters, a lot of squids, giant squids, they couldn't reach the market. But now they can reach it, productivity is important not only for seafood, but also for the fruits of the land.

Therefore, agricultural technology. To feed the entire nation, and also to lift our farmers and their families out of poverty. And the foundation of opportunity is education. It opens minds and opens doors. So it's good what Celia and Cesar did to combine three schools and five campuses into one university. So there are economies of scale and the budget, instead of having a lot of administrative expenses for each school or each campus, they are all combined and the MOOE and even the capital are invested in better education, a standard of education, especially in technology here at Jose Rizal State University. So, congratulations!

Because in today's world, the strength of education must be accompanied by the strength of the backbone of technology. And that backbone is really with our proper methods of agronomy, agricultural technology.

To broaden the mind and connect to the world through roads, RORO, and even telecommunications technology. Education and technology are the twin pillars upon which the future of the nation is built. Therefore, in my remaining months in office, we will continue to be dedicated to promoting more and better education and more and better infrastructure and technology.

We have come a long way together, but we still have a long way to go. We should not rest.

Therefore, I continue to be interested in you, the youth of today, standing on your own two feet, through good education, utilizing the value of upgraded education in university education and the modern way of improving yourselves and improving our country.

To all of you, especially all the students of Jose Rizal State University, congratulations! To my colleagues, our officials and our university officials.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Mindanao Agribusiness Tour: Visit to Jose Rizal Memorial State University. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080354/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27711&Itemid=38