Thank you. Many thanks, many thanks, Secretary Nitoy Roque for your introduction of me. And thank you also to Ambassador Villamor and Consul General Tago for your welcome remarks.

I would like to introduce the various members of our delegation who are seated here on stage with me: next to me is our Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Ambassador Villamor’s boss, Secretary Bert Romulo. Next to him is the Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives, Girlie Villarosa; you know Secretary Nitoy Roque because he was a Labor Attache here for a long time; to Ambassador Villamor’s right is Congressman Danny Suarez; and my provincial mate, Congresswoman Anna York Bondoc-Sagun; behind us, you probably know him, those of you who have been here for a while, because he was Ambassador here in Saudi Arabia for a long time, now, Chairman of our panel in the peace talks with the MILF, Ambassador Paeng Seguis; next to him is our Press Secretary, Cerge Remonde; then, our Trade and Industry Secretary, Peter Favila; our Secretary of Agrarian Reform, and I am greatly honored that he has served as secretary in the cabinet twice – during the time of Diosdado Macapagal and during the time of Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo. And the one who grew up in Saudi Arabia and returned to Saudi Arabia as Consul General, the one who takes care of you here, Consul General Tago, you already know him.

We all greet our fellow Filipinos here in Jeddah and in the Western Province. Thank you very much for your attendance. My fellow Kapampangans, thank you very much for your support, there are many of you here. To our brothers and sisters, from the Visayas and Mindanao, thank you very much for coming. To my mother’s province-mates, good evening to all of you, thank you for being here. To our fellow Pangasinenses, it is a blessing to have all of you. And we have met the Bicol Association, good evening to all of you. Thank you, God. And to our Ilonggos, thank you very much for coming tonight.

I am pleased to be here again, and some of us have met when I made a state visit in 2006. Now I have returned to accept the invitation of His Majesty The Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques for the opening of KAUST, where our six scholars are studying. I heard there are six of you – five masters and one PhD. Who among you is the PhD here? Congratulations! And this is Science and Technology, you know, it is very important because for our country, two years ago, we studied our Research and Development Manpower and the conclusion of the study was that we need a quantum leap in our Research and Development Manpower per number of population if we want to truly become a center of development. So two years ago, we started a program to provide scholarships for students for masters and doctorate degrees in Science and Technology at seven universities in the Philippines, including Ateneo where you came from. But because it’s all free, you even have your own apartments, I was freed up to have six more students to support for their masters and doctorate studies, so congratulations to you and thank you very much to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

This visit, our acceptance of the invitation, is also part of our overall strategy to engage the global community to benefit our economy, to enhance our national security and of course, to promote the welfare of our OFWs – the biggest community of which is right here in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Regarding national security, Saudi Arabia has been a great help in our process.

for peace in Mindanao, especially since he is the leader of the Muslim nation. He has great influence on the various Muslim countries and on our Muslims in the Philippines. And Saudi Arabia has greatly helped improve the lives of our Muslim brothers and sisters in Mindanao, thereby reducing a major cause of war. For example, Saudi Arabia helped us build the good road now in Camp Abubakar, the former camp of the MILF which is now a community of Iranons. They are also helping us complete the Circumferential Road of Lake Lanao which is more beautiful than Lake Geneva, we just need a good road so we can all enjoy the beautiful view there.

And also regarding opportunities to work here in Saudi Arabia. Just now, I want to congratulate our Philippine Nurses Association because they had, for the first time, an organization here and they had their oath taking and I took the opportunity to ask if it’s true that to become a nurse in Mecca or Medina, for Filipino Muslims, it’s not necessary to be a nursing board passer. That is part of the help so that our Muslim nursing students will have an opportunity there in Mecca and Medina. But that’s only for there, but in other places, it’s still required. So perhaps, several times, we’ve had a board exam here in Saudi Arabia and Nitoy, in November we will have a board exam, right? Last week of November, we will have a board exam. But not only that, I am having Ambassador Villamor draft an Executive Order so that, until it is rescinded by another president, a board exam will be held here in Saudi Arabia every year.

When I entered, Philippine Nurses, PICPA, there were so many different professions here in Saudi Arabia, in Jeddah, and I am happy that the 1.4 million Filipinos, as Consul General Tago said, are praised for your diligence, your skill in working, and your ability to get along with others.

Before I came here, I visited the Filipinos at the Red Sea Mall. There are many nurses there, many chefs, many waiters, many different employees. The nurses weren’t there because they were working, no, they were shopping. But we had the opportunity to talk about their lives here. And for the majority of the 1.4 million, the situation is good, but of course, if you are 1.4 million, by the law of averages, there are several hundred with serious problems.

That is why this is an important matter to address, and during my state visit three years ago where some of us met, the King pardoned seven hundred OFWs who were in detention at that time. And a planeload of them came home with me.

Tomorrow, with the help of their government as well, an initial group – those who can fit on my plane – 120 workers with serious problems, will return to the Philippines, and be reunited with their families. We expect many more to be able to leave, after efforts to resolve their disputes with their employers.

That is why I directed the DOLE to implement the reforms we made because the majority with problems are household workers. So I told the DOLE, I reminded them, to fully implement our reforms in order to provide greater protection for household service workers.

Number one, we raised the minimum wage. Before, before I came here the last time, it was $200, we doubled it because we wanted only the educated and those who are able to hire household workers because they treat them better.

Secondly, there is no placement fee.

Third, mandatory skills certification to ensure that those coming here are capable of doing the household job. Because if you're coming from anywhere in the Philippines, and you have no experience working in a household in Manila, then you come here, and you don't know how to iron, you don't know how to cook, you don't know how to do laundry, of course, there will be arguments, and there will be physical harm, so certification is needed.

And fourth, basic culture pre-departure orientation to adjust to the work environment.

I have also directed the DOLE that the POLO should act more quickly on the requests for assistance from our workers with serious problems. And I have directed the DOLE to increase their personnel in Saudi Arabia before the end of the year to respond more quickly.

And furthermore, I have also instructed Ambassador Villamor that, even though you have a consulate in Jeddah, there should still be an Embassy on Wheels. So that every two months, consular officials go around to various establishments where there are many Filipinos, so that your passports can be renewed and for your other needs.

Now, before I came here, we heard about the case of those under the bridge. Have you all heard about it? Under the bridge. So, of course, I had this investigated by Secretary Nitoy Roque, and this is his report: for many years, the Jeddah immigration has been using the Khandara Bridge as a pick-up point for overstaying pilgrims from various countries. And from the bridge, they are brought to the Haj Terminal for processing and for documentation. After that, they are returned to their countries.

Now, what happened was, this bridge was used as a gathering point for 300 OFWs along with children born in Saudi Arabia. By the way, children of Saudi Arabia, congratulations on your very beautiful orchestra and chorus. It was, by the way, a result of the combination of various Philippine schools here, congratulations!

So that is more typical, but there are also some children whose parents are having problems, and the children are also having problems. And this is it, including those who went to live under the bridge. And many of them reportedly ran away from their employer or sponsor. And some of them have been freelancing or doing part-time work or running businesses for a long time.

So what we’re doing there now is we’ve addressed this problem and I am happy that with the 300, there’s a report that around 100 women and children have already returned home. One hundred! Now, the two hundred – the men – are currently being processed, and of course, as you know, the office is difficult during Ramadan, but now that it’s over, and after Eid’l Fitr, we expect the process to be faster so they can return home.

But this is a lesson, so I instructed Ambassador Villamor to coordinate with various government agencies to expedite the processing for our distressed workers. And I instructed the DFA, Secretary Romulo; the DOLE, Secretary Roque; as well as the NBI, I called Secretary Agnes Devanadera in Manila to have the NBI investigate and handle these workers, not just the 66 women and 31 children who have rejoined their families in the Philippines. But also the remaining 200 who are in the final stage of processing for repatriation. What is really the problem, why did they escape? And who offered them to go there under the bridge, which is usually frequented by pilgrims, so we need to know all of this, investigate it – that is what we are doing.

As I said, there are several hundred with problems. That's what I'm doing, communicating, and I was just talking with our hotel workers here, and Ambassador Villamor was also talking with them. And as I said, if there are 1,200, there are several hundred with problems that need to be addressed.

But above all, the most important thing is to help make our economy competitive enough so that one day going abroad will just be a career choice and not the only option for our hardworking Filipino workers.

And this is also one of the purposes of our travels. Our trips have helped secure important trade opportunities and foreign investments that have in turn helped us to achieve 34 quarters — or more than eight years — of uninterrupted growth. And it is this achievement that enables us to withstand the recession that is now raging around us.

We are doing everything to maintain this growth. And right now, even though we have a recession worldwide, our mining is strongly rising; our construction is strongly rising, especially with a surge in middle and low-income housing; and by the way, many of you OFWs are the ones buying that housing, thank you very much for that. Government consumption originating from the government has also increased because we raised the salaries of government workers, and we have a conditional cash transfer program for the poorest families in our country; and our business process outsourcing and call center industry is also rising, growing from 5,000 employees in 2001 to almost 500,000 employees now. So that’s how big the increase is in an 8-year period. And of course, a major source of our GNP growth rate is the remittances from you, which are very important to our economy, and this year it will reach a record high despite what the experts said about your remittances decreasing, it is increasing and will reach a record this year, thank you all very much.

That is why I am here to share stories with you, to learn about the different needs, especially the needs of those with serious problems. Also, the needs of those with less serious problems such as embassy on wheels, like board examinations here, but above all, to thank you for your concern for your family, for your work, and for your country.

Many, many thanks and long live the Filipinos in Western Province. Thank you.

This statement serves as a disclaimer. The Office of the President - Records Management and Archives Division (OP-RMAD) is not responsible for any misinformation or misinterpretation arising from the use of machine translation tools, including Google Translate, on content published on this website (www.op.gov.ph). While we strive to provide accurate and accessible information, machine translation may produce outputs that are not contextually accurate or grammatically correct. Users are encouraged to refer to the official Filipino or English versions of documents for definitive interpretation. Ang OP-RMAD ay hindi mananagot sa anumang maling impormasyon o hindi pagkakaunawa na nagmumula sa paggamit ng mga kasangkapan sa pagsasalin ng makina, kabilang ang Google Translate, sa mga nilalaman na inilathala sa website na ito (www.op.gov.ph). Bagama't nagsisikap kaming magbigay ng tumpak at madaling maunawaang impormasyon, ang pagsasalin ng makina ay maaaring magbunga ng mga output na hindi wasto sa konteksto o hindi tama sa gramatika. Hinihikayat ang mga gumagamit na sumangguni sa opisyal na bersyon ng Filipino o Ingles ng mga dokumento para sa tiyak na interpretasyon.

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech at a meeting with the Filipino Community in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134322/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26268&Itemid=38