Thank you very much, Governor Garcia for introducing me. And through you, my thanks to all of Cebu for your constant support for me in the past elections.

Thank you also, Mayor Tommy Osmena for your welcome remarks and for partnering with me in our effort here to implement reforms so that the poor in Cebu City can receive their land.

With me today are various officials from my Cabinet. Here now is our Secretary for Strategic Projects, Secretary Mai Jimenez; my partner in helping the poor in the city and municipality, Mike Defensor and his colleagues from his organization in HUDCC; and our Secretary for Media Affairs, Secretary Dodie Limcaoco; with us are our congressmen here in Cebu City, Congressman Raul Del Mar and Congressman Tony Cuenco; with us also is the congressman from Mandaue City, Mayor Teddy Ouano; with us are various officials from the province and city of Cebu and with us are the various residents here in the province and city, to all of you, thank you for coming today.

And I am happy that I am here again in the progressive city of Cebu, in the progressive city of the province of Cebu together with the progressive city of Mandaue City. I am really happy that I am with the people of Cebu who have received the opportunity to buy land that you have been waiting for for a long time. I hope you will tell your colleagues how the government of Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo loves you.

I also invite the members of the electric cooperatives in Cebu who have been an outstanding electric cooperative throughout the Philippines, where are they now? Are they here, our cooperative? No, perhaps next time because I want to extend my great welcome to the outstanding electric cooperative here in the province of Cebu. Therefore, I appointed their leader, Father Pacquing Silva, as its head in the National Electrification Administration. Oh, that's you. I hope you can tell others about our search for good governance through officials like Father Pacquing Silva from Cebu.

Last night, I arrived in Cebu from the ASEAN Summit in Bali. We signed the ASEAN Concord which signifies even greater cooperation in economics and security, and greater understanding of each other's cultures in order to bring us all more jobs, more knowledge and skills, and greater stability in our country.

In the past two years of my presidency, in my association with world leaders, in my giving of privilege to the poor in the city to buy land where your houses stand just like our brethren here at our convention today, in my reform of electric cooperatives so that others can be good like the cooperative in Cebu. In facing many challenges of our country — terrorism, transnational crimes, SARS, difficult economic conditions throughout the world — I have gained a lot of knowledge, experience and the right perspective in leadership.

Through this experience, I realized that the problem in our history requires progress in order to fight poverty. In our history, our progress has been very slow compared to the progress of our neighbors. But I am proud that in this difficult time in the world, in the past two and a half years of my presidency in our administration, our region has emerged from the Asian crisis and our economy has performed better than the economies of our neighbors in the region.

Currently, the region is still beginning to recover. Our neighbors are already rapidly progressing, so we shouldn't be left behind. The economic problems in our history don't stem from any single president, because our problems are fundamental, originating from the system of our economy and our politics. To truly advance our economy and create a stronger republic, we need to change our system if necessary, even our constitution, to implement genuine reforms in our political and economic processes.

We also need to unite as a people. In the short time I've been president, we've reached a higher growth rate – the highest, a very high growth rate since the 1997 Asian crisis. In a short time, we've given the privilege to the most number of poor people in our history to buy land or a house, as our colleagues here at our convention can attest.

While your food, the supply and price of food, and the poor remain stable, we've also won battles against various high-ranking officials for corruption. Even my family, I say, is not exempt from the law. The court decisions that have been long awaited – like the Erap case decision, the Misuari case decision, like the Marcos wealth, the coco levy, and now the Kuratong Baleleng case – are finally coming. In the total war against drugs, even though we still have much to do, we've confiscated the largest amount of shabu and arrested big-time drug dealers who were previously untouchable in our administration.

We will seek peace through solutions with the Muslim rebels and we are on the verge of signing a permanent peace agreement. We've started a good debate on amending the constitution, including debates on parliamentary government and a federal form of government. But we could have accomplished much more if not for the divisiveness in our country. Our country is deeply divided – there's the MILF, the NPA, loyalists to the dictatorship, and the silent majority seeking peace. There's EDSA Dos, EDSA Tres, and the silent plurality whose purpose is simply to continue living and avoid divisiveness. We need to heal the deep divisions within our society.

We need justice, but we also need reconciliation. We need to finish the past conflicts in our country. We need to give ourselves a fresh start. In the more than two years of my presidency, I've truly gained the experience and perspective to transform society, achieve progress, and overcome poverty.

I strongly believe that my experiences have given me the ability to make a difference, and this is also the reason why people trust me with their dreams and aspirations. We will make true reforms and reconciliation. It's difficult to eliminate politics, but I also want to give more security to businesses and our investors so they can create more jobs.

Our programs are designed to strengthen the economy, create jobs, and incentivize business activity without corruption and red tape in the government. Therefore, I say to the bureaucracy, remain at your jobs while I drive the things our country needs.

So last night, I was with Secretary Mar Roxas from the DTI, coming from Bali. I told him, as he's a member of the monetary board, to expedite the transfer of lands from the BSP to Barangay Apas and Busay, and to the HUDCC. To my Chairman Secretary Mike Defensor and the National Housing Authority, I told them to expedite the preparation for their transfer to qualified beneficiaries there in Apas and Busay. I told HUDCC Chairman Mike Defensor and the DOTC Secretary to create a plan so that Casuntingan friendly settlers… The Casuntingan friendly settlers can occupy a portion of land in the DOTC-Tingub in Casuntingan, Mandaue City. I also told HUDCC Chairman Mike Defensor and the DOH Secretary to expedite the transfer of land from the DOH in Jagobiao, Mandaue City, to qualified beneficiaries. And I told the HUDCC Chairman to expedite the recommendation so we can finish the Socialized Housing Finance Corporation.

It is truly difficult for the efforts of the poor. It is easier said than done than worked on. Experience is needed. We are now at the threshold of a great permanent change. The future we dream of is not just for us… but also for future generations. Reform and reconciliation will finally reach us for our good future.

My brothers and sisters, we are all together, we will seek together in this necessary reform and reconciliation for our good future.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Multisectoral Assembly in Cebu. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412193355/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7399&Itemid=38