Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During Dinner with delegates of the 5th ASEAN 100 Leadership Forum

[Delivered at Rizal Hall, Malacañang, October 15, 2008]

Welcome to the Philippines! And welcome to the Palace of the people — Malacañang!

Again, everybody says in the beginning that this is a very important time, auspicious time, historic time for this meeting.

Every week brings a new chapter in the financial drama that is gripping the world. Some might say the recent chapters read like a horror novel. Two weeks ago, the U.S. government approved, as we know, an unprecedented bailout worth 700 billion dollars that many thought would calm the waters. Last week, those waters were roiling across the globe as Asian and European markets and governments scrambled to respond in kind.

Today, markets around the world have swung back in a positive direction again. Who knows where they will be next week? One thing is sure: we must not lose sight of the impact on real people who bear the brunt of these market fluctuations. We must not revert to complacency just because the markets swing to the positive.

The last few weeks have revealed that confidence is important, but confidence alone is not enough. We need fundamental structural reform and global cooperation. This is why I have proposed a meeting of ASEAN+3 next week in Beijing on the sidelines of the ASEM, the Asia-Europe Meeting. This meeting should aim at preventing the financial firestorm from engulfing our markets and at putting in place solid stabilization measures.

Along the same line, this past week, I instructed our Finance Secretary Gary Teves to meet with the ASEAN+3 Finance Ministers and their representatives together with the World Bank, IMF and ADB senior officials in Washington, to hammer out a deal to aid our region if it should become necessary. As a result, they reached an understanding to establish a standby facility to assist ASEAN countries who would need to cope with severe liquidity problems.

I keep talking about the subjunctive because we don’t have an ASEAN economy in that condition yet, but it’s always important to be prepared. The facility can also be used to purchase toxic assets and recapitalize troubled financial institutions and private companies. The World Bank indicated that it can initially commit to 10 billion dollars as its contribution to the facility. Hopefully, the IMF, ADB, Japan and China, and the rest of ASEAN will contribute at least the same. In addition, we should aim for viable binding market monitoring and regulation. How to do that, through what institution, that is something we all have to think about.

I have also called, and I continue to call on the G-7 countries, to include the emerging economies in the bold actions and extraordinary measures that they plan to undertake to ease the global crunch. The emerging countries should not be isolated from the grand plan. The systemic failures that are sweeping the globe from the tropics to the arctic and therefore they should lead to a universal solution, not merely a patchwork of regional remedies.

Now, to talk about the Philippines. The Philippines appears in relatively good shape — thanks to our fiscal reforms that manifested in, as Dato Timothy pointed out, 7 percent plus GDP growth last year. We took decisive action few years ago to fundamentally alter our economic fortunes. When some governments were cutting taxes, we raised them. When some governments were deregulating, we were bringing more discipline and order to our financial regulatory environment. When some governments were going deeper into debt, we were fiscally prudent, building up our reserves, investing in our infrastructure, and yet paying our debts.

These were not easy decisions. But they built for us a stronger economic foundation. To quote Standard and Poor’s, and I quote: “Yes, the Philippines is ‘lucky’ because they have made the necessary adjustments and reforms when times were still good. So they are facing the global market problems and economic slowdown from a considerably improved position compared to what they were in 3 to 4 years ago.”

To continue the quote: “The Philippines is an ‘island of calm’ currently, while there is turmoil in the higher rated and previously stable countries.”

Nonetheless, I have directed our economic managers to draw up a contingency plan, to cushion the impact of a possible U.S. economic recession on the ordinary Filipinos. The plan includes strategies to pump-prime growth, to upgrade the country’s infrastructure and social services, and to protect labor. But it is imperative that we all find real community in this global credit crunch that we can find common solutions to our shared problems.

The upheaval in the global economy this past year has clearly had a significant and painful impact on the whole world, including ASEAN through higher prices of food, fuel and rice. This has led to greater pressures on our peoples, especially the very poor and the working poor.

S&P recently said in a report that the epicenter of the financial crisis that is now taking place is much farther away from our region compared to 1997. Yet, Asia is not entirely insulated from developments in advanced financial markets. Growth has eased all around the region. However, our region has thus far proven to be resilient and resourceful in dealing with the latest round of challenges, more so than ever before.

For the Philippines, our macroeconomic fundamentals remain. Inflation has moderated, but we still remain vigilant. Over the past several months in different crunches, our Central Bank where our Secretary of Trade and Industry Peter Favila is our national government representative to the independent Central Bank, the Central Bank raised policy rates a hundred basis points total.

The potential exposure of our banks to the asset deflation triggered by the U.S. financial losses accounts for less than one-third of one percent of total system assets. And this very, very small exposure is fully reserved, our banks are well capitalized, and the innate conservatism of our bankers is matched by the prudential foresight of our regulators.

Nonetheless, in the Philippines as well as in the rest of the world, 2008 is certain to go down in the history books as one that confounded all manner of economic assumptions and expectations. We were all surprised by the heights to which oil and other commodity prices soared earlier this year. The U.S. financial crisis appears deeper than most anticipated. In these unsettling times, the best buffer we can have against external vulnerabilities has been and will continue to be our own domestic internal strength. By that, I mean, both within our own respective economies and as an increasingly integrated regional economy.

Building a stronger, healthier economy driven by domestic consumption and investment and relying less on external markets is exactly what our reform agenda and ASEAN’s vision and charter are all about. For the Philippines, investors recognize that this is one of the key contributors to our renewed economic strength and stability in recent years.

For the region, it is exactly because of such uncertainties in the world economy that are now taking place that we, as a region need to take a bold step forward in creating a self-sufficient, self-reliant region that is insulated from global volatilities.

We as individual economies and as a region need to continue to focus on reining in inflation, increasing targeted investments to our poor, and getting our economic engines moving in a higher gear. We need to work hard to further strengthen our banking systems, to continue to improve our fiscal health, and to encourage investment in our booming industries.

For the Philippines, we will continue on the path of economic reform. Our reforms to date have helped us in this time of global economic upheaval. Without them, we would not be as confident as we are that our economy can withstand these external shocks. By creating a stronger economy, the Philippines will be in a better position to contribute to the development of our region.

However, no matter what actions we take, this is a global problem. We must work together to resolve these issues, to see any significant recovery in the global economy.

The global financial and economic system is indeed, as we all know, under deep stress. You might even say, the current system isn’t working, or at least it hasn’t proved to work yet to adjust to what is happening every day to markets and economies, and more important to people the world over.

The answers to these questions are not evident, as I mentioned earlier, where do you find a mechanism for a binding monitoring and regulating system. And the answers will not come easily, but we can be sure that the events of this year will prompt, perhaps for the first time, a serious and thorough-going reconsideration of the policy alternatives.

Notwithstanding the challenges of the global economy, I remain optimistic about our fortunes here in the Philippines. We are a tough, resilient and hardworking people, as most of you, as Dato Timothy says, most of you who have come in contact with our Filipino expatriates know — we love our nation, we love our friends and neighbors in the world.

This is why I’m truly honored to see so many members of our ASEAN family, especially our future leaders, come together in unity. For being with us tonight, I thank you.

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches [of] Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2008 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].