Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Governor Aumentado for introducing me.

I would also like to extend my greetings to our congressmen here in Bohol: Edgar Chatto is my student; Congressman Cajes, the father of your SK president; Congressman Jala; Vice Governor Julius Herrera; Mayor Lim; of course, the son of Congressman Cajes, President Frances Bobbith Cajes-Auza.

And let us welcome our senator, perhaps still a senator, our uncle in the senate, Senator Tito Sotto; oh! No problem. I have already greeted our senatorial candidates so I will also greet the other candidates so they don't forget their names. Now starting from the left, from Tito Sotto, let's plant Pichay in the senate; the champion of women, teachers and young preschool students, Tessis Aquino-Oreta; a youth who can represent our youth, the youth in my cabinet, the youth in the senate, Mike Defensor; another youth, our champion of Green Philippines, Migs Zubiri; don't forget if we want peace and progress throughout the Philippines, it is also important that we don't forget the Sultan of Sulu from the Muslim provinces, Sultan Kiram of Sulu; personally nominated by Governor Rico Aumentado in the Team Unity lineup is his fellow governor, Governor Chavit Singson; another governor, who with the help of the people of Bohol can become a senator, will represent the local governments, Vic Magsaysay is our guy; you young people seem to be saying, “bad… If you are bad, young people, you're disliked,” the champion, the people’s dragon, Joker Arroyo; a leader, a long-time leader in our education reforms, therefore Angara of life, Ed Angara; and another matinee idol of our youth. Let us welcome — he was not acknowledged earlier — the correct one in the senate, Ralph Recto; and of course perhaps… Actually, he was supposed to welcome me but I am now on stage I will also welcome the son of Bohol, who is? Cesar Montano.

Our youth leaders who are with Bobbith Cajes; our cabinet members and various appointees that I will not name so you don't mistake them as senatorial candidates, our outstanding young Boholanos who received awards earlier, to all of you young people of Bohol, good and congratulations on this Bohol Youth Day.

Your attendance shows that you are really ready to lead to improve the lives of our nation. You have a vision. And even though you are young, you have will and thoughts that you use to participate in solving our critical issues.

We have gained the trust of the world due to the growth of our economy and politics, so now, there is a greater opportunity for the people, like the youth, to reach the fruits of progress — more jobs; more affordable prices of goods; a strong peso; more investments; education for the poor; services for health care and housing and anti-hunger for the poor as well; our fight against terrorism; and the Green Philippines program. So thank you very much for including the launch of Green Philippines in your Bohol Youth Celebration.

In truth, our country is still young — you are our people, young; you 65 percent of the population are only 35 years old and below. Our country is really young, our independence is only sixty years old, and we are still overcoming growing pains.

Our nation is young because we love life: we like to sing, dance, participate in sports, like our champions in boxing and chess, and we like innovation and technology.

We are young because we are a true people of the world, participating in the changes happening around the globe. We are at the forefront of the global workforce.

And if I may say a little something in english, not only to you our Bohol youth but to the Filipino people, Philippine resiliency is given across all sectors. The surge of exports to the highest point since 1999, despite the continuing strength of the peso and the relative volatility of overseas markets, marks the productivity and excellence of the Filipino. While we leave the determination of the true value of the peso to the signals of the market, our exporters can be assured that the economic team is on top of balancing out the situation and forging a business environment that would give them a fighting chance moving forward in the global game. “Made in the Philippines” has become a tag of quality, consistency and excellence. This comes with growth and stability in all economic and political fronts, and the surge of optimism and national pride among our people, together with the youth like all of you.

Today, I accept the Bohol youth to help create a new vision for our young nation. This is an invitation to involve the next generation in civic life, dedicate your voices, take action and you will determine your own fortune.

Use the instruments given to you by the government for your families and for the nation so that you can become doctors, lawyers, farmers, health care workers, and lead in high-tech and clean technology, and in other noble professions.

We love our OFWs and greatly value their sacrifices and service. But we must work for the day when our youth, you, will own the energy to reach the day when a job abroad is a career choice and hopefully not the only option available for a hardworking young Filipino.

Together with the increase in jobs here in the country, we must build a new quality of life here to maintain the youth, you, and keep our country beautiful like our people who are young and handsome and beautiful.

We must restore our forests. This, we have narra seedlings so that our forests can truly be restored. The forest in Bilar is perhaps a good example for all of Bohol. Ay! Bilar. Are you from Bilar? Congratulations! May your forests, all of Bohol have forests because of what we are starting today with our reforestation. And replace the fallen trees with new, protected forests for the protection of our nation and people.

And I would like to use the enthusiasm of the youth and the elderly to clean our environment. Included in our Green Philippines is the goal to make the country energy-efficient and for us to no longer rely on expensive vehicles that emit exhaust and factory smokestacks. We can use the sun, the wind, and geothermal resources and we can create our own clean fuel like biofuel.

We need the strong will of the people for politicians to listen to this new and clean Green Philippines. We want our coral reefs and coastlines, the wonder of the world, which are abundant here in Bohol, to become national parks and international sanctuaries for eco-tourism and scientific research.

I wonder Ace if I can announce…? May I announce the Kingdom Holdings? Because your bays, your coral reefs, your hospitality, your people are very beautiful, I would like to announce that as a result of my state visit to Saudi Arabia last year, when I had a talk with the fourth richest man in the world, Prince Al Waleed of Saudi Arabia who invests the money of the royal family. Kingdom holdings headed by Prince Al Waleed has entered into a partnership with Ayala land and they would like to buy the whole Fonacier property in Panglao to put up a six-star resort, Raffles family. Their investment is 150 million dollars here in the Philippines and in Bohol.

We still have time to uplift our country in the proper way since the beginning: clean, healthy, productive, and beautiful. We want the youth here in Bohol to be included in the new Green Philippines. So I issue a call to you, the Bohol youth to make, to make in the next five years our Green Philippines.

These are just some of the things that were thought of. There are many of your programs that President Bobbith Cajes-Auza mentioned earlier. I call on our youth to respond to this call to action to bring new, innovative ideas for land management, care for our environment, and ways to create clean, socially responsible environmental policies.

We need to go beyond the time of thinking in “either/or” terms regarding our environment. Let us embrace change and be courageous in creating a Green Philippines that is green and can boost the economy.

I truly believe that within ten years, the Philippines can become a model for environmental stewardship. But Bohol youth, I need your help to make that vision happen. Let us start this vision right here in Bohol — Green Bohol. And so therefore, we count on you, Green Bohol. Keep Bohol beautiful like the young people of Bohol here at our meeting.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Bohol Youth Day Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151201/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1974&Itemid=38