Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 2nd Strong Republic Nautical Highway Conference

[Delivered in Xavier Estates, Cagayan De Oro City, April 30, 2008]

In 2002 I presented to the Cabinet a work program to reduce transport costs from the food basket of Mindanao to the large consuming population of Luzon. Then Agriculture Secretary Cito Lorenzo and then Philippine Ports Authority General Manager Al Cusi had started doing something about decreasing handling and wharfage costs. I instructed the DBP to take the lead for other measures like financing logistics, storage and port facilities.

We pulled out from the DBP filing cabinet an obscure master plan of a Sustainable Logistics Development Plan initiated by their SVP Marietto Enecio made up of 48 Road and Roll-on-Roll-Off routes.

At a Mindanao Shippers Conference that year, we launched the DBP Program with P 20 billion for long-term lending.

When we completed the Dapitan, Zamboanga del Norte to Dumaguete, Negros Oriental and Roxas, Mindoro Oriental to Caticlan, Aklan routes in 2003, we baptized as the Strong Republic Nautical Highway, a 900-kilometer seamless stretch of roads and ports that cut travel time by 12 hours from Dapitan to Batangas port and on to any point of Luzon by land.

Thanks to the U.S. government, this Nautical Highway can now connect through the Dapitan-Siocon Road which we are completing, to the Zamboanga-Basilan-Sulu-Tawitawi Corridor made up of the GEM RORO ports in Lamitan, Basilan, in Siocon, Zamboanga del Norte, in Siasi, Sulu in and Bongao, Tawi-Tawi.

Indeed, the U.S. has worked side by side with our military and local governments on a number of community public works projects. The positive impact of these projects cannot be overstated: from RORO ports to health care to building schools, the outreach has built more than buildings – it has built trust, which is the basis for effective and lasting diplomacy.

Now we showcase the Central Nautical Highway. We started last Monday by launching the link from Bulan, Sorsogon to Masbate City to Cawayan, Masbate, to Bogo, Cebu to Cebu City, which has an existing RORO link to Tubigon, Bohol. Yesterday we traveled by road from Tubigon to Jagna, Bohol and by RORO to Mambajao, Camiguin, from where you can motor to Benoni, Camiguin. This morning we saw off a RORO ferry in Benoni bound for Balingoan, Misamis Oriental. In sum, the Central Nautical Highway goes from Sorsogon to Misamis Oriental.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo Speech during the 2nd Strong Republic Nautical Highway Conference. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412121922/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1336&Itemid=38