Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Financial Executives Institute of the Philippines (FINEX) and FINEX Foundation Induction of Officers and Directors/Trustees

[Delivered at the Grand Ballroom, Hotel Intercontinental Manila, Makati City, January 17, 2007]

Thank you, Peter for your introduction and congratulations! On your very valuable role in making the ASEAN and East Asia summits a success.

President Billy Cortez, other new officials of FINEX, other former officials of FINEX, members of the Cabinet and government, leaders of the business community, ladies and gentlemen.

Once again, congratulations! To the new board of FINEX.

Your board comes to office at a time, as Billy said, of great hopes and expectations. And we have set 2007 as the boom year for the economy. The sentiments of optimism and hope, as Billy said, are rising among the people. I thank you for saying that Billy. Your steady faith in our economy mirrors the confidence of the global financial community. The entire region and the world behold the valiant excellence of the great Filipino worker including the great Filipino workers in our financial field.

The Philippines reaps high marks in terms of fiscal freedom, trade freedom and freedom from government. We are going past the restrictive hurdles in the economy. This would have been speeded up by charter reforms, but the direction is clear — a strong and vibrant Philippine democracy under the blessings of economic freedom and free enterprise.

The Cebu summits have paved the way for one caring and sharing regional community in East Asia. We had a most productive summit held in the confluence of challenging events: the nuclear test in North Korea, the political situation in Myanmar, the continuing threat of terror, the energy crunch last year, the disasters that struck the region, and many more socioeconomic and political issues emerging in the early limelight of this millennium, or as Billy said, this Asian century.

We are determined to build a band of nations committed to democracy, security, and prosperity in every community large or small. The summit meetings tied hopes and aspirations for regional integration in 2015, or five years ahead of schedule. The wave of the future, therefore, is an open trade system focused on the viability of all its components — governments, business and most of all, human resources. Billy said FINEX is made up of human resources of so many movers and shakers, corporations in this country — you must pitch in with your talents and energies.

We know that the future of the world and the region lies in the enlightened solidarity of leaders and peoples. On our part, I am instructing the department of labor to produce the detailed Philippine position on the protection and promotion of the rights of migrant workers. The Philippine detailed position will be an input to a regional plan of action. And for Peter, his great and important job will be to hammer out a refurbished plan to give more force and teeth to the ASEAN leaders’ statement on the Doha development agenda of the WTO, in consultation with his counterparts in the region.

I thank Peter for his great role in the ASEAN and East Asian summits because in the ASEAN summits the leadership is really a troika. There is the head of government, there is the foreign minister, and there is the trade minister. And the acceleration to a regional integration to 2015 is largely the work of the trade ministers. Also, what concrete measures we can do to produce at last a viable package and practicable package for the Doha round will also be in the hands of the trade ministers.

The Department of Transportation will work out the details of the Memorandum of Understanding of the Brunei-Indonesia-Malaysia-Philippines East ASEAN Growth Area on the expansion of air linkages. You know what’s important about this agreement between the Brunei-Indonesia-Malaysia-Philippines East Asean Growth Area — which for us means Mindanao — we will be granting fifth freedom rights to one another. In other words, a Bruneian airline… Or let’s put it this way, a Philippine airline can travel from Brunei to Sulawesi, and that will ease travel among our countries especially the regions that composed BIMP-EAGA. And I am directing the energy department to dovetail all our pertinent programs with the Cebu Declaration on East Asian Energy Security so that we can participate actively in pursuing the common ends defined by the leaders.

Just this morning before coming here, I did the ceremonial signing of the biofuels law. Biofuels was on everybody’s tounge in the East Asian Summit on energy security. Because of the energy crunch last year, I insisted that in the East Asian Summit we would have one session just on energy security. It was indeed very fruitful and all of us thanked the new government of Japan under Prime Minister Shinzo Abe for pledging two billion dollars to promote energy security in our region. And that’s why it’s important for the Department of Energy to work out our own part of that regional plan because Japan is there to help us with the funding. But that is the part of government. There is of course the important part of the business community. Everybody said we can do policy but the ones who will create the wealth will be the business community. And that is why it is important for you, the leaders of the financial community, the financial professionals of the Philippines to keep up the action.

You and I must tap the same collective determination as we forge ahead, again as Billy said, with the rest of the economic and financial reforms that enabled us to avert a fiscal crisis and beyond that get the economy rolling.

Judicious spending shall continue to be observed. Our priorities lie in programs that have the greatest impact on the most number of our people. For instance, the use of ADB’s 650 million-dollar loan for power sector development. Because I know that when you talk infrastructure, I’ve asked you, I’ve asked the business community about what are your particular requirements, additional requirements for infrastructure. They say… Well, they’ve seen the north expressway, they see the construction on the south expressway, power infrastructure is so essential to make us power competitive.

I’ve also been calling the attention of our power-intensive industries like electronics, that in areas like Oriental Negros, Leyte and Misamis Oriental especially the PHIVIDEC Industrial Estate in Villanueva enjoy royalties from the power companies, from the power generators that operate in their jurisdiction. And this royalties can be used 80 percent for electricity and only 20 percent for other development projects. So where do they usually spend their 80 percent? It is to subsidize the power rates of their constituents. And therefore I hope that the electronic companies will find their way into doing their investments in these areas.

In fact when I pointed this out to the leaders of Oriental Negros, they said, “yes, we will welcome the electronics companies and we will give them at least 50 percent subsidy on their power rates if they locate in the Palinpinon geothermal area of Valencia.” Help us though to improve our airport so that their air freights can also or that the air facilities, air travel facilities, cargo facilities can also be world competitive. And we are doing that, part of our Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan.

To go back to our spending patterns and also our revenue generating patterns, efforts will be increased to sell off government assets earmarked for privatization.

Collection efficiency is up. I was… You know the Prime Minister of Singapore is also going to do a tax reform this year, immediately after the ASEAN summit. He says he’s copying the Philippines. And I told him about the efficiency of our VAT collection. That we have collected more in VAT revenues than we had projected. I told him that when we were defending and we were advocating the Value-Added Tax before our legislators, we did not want to be so overly optimistic as to assume revenues are related to a one hundred percent tax collection efficiency. We assumed an 80 percent tax collection efficiency in projecting revenues to match expenditures. But we have surpassed that, which means that we have achieved more than 80 percent tax efficiency only in the first year of implementation when there were supposed to be still so many kinks to iron out. So, congratulations, Gary for you good work there.

As I said collection efficiency is up alongside the overall efficiency of all government agencies. For instance, for the first time in ten years, NAPOCOR gave a multibillion-peso dividend to the national government. And to think that barely two years ago, NAPOCOR was the main culprit for our consolidated public sector deficit. Of course, related to the tax collection efficiency, the hunt for the corrupt will continue without let up. And the United States has recognized this effort by giving us a 20 million-dollar grant to improve our revenue and anti-corruption efforts under the Millennium Challenge Account. And with their support and with our own spending, we are moving forward in the administrative and judicial aspects.

Also — maybe that’s why Omar Cruz is not here. He’s very busy — we have paid forward some of our debts. I hope that makes our central bank governor happy. And so therefore… What did we save in interest in debt service 2006? Thirty seven billion pesos. And that’s why the social payback has begun to emerge.

I thank Congress, Girlie, and the Senate for finally agreeing to pass our budget and that will certainly increase the social payback to our people in terms of more important infrastructure projects that will entice more investments to come in as well as direct social payback expenditures on education, health, microfinance.

But even before that, over the last six years, almost six years of our administration, our average self-rated poverty score is now at its lowest since 1986. Our ultimate goal — Billy, talked about the ultimate goal of FINEX — the ultimate goal of our country is to remove the yoke of poverty which has pinned us down for centuries and to join the ranks of first world economies by 2020. But to be able to attain that and move towards that, we must strengthen our unity now that we are able to see palpable signs of progress. We must remain united and fixed on the rising star of the future. And that is the work of the new officers and board of FINEX.

Congratulations!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Financial Executives Institute of the Philippines (FINEX) and FINEX Foundation Induction of Officers and Directors/Trustees. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412152725/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1805&Itemid=38