I am happy to be with you, to be with the people of my childhood home, the people of Mindanao. I am glad that we are holding this, not in our backyard in Mindanao, but in the population center of the Philippines. It is because I believe that unless we, including the rest of the Philippines, come to terms with Mindanao, we will never attain our full promise as a nation, much as America had to overcome its baggage of racial inequity and prejudice in order to become the great democracy that it is today. Thus, we must arrive at a national consensus on the principles to guide our search for peace. I would like to take this opportunity to outline to you and to the nation once again the consensus that I have been offering to our people.

One principle is that our ultimate objective should be both peace and development. A second principle is that our framework should be based on constitutionality, national sovereignty, and territorial integrity. A third principle is that our society is a multi-ethnic one which should be founded on social justice for all, and the institutionalized accommodation of ethnic traditions. Christian and Muslim, Chinese and Spanish, Tagalog and Cebuano, these are but a few of the names to which the Filipino responds in a wondrous testimony to our rich and varied heritage as a nation.

To these three broad strategic principles, I would add a fourth operational principle. In our search for peace, there is no role for terrorism or inhuman brutality. Such acts must be universally condemned and addressed decisively.

In dealing with Mindanao, our principle is that all reasonable efforts must be exerted to safeguard the lives of innocent victims such as hostages. But when it becomes necessary to use our police and military forces, we must extend them Ml moral and material support, for their lives are at stake. Thus, there must be clear objectives that the population can understand, and therefore rally around. That is why I’m glad we have dialogues like this.

This is a great day for us to meet. I think the Lord planned it this day. Dongkoy Eman kept postponing it because he wanted to wait for the day after the killing of Abu Sabaya. I think the Lord wants me to use this occasion to reaffirm today my determination to enforce law and order. The people must be safe in their homes and places of work. They must be safe not only in the cities, but in the farms, in the hinterlands.

I renew this commitment to you, the people of Mindanao, the people whom you represent in Mindanao. The Abu Sayyaf is virtually finished, and we will not stop until we account for all of them. The leader of the Pentagon gang has escaped, but we will hunt him down.

I shall strengthen the capability and discipline of our military and police forces. But as far as the escape of the Pentagon gang is concerned, I have already told Secretary Joey Lina and Generals Larry Mendoza and Jun Ebdane that they must immediately discharge the guards who were in charge of guarding the Pentagon gang, aside from charging them criminally. But more than that, General Ebdane has accepted my challenge that he must eliminate kidnapping within one year. He has put his job on the line in his promise to comply with that challenge.

You have seen the excellence of our troops in “Operation Daybreak'” leading to the rescue of Gracia Burnham. You once again saw the excellence of our troops in the battle yesterday. You have witnessed the bravery of our soldiers under heavy fire on land or at sea. They stand on guard in faraway detachments.

I feel that the move they made transferring the policemen of Pasay and putting them all under training is good but rather weak. They should have dismissed immediately the ones who were directly involved. Hence, this shall serve as our new ethic in the drive for peace and order. Anybody who blunders will be discharged as well as charged immediately.

We shall upgrade the high quality of soldiery we already have. We shall put the police back in high regard of the public. We shall modernize equipment and facilities. I think we would not have been able to get Abu Sabaya yesterday or even rescue Gracia if we had not been able to avail all the modern facilities of the US forces in Balikatan. We shall continue to train with our foreign allies.

We shall strengthen law and order because we want to free our people from the tyranny of lawlessness and terrorism. I am not speaking only of the rich or privileged. I am speaking of ordinary people who get held up in jeepneys or who get victimized by snatchers in the streets. I am speaking of the likes of Ediborah Yap who had to endure poverty only to fall into the hands of terrorists. I am speaking of the people of Mindanao who earn their money through sweat, only to be taken by bandits.

Our problem in Mindanao is rooted in economic exclusion. And the axis of poverty is often crossed by the axis of terrorism. I am not saying that poverty is the cause of terrorism. Evil is the cause of terrorism. But poverty and the sense of powerlessness it brings are the spawning grounds where terrorism can more easily spread its evil ideology. Thus, the war against terrorism is also a war against poverty.

As a child growing up partly in the town of San Juan, then part of Rizal, and partly in my grandmother’s farm in Lanao, in Mindanao, I saw the world of difference between the lives of the middle-class suburbanites in San Juan and the impoverished tenants and farmers in Lanao. I saw the grinding poverty in the Muslim areas, the same poverty which still pervades the Muslim areas in Mindanao. Today, these areas remain the poorest within our country. These continue to have the lowest human development index in our country. It is doubly tragic for them that they live next to thriving communities like Davao, General Santos, Cagayan de Oro, and Zamboanga City. Undoubtedly, poverty is at the root of our national security problems in Mindanao. In fact, poverty is our most basic national problem, just as it was when I was a child.

That is why I want to find jobs. Jobs for our people in order to be able to fight poverty. That is the reason why I travel. Many of you had been with me to look for investments, ODA, and jobs for our people. That is why I am doing power sector reform. When I came to the presidency, our power rates were the second highest in the region, second only to Japan. We need this power sector reforms because NAPOCOR has been so inefficient all these years. Government is not a good manager. Its debts have been a major contributor to our public sector deficit. That’s why it must be privatized.

You will see your electric bills come down in July because I told NAPOCOR that they should bring down their power purchase cost adjustment (PPCA) which is part of PPA. I told NAPOCOR to bring it down to 40 centavos and this will be reflected in the July billings. When this is reflected in the July billings, we will now go down to number six as the most expensive electricity rates in the region. We will jump over four other countries in terms of competitiveness.

In my State of the Nation Address last year, I said I will bring our war against poverty to rural Mindanao and to areas affected especially by past conflicts. Let me just therefore mention a few projects where I personally had a hand in working out.

For instance, we are fast-tracking negotiations with the World Bank for the ARMM social fund for peace and development, and the Kapit-Bisig or Kalahi Program for non-ARMM areas. This is our major World Bank project for the year. While it usually takes the World Bank a couple of years to work it out, we have to work out our budget cover and the World Bank is willing to begin it this year. These projects will be our core poverty reduction programs in Mindanao.

My visit to President Bush was the occasion for that World Bank commitment. That visit also resulted in a doubling of the help of USAID, which had dwindled to a token after the removal of the US bases.

I just came from North Luzon where we have many dynamic LGUs that are very active getting money from the ODA sources. They knew that globally we had a doubling of our USAID budget as a result of my visit to President Bush. They tried to access from that fund only to be told, “Sorry, the bulk of the increase is for Mindanao.” I had just come from a griping session from those who say that too many resources are going to Mindanao.

Nine months ago, I inaugurated the diversion dam of the Malmar irrigation project. I hope by this time the system can now service 5,600 hectares of new riceland. I understand that 1,700 hectares are now actually being planted. My personal choice for NIA is a son of Mindanao – Jess Paras of Cagayan de Oro.

The modernization of key transport facilities is evidenced by the Mindanao International Container Terminal at PHIVIDEC in Misamis Oriental. Funds don’t move on verbal promises alone, funds move on documents and on actual budget releases for counterpart and budget cover. It was in my administration that this project was able to begin at the cost of $100 million from JBIC.

Construction is going on in the airports in Tawi-Tawi, Cotabato, Pagadian, Butuan, and Dipolog. This was delayed for five years because of problems of land acquisition. The Asian Development Bank, exasperated by the five-year delay, actually gave notice to cancel the project. But we have been able to save Dipolog and Butuan. We are trying to save Pagadian and Cotabato, too. You have to have some technical competence to be able to bring development and not only verbose pronouncements and strong words of support and braggadocio.

The Laguindingan Airport was a landmark project of the Cagayan de Oro-Iligan Corridor Area Development, whose master plan I supervised more than 10 years ago when I was still undersecretary of trade and industry. As President, I am dismayed that it is not yet on the ground, so I am instructing incoming Secretary of Transportation Leandro Mendoza to give it the highest priority.

The DOTC and the PPA, in coordination with the DA, have initiated steps to implement the logistics cost reduction program that should lower the cost of transporting Mindanao products to the rest of the country. Now I want Cito Lorenzo, Deputy CORD for Region 10, to see this negotiation through with a win-win solution because on the one hand you have the business users; on the one hand, you have the port workers. There must be a win-win solution for both.

The Zamboanga-Pagadian Road is the longest Philippine road not in terms of kilometers but in terms of construction time. I have travelled this road many times in various positions over these years. I have travelled it as a private citizen, as DTI undersecretary, as senator, and as vice president. I know how important the road is. I also know how bad the road is. When I was a new senator in 1992, there was a legislative-executive meeting about the public works act, and as part of my asserting my independence as a senator I said, “I will not support another flyover in Metro Manila unless the Zamboanga-Pagadian road is constructed.” Thank God that during my presidency it will be completed by 2003.

The construction of the second Magsaysay bridge in Butuan City bypass road is also ongoing.

Speaking of roads, the ADB has already pledged funding for the construction of the Basilan Circumferential Road, the Cotabato Diversion Road, and the Lake Lanao Circumferential Road. This Lake Lanao Circumferential Road is very close to me because it was my father who started that road. My father always used to say that Lake Lanao is more beautiful than Lake Geneva. I may also add that Dansalan market can be more beautiful than Maraquesh market. We, therefore, hope that we can fast-track that Lake Lanao Road.

And of course, the Basilan Road which has been the aspiration of the people of Basilan all these years. If they had the Basilan Road all these years, the Abu-Sayyaf would not be able to act as kings in those hinterlands the way they have been doing before the killing of Abu Sabaya. In the meantime, the American Seabees are helping build the Basilan road. The military exercises of Balikatan 2-1 will end on July 31st as scheduled while the military portion of the military exercise of the Balikatan will end July 31, the Seabees and their security escorts may continue to work on their construction projects. Before or on July 31, we will inaugurate the Basilan Airport that the Seabees had upgraded.

Tonight President Bush will call me up about many things and Balikatan will be part of our conversation. While the military training portion of Balikatan 2-1 will end on July 31, we can start the next Balikatan immediately. As a result of the clamor from people all over the country, the next Balikatan will be more geographically spread out, unlike this Balikatan which had been concentrated in Basilan.

Over the past year, we have also moved to put the BIMP-EAGA back on track. I hope that the travel tax exemption which I have extended until 2004 has spurred the increase in the mobility of people within the region, along with the opening up of the Davao-Manado, Indonesia air route by Air Philippines, and the Zamboanga-Bongao-Sandakan-Sabah sea route.

Enhancing security cooperation in the greater framework of ASEAN and within EAGA is crucial in restoring investment confidence. The Trilateral Agreement we signed with Indonesia and Malaysia should strengthen border controls and enable the countries’ signatories to apprehend criminals and terrorists plying our common waters. This will prevent another hijacking of tugboats the way it happened a few days ago.

We must vigorously undertake measures to contain the negative image of Mindanao and reflect the truth that Mindanao as a whole is secure. Tourists and investors should feel reassured when they visit or invest in Mindanao. I have been telling the whole world about how Surigao’s crime rate is two out of 100,000 when the world’s standard is eight out of 100,000. There are many places in Mindanao where statistically you can prove that Mindanao is safer than many parts of the world.

I am also instructing the DA, the NIA, the DPWH, the DILG, the DENR, the DOTC, and other concerned agencies to realign all their regional budgets with area-based development programs such as the Davao Integrated Development Program, the Socsargen, and the Metro Cotabato Development Alliance. They should not make their own regional program separate from these area development plans. I have observed that the reason why some area development plans were not being funded was that departments were doing their own regional budget priorities outside the development areas because they thought the development areas will have their own special budget which was not the case. Let me, therefore, make it very clear. These area development plans must be the regional development plans of the national departments as well.

Because government has extremely limited funds, we have to exercise fiscal discipline as a strategy for development. The fiscal discipline that I exercised last year was the litmus test for the capital markets. It was the reason why we graduated from negative to stable in the international credit rating agencies. It was also the reason for our present low interest rates, our present low inflation rate, and our present stable peso. If we bloat our budget deficit in the name of more projects even it is a project for Mindanao, it will be counterproductive. It will result in runaway inflation, sky high interest rates, and peso devaluation. Then it would not be worth all those projects.

I hope, therefore, that the Mindanao leaders – and I consider myself a Mindanao leader because of my childhood in Mindanao – will all continue to help find solutions to the many challenges of peace, development, sovereignty, and social justice.

Good morning to all of you and thank you very much.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library