Good afternoon.

Our officials of the Department of Education, CHED and TESDA, our youth and academic organizations, our teachers, school administration and parents, other members of the youth and representatives in the education sector, thank you very much for visiting Malacañang. (applause)

Your concern for the country is commendable. You are a great inspiration to our administration.

You elected me – because almost all of you are 18 years old and above, there are some below 18 here, right? – and also the legislators to work for the good of everyone. Thank you for expressing your weariness of the politics of division and despair.

Thank you for your statement expressing your desire for us, those you have elected, to make difficult but correct decisions for the economy, fight poverty, and keep our country peaceful and progressive.

What was on my mind on Tuesday when I signed the largest budget passed in the history of Congress, 1.2 trillion pesos for 2008, was this: This funding will promote the three “E’s” — economy, environment and education. (applause) These are the programs most important to improving our lives.

Our budget reflects our actions and policy priorities to invest in our people. Isn't it what every Filipino wants – good jobs, food on the table, quality education for their children, and a brighter and cleaner environment with fresh air, clean water, and fertile land.

Perhaps some people and politicians have forgotten, but for the first time in a generation, we have a budget and economy that generates revenue that can be spent to improve and uplift the lives of Filipinos. Because in the past, the budget was only sufficient for salaries, debt interest, and the Internal Revenue Allotment for local governments. In the past, if we wanted to build infrastructure, we still had to borrow money, but not anymore. We can now spend on infrastructure and social services with our own capabilities and no longer need to rely on debt. (applause)

What we call social payback began last year when we started increasing funding for infrastructure and basic services for our citizens, including education.

Education in particular is taking a frontseat in our budget this year. Isn't there nothing more important for Filipinos now than education? The opportunity to have quality education is the way for you, the youth, who belong to the next generation, to escape poverty and live comfortably. (applause)

Education is a core value of Philippine society and family life. Education is the most precious jewel that each parent, older sibling, aunt, or uncle bequeaths to their child, sibling, or nephew/niece. To help family members finish their studies, Filipinos stay up late working or go abroad, scrimp on lunch, scavenge for recyclable materials, and make other sacrifices for the diploma they aspire to have. That is the value of education. (applause)

Because education is most important to the Filipino family, the government strives to allocate the country’s largest fund to education.

Now, because of our tax reforms, there is a larger allocation for social programs than for debt payments. Almost two hundred billion is allocated to education. As you know, our Constitution states that the largest portion of the budget should be for education. But this time, it is the biggest percentage in a very long time. (applause)

The Department of Education (DepEd) will receive a large fund for education, almost two hundred billion pesos will go to education agencies, P150 billion to DepEd, which operates elementary and high schools. CHED will also receive funds, as will state universities and colleges, TESDA, DOST, there will also be funds from CICT and there is also a portion for DSWD.

The DepEd and DSWD will implement pre-school, we will use two billion for this. Day care centers will gradually be converted into pre-schools.

Three and a half million poor students in pre-school and daycare will receive rice under the Food for School Program. Therefore, the DSWD shoulders a portion of education expenses, not only the DepEd.

There is also six billion pesos allocated for 11,000 classrooms. And more than 35 million books will be distributed.

The budget also includes the hiring of ten thousand additional teachers. And there is one billion for teacher training in Math, Science and English.

And there is a provision for a salary increase, perhaps in the middle of the year. (applause) We might implement it in the next schoolyear in the middle of the year. (applause)

More than 60,000 students nationwide will be given assistance to study in private high school under the GATSPE ESC.

And we also have high school vouchers, that is separate from ESC. This high school voucher in NCR, because education is very expensive, will be increased from 5,000 pesos to 10,000 pesos per high school voucher. (applause)

The CICT also has a contribution, as it will be purchasing almost a thousand computer laboratories for high schools. (applause)

And to Buboy Syjuco, three billion pesos for providing more vocational training, including a one billion peso scholarship for 100,000 poor individuals, and including P350 million for training for Business Process Outsourcing and call centers. That is TESDA.

We will strengthen the ROTC program, because we want to adhere to the doctrine of the Citizen’s Army enshrined in the Constitution.

The college scholarships will come from CHED, will come from DOST — P700 million. The science scholarships are P300 million. And not only that, it is for college, for Masters, for Science and Engineering including infrastructure and scholarships, more than one billion pesos will be spent. (applause) That is for Masters and doctorate degrees.

Therefore, you can see the scope of education; pre-school, daycare, pre-school, grade school, high school, voctech, college, Masters, doctorate.

And we have already accomplished much, but many things still need to be done. We plan to work hard in the next two years until the day my term ends in 2010. (applause) We will work to implement our Philippine Reform Agenda. We need to move forward and we will move forward with further reforms. We will fight for the Economy, Environment and Education. (applause)

So, many groups of scholars are raising their flags of gratitude. It is our honor to serve you, our constituents. (applause)

Overall, we remain bullish on our economy, optimistic about our future and deeply committed to being a force for good. So thank you for being here today. Thank you for demonstrating your commitment to our nation’s stability and to investing in the people.

Promote Knowledge – The Weapon Against Poverty.

Thank you all very much. (applause)

[MOCK TRANSLATION] “Isulong ang Karunungan — Panlaban sa Kahirapan.”

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s Speech during the Presentation of the Budget on Education. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123020/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1064&Itemid=38