SALUTING OVERSEAS FILIPINO WORKERS IN HONG KONG

I would like to thank I-Remit Global Remittance and Confed Properties for their help with our Christmas Party today because they were the ones who provided, it came from them, the two lots and houses that we gave away today at our Christmas Party. Thank you to Mr. Bansan Choa.

I just want to greet all of you including all the religious groups and to all of you an advance Merry Christmas.

Thank you for using your day-off today to make time for my visit here in Hong Kong. You remember when we were here together at HITEC, I told you, it's okay, we'll make your day-off meaningful. We will open the consulate to serve you on your day-off, so it continues until now. Thank you to those from Hong Kong, thank you also to those from Macau because you took the early ferry to attend this gathering. Where are those from Macau? There they are! Thank you, thank you.

And to all of you, thank you for being topnotchers in the registration for Overseas Absentee Voting. Because you are voters, I would like to express: I’m glad the opposition is moving towards unity so that we can get down to the business of threshing out the issues of the campaign. On my part, I’ve just finished a fruitful trip to Japan where I worked for a better deal for our OFWs and marked more gains for peace and development in Mindanao.

I think, because you are OFWs, you know that Japan is not open to OFWs unlike Hong Kong. But I agreed with Prime Minister Koizumi that starting in January, we will begin formal negotiations for OFWs to enter Japan. What we agreed on, I told Prime Minister Koizumi, the first thing I requested was for caregivers to be allowed to enter Japan. Because I told Prime Minister Koizumi – and he admitted it – that Japan is called an aging population, there are many elderly people. There is a shortage of young Japanese, nurses, midwives, and caregivers. There is a shortage of young Japanese… to take care of them. I said our Filipino caregivers are well-known all over the world. Known in Hong Kong, known in London, known there in Sweden, where Vicky is now, known in Canada. Well, I know the elderly Japanese, they really want a Filipino caregiver to take care of them.

Another thing I will push for to enter Japan is Information Technology professionals. After my meeting with you today, I shall leave for Bahrain. And in Bahrain, the meetings will also pursue the same thrusts at what I sought in Japan. We shall widen the range of our diplomacy to reinforce our domestic policies and programs to uplift the lives of our people. My administration, ours is an administration that has been working across continents to bring the message of Filipino pride and pride in the Filipino’s bright future. This is part of the reform and the changes in the system, and part of the unity and reconciliation we are seeking in our country as we bring all Filipinos worldwide, and at home together behind the sustained march for peace, progress and prosperity.

I said, change in system means change in the system. In my two and a half years as president, I have seen, I have understood what changes are needed in my system. One of these systemic changes that I am striving to make and will continue to strive to make is I want to build in the Philippines something like the change made here in Hong Kong, that is, the Independent Commission Against Corruption or ICAC. And in the change that I have already begun preparing, my advisor is none other than the very first person who established the ICAC here in Hong Kong. And when he went to the Philippines and looked at what I had started to prepare for it, at his press conference, he praised my administration because he saw that I was determined to strengthen our system here in the Philippines against corruption.

Regarding peace, perhaps you have already heard that Commander Robot has been neutralized and arrested – he was the leader of the shameful kidnapping incident in Sipadan in the year 2000. Now, all the surrounding issues of the Sipadan kidnapping can be given light through the judicial process and institutional investigations. Our priority is criminal justice and we will pursue this without being distracted by the peripheral issues. Let the light come out so the public will see the truth behind this most notorious incident in the history of crime and terrorism.

Regarding development, this past quarter, according to our statistics, our growth rate in the Philippines is number 6 out of 21 economies in Asia and Pacific. And on top of the increase in production within the Philippines at 4.4 percent – number six indeed in 21 economies because of your remittances – that 4.4 percent GDP growth rate became a 5.9 percent GNP growth rate because remittances are included in the GNP. So thank you very much, your remittances amounting to more than 200 million U.S. dollars per year greatly help not only your families but also our country.

So to those of you listening to me in our past meetings, you may remember that I always say that you are overseas Filipino workers, but you are also overseas Filipino investors because your remittances serve as investments in education, housing, and the capital of your loved ones. Aren't these all investments, and all of this comes from you.

I want to return the help to you through programs that you and your loved ones in the Philippines can benefit from.

So, regarding the Overseas Voting Law, which you have been waiting for for several years, several administrations, several Congresses, and finally passed within my administration. And not only that, the Anti-Money Laundering Law, it is not only to arrest money launderers, it is so that we are not given penalties by the international community and to not increase the red tape of your remittances. So this Anti-Money Laundering Law is also for the good of our OFWs so that you do not have difficulty sending your remittances to our country.

I also expanded our housing program for workers. In my administration, we intentionally included overseas Filipinos in our Housing Program for workers. And I heard that the results of the three Pag-IBIG housing fairs held here in Hong Kong since last year, where we intentionally included OFWs, were good. According to our Pag-IBIG office here in Hong Kong, you overseas workers have already purchased housing worth 78 million pesos in Hong Kong, which was accepted by various housing developers from the Philippines at the said housing fairs. That's why Confed Properties, due to their large income, is okay with donating additional housing, because you have given 78 million pesos in housing revenue to our housing developers. So for those who have not yet participated in the Pag-IBIG housing fairs, there will be a fourth housing fair coming in January. Join so that your hard-earned salaries go to a worthwhile thing, either a house for your relatives or a house for you if you are going to retire in the Philippines.

Hong Kong is not only good at registration, but also at being a member of the SSS, did you know that you are also a topnotcher? According to our SSS officer here, there are already 88,000 SSS members in Hong Kong. That's a lot, a vast majority, and we continue to promote the good programs of the SSS here, as well as in Macau.

The Provident Fund, didn't we establish it to provide social services and emergency loans to our OFWs? We now have enrollees from Hong Kong, Jeddah, Qatar, Milan and Rome.

It is good that many of you are active in the livelihood and skills training services that we have expanded. Our program for teachers examinations and finding items for you, all of that is an order of the President of the Republic of the Philippines. I was the one who ordered that. Some went home, some want to return here because there were not enough items. I want to tell you, in the 2004 budget there will be another addition of items for new teachers.

I know that you are suffering here in Hong Kong. The Philippines is even better because it has a 4.4 percent growth rate, GDP and 5.9, GNP. Hong Kong has a negative growth rate this year. I know that the hardship of Hong Kong is also experienced by you who work here. First of all, the SARS outbreak, I am saddened that we have compatriots who became victims here in Hong Kong, as well as in other countries like Singapore and Canada. We will not forget them in our prayers and I thank all those working in Hong Kong hospitals for your sacrifice and let us also thank our doctors that I sent here — isn't that Dr. Fajardo? — to serve all of you. He made a great effort when SARS occurred to ensure that our OFWs, as much as possible, would be safe from this epidemic.

It's good that in the Philippines we were able to contain SARS. Aside from the two who died from SARS — one worker who came from Canada and his father — SARS did not spread. And the whole world praised the Philippine government for our SARS management. That is proof that our administration is expert in crisis management.

Another problem with the Hong Kong economy, which you OFWs are also affected by, is the very unfortunate reduction of the minimum allowable wage and the imposition of a levy on employers of foreign domestic helpers. I, among all seven countries that send OFWs here, am the most zealous of all heads of government in defending my OFWs. I even offered to other leaders. I fought for you and offered to other leaders of countries with domestic helpers here to unite and fight this together and we filed a case. We led that. Seven countries came together but the Philippines was the leader.

Second in activeness is Indonesia, and according to reports, the first part of our struggle here in the Hong Kong High Court regarding this issue was successful, although it was slow. You know in the Philippines we think the courts have a long process, it's the same in other countries, it's the same here in Hong Kong. But according to the lawyer handling the case and also our consulate, there is a date for argumentation regarding this case. Trust that I will not stop bringing my struggle, our struggle for the welfare of our OFWs here in Hong Kong to the authorities of Hong Kong.

After all, as you are model Filipinos. A model in working, that's why your employers love you, and they also fight for you. A model as citizens, that's why you are number one in overseas voting registration. A model in serving our economy because you send so much in remittances.

Filipinos in Hong Kong and Macau, thank you for being model Filipinos. I hope your success continues.

Thank you very much and Merry Christmas to all of you.

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].