Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the awarding ceremony for the Outstanding Volunteer Workers/Mother Leaders of Bulacan

Congratulations to the Outstanding Volunteer Workers of Bulacan!

We promote volunteerism in our country because there is so much to be done for our development and these should not solely rely on the government.

The most important goal of this government and society is to lift the country out of poverty. This Christmas season, everyone who is able should help those in need. The government will do everything to focus on this.

Rice is not only the staple food of our people; it is a symbol of our ability to fulfill our commitment to feed the less fortunate. We are committed to ensuring that those in need throughout the country have affordable rice this Christmas season.

We cannot say that we are progressing as a nation if we do not lift up the poor and hungry in our surroundings. We must be a society measured by our ability to live according to our faith.

The main goal for the Philippines is to join the ranks of First World countries within twenty years. To do that, we need a vigorous middle class, world-class infrastructure, and strong government institutions. However, in the near term, we need to address the real issues of hunger and poverty that affect us now.

Those living in poverty have decreased, but we need to more aggressively accelerate the path towards poverty eradication. That is why, during Christmas and after, we will do everything in our power to bring rice to those who need it most and strive to protect the poor from high prices.

We continue to struggle with the challenge of hunger. We have created a program against hunger with two important strategies: first, the supply-side strategy of increasing the food supply, and second, the demand-side strategy to ensure that the people have enough money to buy the food they need.

The supply side includes irrigation projects, improving infrastructure to speed up the delivery of food to market centers and lower food prices; distribution centers such as food terminals and nearly ten thousand Tindahan Natin outlets that sell cheap rice and noodles. This strategy also includes Gulayan ng Bayan (community gardens) and the Food-for-School Program for students from the poorest families.

The strategy for the demand side includes the creation of new jobs through the promotion of microfinancing, providing emergency work for the unemployed, and strengthening the free training program to acquire the skills needed for employment through the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA). The additional performance bonus given to government employees can also be considered part of the demand side.

An important part of the demand side is teaching families proper nutrition, and providing the right food should start from childhood. I call on mothers, especially those with newborns: it is better to breastfeed for two years and make it exclusive breastfeeding until your child reaches six months. A breastfed child grows up healthier and smarter than children who drink cow's milk.

The promotion of natural family planning is also part of the demand side.

We expect local officials to be familiar with these programs.

We are full of hope that as the current year ends and the New Year begins, this Christmas, the Philippines will be seen as stable, strong and peaceful, with a vibrant economy, a soaring stock market, and flowing investment.

And while many are bonding with family around the world, we would like to acknowledge the eight million Filipinos abroad, including many who will not be able to return home for Christmas. We want to let them know how much they are missed by relatives and friends here.

Finally, we call on everyone to unite, pray for peace, and help those in need. There is no greater aspiration than to live peacefully and safely, free from hunger and want.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech at the Awarding Ceremonies of the Outstanding Voulunteer Workers/Mother Leaders of Bulacan. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135454/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2303&Itemid=38