Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Vin D’Honneur 2006

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, January 9, 2006]

FOCUSING ON THE YEAR AHEAD

I thank you all for being here. The New Year’s reception is a timely opportunity to focus on the year ahead.

This year, I’m confident and hopeful about the state of our nation. We’re on the right road, starting with the fact that the Philippines entered the year on a high note: the stock market is up and closed at 2151 points today; the peso is strong and testing 52 to the dollar; revenue collections are up and our fiscal deficit is down. The strong macro economic fundamentals are starting to pull up the economy — more than one million jobs were created last year and more investments have been flowing in along with a surge in tourism. In fact, the government saved over 20 billion pesos last year from debt service as a result of our improving economic performance. This money freed from debt service is being invested in the people.

I’ve set an ambitious but achievable plan for 2006 that rests on three strategic objectives: one, build a stronger economy. Two, build a stronger republic — we will achieve this by fighting terrorism and destabilization and bringing peace to Mindanao. And three, press for long-overdue political reform through Charter Change.

First and foremost is the need to deliver real economic and social results to the people as soon as possible. Phase I of my economic plan has delivered desired macro results through investor confidence, fiscal stability and the prospect for improved credit ratings. Phase II of my economic plan, which I launched after the passage of the VAT Reform Law, is designed to bring the benefits of our macroeconomic advances to the people who are after all the inspiration for our reforms.

For the first time in years, we will have the resources to sustain our investment in the people and not just feed the beast of debt service.

We recognize that the benefits apparent at the top of the economic pyramid are not yet being felt by the very people who need it most—our poor. Therefore, I have asked my Cabinet to target 35 billion pesos immediately to help bring near-term improvement to the lives of our people. And that’s only a down payment on the money that will be flowing to the people as our revenues continue to increase and our cost of debt servicing continues to decline.

And let me be clear: this is not wild-eyed spending; this is targeted spending within the limits of our fiscal controls and budget plan. We are paying responsibly down our debt while simultaneously building up our investments in basic services and infrastructure.

Progress is not always apparent to those who need it the most and who are most concerned with the day-to-day necessities of life. Therefore the people remain impatient for fundamental change in their lives. This is particularly in the area of health care, education, housing and infrastructure. It is to these areas that the money will be spent in an effort to create jobs and provide better services.

My top priority in the coming months is to see that real results are delivered to real people. In the first six working days of the year, I instructed the release of 3.5 billion pesos: half a billion for farm-to-market roads; half a billion for infrastructure response to the problem of recurring floods; one billion for housing for Northrail and North-South rail linkage relocatees and for our soldiers; half a billion for subsidized rice and noodles for the poorest of the poor; half a billion for PhilHealth insurance subsidies; and half a billion to build classrooms in overcrowded elementary schools.

Our economic security is deeply affected by our physical security. Peace and order go hand-in-hand with a strong economy. And nothing is more important to our personal and economic security than the fight against terrorism and destabilization. Terrorism and d destabilization are costly in terms of shattered lives, misspent capital and misspent economic productivity. The people are fearful of what the scourges of terrorism and destabilization are doing to their lives and their security. I am determined to bring real peace and real security to alleviate their fears. The next generation deserves to live in peace and harmony.

Terrorism and destabilization and the resources used to fight them sap the strength of the nation. We must end terrorism and destabilization so that we can bring back peace, order and security into the everyday lives of the people. We must then use the money that’s diverted to these fights and employ it wisely by investing in the opportunity of a vibrant society.

I will not rest until we have condemned terrorism and destabilization to the dustbin of history. We must fight destabilization in every corner of our nation. We must fight terrorism in concert with our allies around the world.

Terrorism and destabilization are evils that we must conquer and overcome. On the other hand, peace in Mindanao is a noble cause that we must embrace. We will strengthen our security and enhance the peace as a result of a successful conclusion of a just and equitable agreement with the MILF. I remain optimistic that 2006 will be the year of peace in the Philippines.

I have been bringing the Philippines back into the mainstream of the global community through a strong regional and global foreign policy.

I have led an aggressive foreign policy agenda designed to bolster our economic and political security, and in no area has this been more important than in gathering the pieces together to forge peace and prosperity in Mindanao.

The concerted foreign policy efforts of our administration have helped pave the way for a significant breakthrough in the south. Our Muslim friends in Malaysia, in Southeast Asia and in the Middle East, and our traditional allies in Asia, Europe and America have rallied to help facilitate a peace in Mindanao.

There is hope and promise for our economy and for securing peace and order in this new year, yet there remain many mountains to climb across the landscape. Social justice is not yet available to every man, woman and child in our land. The high global price for oil is pressing on the poor. There is a need to regain the trust of the people in the institutions of government. And the violence perpetrated against journalists and judges is a moral outrage that must be crushed.

So, while I believe we have made progress, we will not achieve the rank of a modern, first world nation in 20 years until we address these issues.

To do so, we must slay the dragon of politics as usual. Politics dominates our life way out of proportion to the real needs of the people. And a change in politics must be accompanied by a change in our system of government.

To that end, we must create a modern constitution if we are to build a modern Philippines.

We can and must deliver to the people a constitution that they can trust to create a better Philippines. To that end, we must create a new constitution that provides for less gridlock, more local control, greater accountability by the politicians, better service delivery, stronger police protection, less opportunity for official corruption, and more jobs and economic development at the local and provincial level.

People are sick and tired of all the politics. They want less talk, more action; more jobs, less jawboning; more local control, not more metro manila control. The people want to move forward; not stand in place. Doing nothing is not an option.

I’m pushing for Charter reform because I sincerely believe it is the last bastion that holds back the nation and keeps us divided and poor, when we should be unified and prosperous.

Charter reform is about moving the nation forward. It is a referendum on whether we want a modern nation, free from want and poverty or a nation that embraces the status quo and merely treads water. I for one want a nation that moves ahead with decisiveness, vigor and force, and provides more jobs and economic opportunity for every single person.

In conclusion, I relieve we are embarked on a plan for 2006 that is realistic, focused and achievable. It is ambitious, yes. But the people are impatient and eager for progress and so am I.

Let me therefore ask you all to join me in a toast for a stronger, safer nation and a stronger, safer world — politically, socially and economically.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].