Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 14th Quadrennial Conference of National Commissions for UNESCO of Asia and the Pacific Region

[Delivered at the Grand Ballroom, EDSA Shangri-la Hotel, Mandaluyong City, May 19, 2008]

Thank you very much, Acting Secretary Ebdalin for your introduction.

Ambassador Soliven, Secretary Lapus and the other officials of the Philippine Government, Mr. Sayyad, Dr. Tait, National Commissions from the member nation of the Asia and the Pacific Region, ladies and gentlemen.

First of all, welcome to our partners in Asia and the Pacific Region!

We’re honored to host this conference of UNESCO of the National Commissions and the Director Generals Consultation on your new program and budget. It’s a great opportunity to have you here and to be able to speak with you and to thank UNESCO for supporting our country’s priority programs which dovetail with the mandates of UNESCO and the overarching objectives of UNESCO’s Medium-Term Strategy for 2008 and 2013.

This is a very informative experience because, as Mr. Sayyad said, you have just recently approved the Medium-Term Strategy and it is important for us, the national officials, to be aware of your five overarching objectives and see how our own programs dovetail with UNESCO and where we can work together.

UNESCO’s first medium-term overarching objective is attaining quality education for all and lifelong learning. And we are very proud that our own Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan for 2004 and 2010 gives high priority to education for all. In fact, we have used that term as one of the ten points of our administration’s ten-point agenda.

We hear and heed the U.N.’s advice to expedite the implementation of the basic education sector reform agenda in order to achieve the U.N. Millennium Development Goal of universal primary education by 2015. Our education services to the poor have vastly improved though we have a long way to go. We’re expanding early childhood education. We’re paying cash to the poorest of the poor who send their children to school. We’re providing food-for-school programs in food-poor areas in the elementary school. We’re abolishing all fees collected in public primary schools.

And, as Ambassador Soliven has said earlier in her speech in support of UNESCO, we have issued an Executive Order establishing a center for Lifelong Learning for Sustainable Development of the Philippines. We are also proud to be in tune with UNESCO’s second overarching objective in its Medium-Term Strategy which is mobilizing science knowledge and policy for sustainable development.

We are investing billions in Science and Technology Research and Development including scholarships for Masters and Doctoral degrees in Engineering. Sustainable development is one of our top priorities. We have begun the “Green Philippines Program”, and I am glad we have some environmentalists here in our audience with us. Our Green Philippines plan is a blueprint for mapping our environment and economic policies that allow for sustainable development that doesn’t fall on the backs of the poor or erode our environment.

In this regard, we thank UNESCO for re-nominating the expanded Tubbatahha Reef Marine Park to the UNESCO World Heritage list and for encouraging the nomination of Mt. Apo Natural Park as the first site in Mindanao to be inscribed in the World Heritage list. We also thank UNESCO for facilitating the establishment of an efficient emergency communication infrastructure network and communication system for the Department of Health in Eastern Visayas in Central Philippines which is quite disaster-prone.

So, we thank UNESCO for helping us achieve UNESCO’s second overarching objective.

The third overarching objective of UNESCO in the Medium-Term Strategy is addressing social and ethical challenges such as poverty, biotechnology, human rights. Our improved fiscal position is allowing us to invest in job creation, better healthcare and more educational opportunities. These are the keys to lifting the poor up. We have the support of UNESCO here and therefore we are optimistic.

We also count on UNESCO to help us work out the safe and responsible use of modern biotechnology and its products as one of several means to achieve and sustain food security, equitable access to health services, sustainable and safe environment, and industry development.

And on the issue of human rights, since the formation of a special commission to tackle our unfortunate history of political violence, extrajudicial killings are down and prosecutions are up. Of course, we will not be satisfied until we are at zero and we count on UNESCO’s support for this.

The fourth overarching objective of the UNESCO Medium-Term Strategy is fostering cultural diversity, inter-cultural dialogue and a culture of peace. And so, we thank UNESCO for including the Jose Maceda Music Collection in the international memory of the World Register. This attests to the universal significance of preserving the traditional music of the Philippines which are very important part of our culture.

Our society is a multi-ethnic society and multi-cultural. It should be founded on social justice for all and the institutionalized accommodation of ethnic traditions.

So, we have adopted inter-faith dialogue as an official policy of our Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan. The role of inter-faith dialogue in restoring peace in Southern Philippines is an experience we would like to share with the world through UNESCO.

Finally, the fifth overarching objective of the strategy is building inclusive knowledge societies through information and communication. Our information structure is cost- competitive and we have a highly trainable English Proficient, I.T-enabled management and manpower. That is why we are a leader in the outsourcing space.

And even more than that, we are deeply committed to press freedom and its role in building inclusive societies. Well, I might not always like what the media writes about me, I respect their right to say it because we live in a vibrant and robust democracy.

As we improve security in the parts of the country that have known some degree of violence, with the support of UNESCO, we’re able to move quickly to build inclusive societies and develop the economy of those areas. And as a neighbor and friend in an inclusive regional society, we all I’m sure share the anguish of the Chinese and the Burmese in their current moment of tragedy.

Together, we will rise above catastrophe with the support of UNESCO.

So, it is fitting that this conference highlights ‘Strengthening Partnerships and Collaboration in Asia and the Pacific Region.’ By working together, we can combine efforts and resources toward the mission of UNESCO to contribute to the building of peace, the eradication of poverty, sustainable development and inter-cultural dialogue through education, the sciences, culture, communication and information.

I understand that by next week, the UNESCO Secretariat will start to draft UNESCO’s program and budget for the next biennium.

So, I wish all of you a fruitful and productive discussion as you plan the region’s strategic programs to bring about a culture of peace and to deepen and develop mutual understanding, reconciliation and dialogue.

Once more, to all of you, welcome, mabuhay and thank you. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the 14th Quadrennial Conference of National Commissions for UNESCO of Asia and the Pacific Region. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412121719/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1402&Itemid=38