Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At a Bilateral Meeting with U.S. President George W. Bush

[Delivered at the Study Room, Malacañang Palace, October 18, 2003]

A REVITALIZED AND MATURING ALLIANCE

I’d like to thank President Bush for coming to the Philippines on this state visit. It affirms the warm and deep relations between our two countries. It’s another building block in a revitalized and maturing alliance rooted in shared history and shared values, a common interest in global peace and prosperity, as well as a real commitment to combating terrorism and advancing freedom.

I’d like to take this opportunity to thank the United States for its support for the Philippines as a non-permanent member of the Security Council for the term 2004 to 2005, and also for designating the Philippines as a major non-NATO ally.

I also welcome the Joint Defense Assessment made by our respective defense agencies. It recognizes that the world today requires a new perspective on political and economic security. The assessment recognizes the determination of the Philippines to take greater responsibility for its own political and economic security, even as it acknowledges that strong relations with the U.S. will contribute greatly to peace and. prosperity, stability and security especially from terrorism.

Indeed, we must close ranks and stand firm against terrorist threats, however grave, however armed and from whatever quarter.

When Dos Palmas hostagetaking happened in May 2001, the Philippines chose to fight terrorism, compensating for such modest means at its command with an unshakeable resolve to defeat it once and for all.

I thank President Bush for continued security assistance which enhances the means to defeat terrorism. I also appreciate the help of President Bush for increased economic assistance to alleviate poverty and other socio-economic ills from which terrorism draws its strength.

I take pride in the robust economic ties that bind the Philippines and the United States. This past week in preparation for this visit, we witnessed the launching in the Philippines of “Convergys”, the largest customer care service company in the world which is hiring 3,000 workers in its first year of operation.

We also witnessed the launching of the new 50 million-dollar investment of Ford, to launch the Philippines as an export hub to the world. We received 33 million dollars of new USAid money for educational assistance in the conflict-affected areas, and we celebrated the electrification of 1,650 barangays with the contribution of one million pesos per barangay from Mirant Cal Energy in San Roque – all in preparation for your visit, Mr. President.

I look forward to the rest of my talks with President Bush and the officials of his administration.

Once again, thank you, Mr. President. And thanks to Mrs. Bush for making this state visit to the Philippines.

Source : Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].