Mayor Freddie Tinga and the other local government officials; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen:

Soldiers, I greet all of you, brave soldiers of the Philippine Army, on our 105th Anniversary.

And I salute our awardees on this occasion. Our awardees are this year’s models of the great Filipino soldier. Models of the best tradition of the army. You and the rest of our army do our nation proud for your courage, conscience and patriotism.

I also salute the 20 officers confirmed last week by the Commission on Appointments. Six of the generals and five of the colonels are from the army. I appointed you, i chose you to be generals and colonels because i believe in your qualities of military leadership. Congratulations to you all!

Today is also the 105th Anniversary of the Philippine Presidency. In the Tejeros convention where General Emilio Aguinaldo formally constituted the revolutionary army of the Philippines, he was also declared President of the Revolutionary Forces and the Republic. And today as Commander-in-Chief, I share with you the historical meaning and legacy of this moment.

Fourteen months ago, the AFP Chief of Staff, who came from the army, brought with him the whole Armed Forces of the Philippines to deal the final blow against plunder and the loss of moral ascendancy of a presidency that could no longer govern.

Then as now, the fortunes of the presidency and the army are closely interlinked. It is a bond that is forged in a common vision — the vision of a strong democratic nation. It is a good message for our people that you have for your anniversary theme, and I quote “At your service for freedom and democracy across the land.” End quote.

This quote declares the army’s undying recognition of the people as the masters of the command. It reaffirms the AFP’s primary mission to preserve freedom, uphold democracy and protect our nation’s sovereignty and integrity. Indeed in our nation’s history we have seen that freedom and democracy enable development, while authoritarianism and dictatorship sabotage development and the battle against poverty.

To win the battle against poverty we must have security, both internal and external, for which the army plays a crucial role. You bear the brunt in the fight against insurgency, rebellion and terrorism. In this, you have displayed the highest degree of valor and gallantry in defense of our territory and sovereignty, constitution and flag. You have shown that the Philippines is the home of the great Filipino soldier.

The 227 officers and enlisted personnel wounded or killed in action against the Abu Sayaff from January 2001 up to this day are a painful testimony to your greatness and your willingness to pay the highest price for our national security.

But we do not want to sacrifice more of our brave men and women, and yet the war must be fought. This is our commitment to our people and to the international world. We will put an end to these terrorists soon with the assistance of our allies.

Balikatan is addressing part of the training and equipment needs to match your valor and stamina. Courage, we need not learn from others, you have a surfeit of that. But tactical and operational training are needed to transform courage into sure victory.

At this juncture, I would take up exercise Balikatan 2-1. In the beginning, there were understandably questions and apprehensions regarding the participation of Americans in exercise Balikatan. Even at that time where the issue of the American participation was being debated, I saw and was convinced of the need for American assistance to enhance the effectiveness of the armed forces of the Philippines in its fight against the terrorist in Basilan thus, I decided without much hesitation.

Our fight against the Abu Sayyaf in Basilan is beginning to bear fruit. Our troops are hot on the heels of terrorists aided by sophisticated intelligence gathering. Equally encouraging is the warm acceptance by the peace loving peoples of Basilan and Zamboanga of the American presence. They, who are the ones directly affected by the scourge of terrorism look forward with confidence to the day when this scourge is finally stamped out. And we shall win with superior moral and now superior physical resources.

We shall uphold before the world the finest tradition of soldiery that lives in the army and the other major services. We have to push forward with greater vigor and force until terrorism is destroyed and can no longer rise from the ashes.

And now that the Balikatan 2-1 is running in the middle of its course as in previous Balikatans under the visiting forces agreement, your superiors together with our counterparts in the united states armed forces are brainstorming on the curriculum of the next Balikatans.

Because the curriculum of every Balikatan is usually planned and agreed on a year in advance, the originally envisioned Bbalikatan exercises for 2002 were planned and agreed on long before September 11. And therefore, to my mind that original curriculum, that original content became less relevant after September 11. And i instructed that the content be modified to emphasize the skills needed in the international war against terrorism, the result was Balikatan 2-1.

We must continue re-examining the content of future Balikatans to make sure that they conform more and more to the fight against terrorism and increasingly to the fight against the twin of terrorism, the fight against poverty.

Now, I’m beginning to receive feelers from the people especially of Basilan regarding the possibility of enhancing community development assistance in the u.s. Participation in exercise Balikatan. This is in order to help them recover soon from the destruction and stagnation which terrorism has wrought on them for so long.

I am keeping an open mind on the matter. Offhand, I see no serious objection against the proposition for expanding the assistance to community development for after all our effort at restoring peace in Basilan is not the end. It is in fact just the beginning of a more arduous and sustained effort of bringing development to the province, of reducing poverty which as i have repeatedly said is the twin of terrorism.

I await the recommendation of my advisers but in the meantime on a matter of strategic policy let me say that i welcome the thought the next modification of the Balikatan curriculum should emphasize civic action. This is important to strengthen the physical and psychological parameters of the community caught in the vortex of combat operations.

In the war against terrorism, we cannot be half-hearted or reluctant to move forward, strategic decisiveness is important. To hesitate now could doom our chances of permanent success. A shallow victory will doom our nation to greater instability and drive our people to deeper poverty and despair.

But let me assure the army and the whole nation that no matter how many more Balikatans there will be after more than a dozen Balikatans there had been under the visiting forces agreement, as long as I am president, not only the constitution but also the self respect of the Filipino soldier will always serve as the parameters and guidelines of Balikatan.

The American soldiers shall not engage the enemy except in a clear-cut scenario of exercising the human right of self-defense. The American soldiers will train and will be trained under our mutual training template through our chain of command. Our battles have not been exclusively against armed aggressors. You, the great Filipino soldiers have also fought ignorance and poverty. As mentioned by General De los Reyes, you have built many useful things for development. You have built dams and electrical installations in conflict-ridden localities. For instance, in the Lanao del Sur-North Cotabato area alone you have constructed or rehabilitated more than a hundred school buildings during my administration. I congratulate the engineering brigades for building these schools in which soldiers sometimes even serve as temporary teachers.

There are 1,600 Barangays that still have no schools serving them and i would like to repeat my instruction that the engineering brigades should participate in the building of these schools. And I would like to clarify my instruction that because we don’t have to pay extra salary to those who are building these schools, the project costs of these schools should be no more than 200,000 pesos per classroom in these Barangays.

In strengthening our political institutions peace remains our preferred option. I have suspended the peace panels but we have not given up on negotiations. The ceasefire agreement between the government and the MILF still holds. Back channels are being used to move the MILF peace process faster. Back channels are also open to the communist party of the Philippines based on sincerity and genuine national interest. I am pursuing the mode of back channeling to try to achieve final agreement at the soonest possible time.

Only yesterday, almost 500 members of the local communist movement, the ram and the MNLF were formally granted amnesty. This has brought the total number of amnesty grantees of various persuasions to 16,000 since 1986. At this point, about 2,600 more have manifested an interest in availing of our amnesty program.

But let not the olive branch we hold before the enemy be rebuffed with gunfire. Waging peace must not be perceived as cowardice. The army and all the AFP are there to guarantee the peace with sacrifice and valor. This is our commitment — to stand for peace without flinching, without letting down our guard.

When peace is gained, we secure it. We will not let the sacrifices of the AFP go to naught. Development shall succeed conflict. In Mindanao, the re-envigorated ARMM has prepared an integrated and realistic development plan that will fast-track the march of regional progress in Muslim Mindanao. Let us all support it.

Basilan has its own accelerated development plan to reduce poverty and deter the spread of terrorism. Balikatan plays a role in this campaign of peace and development which shall be pursued to its logical end. Those who fight for peace and progress should themselves savor the fruits of what they have fought for.

A year ago, on army day, i increased the gratuities of soldiers wounded or killed in action. I also signed a law exempting your allowances from taxes. Now, we must find a way to facilitate pension payments. But the increase of your basic pay is of greatest concern to me. Heroes must have decent salaries, thus, we are working hard for legislation to increase the pay of AFP personnel.

I have also asked the secretary of the budget to infuse the RSBS with a 200-million peso one-time contribution to serve as additional seed money for our soldiers’ pensions. So that the day will come when increasingly the soldiers’ pension can come from earnings of the pension funds. And when this day comes the three billion pesos that every year we allocate from the general appropriations act for pensions can be freed and can thus be used to finance the upgrading of our soldiers’ salaries.

Housing is another concern. Less than 3,000 officers, enlisted men and beneficiaries of soldiers killed in action have been accommodated in off-base housing projects. Another 1,000 or so have availed of Pag-ibig benefits. About 2,000 units served as on-base homes.

These numbers are far too low for the 13,500 army personnel applying for off-base housing and the more than 3,000 waiting to be housed on-base.

HUDCC chairman Mike Defensor has provided the cabinet with a list of public housing projects from the past that had become white elephants because to build them was not commensurate to… To the cost to build them was not commensurate to what the lowly Filipino worker could afford. We are redoing the installment scheme to allow low income workers to pay for them and at the same time comply with COA requirements for floor prices.

I would like to ask Defense Secretary Angelo Reyes to make sure that the soldiers get first crack at these housing units already available even as we speak. I would also like him to oversee the complete staff work for proclaiming eleven identified portions of military reservation as soldiers’ housing sites.

I am also directing the AFP housing board’s actions on applications for the AFP OVAI in Fort Bonifacio. It was my late father, President Diosdado Macapagal, who set aside land in then Fort Mckinley for an AFP officers’ village and an enlisted men’s village. And as president I would like to be able to make sure that his work will not go uncompleted.

And you, dear soldiers carry on with your dedicated service to our people for freedom, for democracy, for Philippine progress.

Always remember the importance of your mission towards the peace of our country and the progress of our countrymen. Always remember that you are needed by our fellow Filipinos, and you are needed by the presidency, you are needed by our country.

And so on this day after 105 years of a glorious tradition, dear soldiers as your commander-in-chief, may I give you a message of thanks from all the Filipino people. And from them to you, mabuhay ang sundalong Pilipino!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 105th Founding Anniversary of the Philippine Army. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230209/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7625&Itemid=38