Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the FICCI/ASSOCHAM/CII

[Delivered at the New Delhi, India, October 5, 2007]

We thank the FICCI, ASSOCHAM and CII for the chance to be together today, at a time when India has become one of the world’s top economies, and at a time when the Philippine economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability.

We cannot highlight enough the great strides that India has accomplished in recent years. Your impressive growth, largely fueled by a knowledge economy, is unique and worthy of emulation. It has made you the world’s fourth largest economy.

There are political, economic and strategic implications for India and the East Asian region as a result of your new-found economic power. As India becomes a true political and economic giant, your obligations to your neighbors also increase, separate from your obligations to your own citizens. These are big responsibilities which we hope will be accommodated in our bilateral relations with each other.

The highlights of the bilaterals we have struck between India and the Philippines include eight agreements:

(1) a Framework of Philippines-India Bilateral Relations;

(2) Agreement to Establish the Joint Commission on Bilateral Cooperation. These two agreements identify priorities, set directions and lead Philippine-India relations to a new era in various areas of cooperation such as defense and security, health and medicine, trade and investments, energy including renewable energy, agriculture, tourism, and culture; and

(3) $50 million credit line from the Export and Import Bank of India. We hope this can finance transactions that will correct the lopsided nature of our trade in favor of India. With India now one of the world’s top economies with a new middle class of half a billion people, your internal market demand and domestic on us in terms of job creation, balance of trade and investment,

Most of the Philippine exports to India are industrial inputs like electronics, phosphoric acid and newsprint. With India s half a billion new middle class we hope we can do more trade in consumer products like fashion garments, fashion furniture, and the trendy virgin coconut oil.

Yesterday noon at the meeting of the Confederation of Indian Industries in Mumbai, I told the business community that the current surge of investments in the Philippines has been anchored by the billion dollar plus investments in our country of several major international companies such as America’s Texas Instruments and AES, Korea’s Hanjin and Japan’s Marubeni.

In the afternoon Global Steel of Mittal joined our billion dollar club by informing us of their plans to set up an integrated steel plant in southern Philippines involving investments of $1.6 billion.

In BPO, Credence Analytics signed a joint venture with a Philippine company, WNS informed us of their plan to set up in the Philippines, while Sutherland informed us of its plans to double its knowledge based employment in the Philippines.

We believe the Philippines offers the best value for Indian investment today. We offer a strategic location in a fast-growing region, our workforce is well educated, productive and English speaking.

This is an advantage also as a film location site for the Indian movie industry. The Philippines is not only advantageous but a premier choice for film shooting because of its white sand beaches, enigmatic and mysterious rainforests, historical heritage sites, and crystalline scapes like lahar and sand dunes. It is a fountain of creative and service talent. We have the production equipment, post production houses and studios, sound stages and other technical and logistics requirements.

When we explained this to members of Bollywood yesterday, they agreed to visit the Philippines before the end of the year to look for film locations. The famous producer Aditya Raj Kapoor has decided to do a movie in the Philippines.

Our white sand beaches combine with the beautiful smiles of our people to make tourism one of our growth sectors. Yesterday Taj Resorts agreed to go to the Philippines to look at possible investment sites. Our Secretary of Tourism, Ace Durano, shall also invite the Oberoi Group to look at the Philippines for their next project.

A possible area of agricultural partnership and cooperation is in the sector of dairy and livestock meat products. The Philippines imports more than 1.7 million metric tons of milk and cream products, as well as more than 50,000 metric tons of carabao beef meat.

The Indian Ministry of Agriculture’s Animal Husbandry Division has no problem with our securing livestock strengthening Philippines livestock. We are looking for partnerships in livestock technology involving artificial insemination, grow-out farms and meat processing operations. The Philippines is foot-and-mouth disease free and bird flu free. We can supply both our growing demand and that of Asia.

On energy, we likewise invite Indian corporations to participate in the privatization of our national power assets. Yesterday Kalpataru Power Transmission said they would join the bid for the December privatization of our national transmission grid.

(4) Philippines-India Joint Declaration for Cooperation to Combat International Terrorism.

(5) Memorandum of Agreement in the Field of Health and Medicine. We are committed to consolidating the gains in new revenue by making long overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure. This includes billions of pesos in new bridges, roads and ports along with billions in education, training and healthcare to upgrade our competitiveness and alleviate poverty.

Our massive spending on health care includes importing pharmaceuticals from India as part of our program to cut in half the price of medicines commonly bought by the poor.

(6) Agreement between the Philippine International Trading Corporation and the Indian State Trading Corporation for the $35 million worth of affordable medicines. But we encourage private drug store owners and local governments to do business with Indian corporations. Let me introduce the representatives of the local governments in our delegation: Governor Villafuerte of Camarines Sur, Mayor Villanueva of Bais City and Mayor Navarro of the town of Laac in Mindanao. Yesterday in Mumbai two Indian pharmaceuticals signed agreements with the Philippine private sector.

Our delegation also includes members of the Philippine Congress. Let me introduce them: Deputy Speaker Villarosa, Congresswoman Angping, Congressman Biron, Congresswoman Garin and Congressman Zialcita. Let me also take to think them for their enthusiasm m pushing for legislation that would make medicines in the Philippines affordable, just like in India. Three days ago the Philippine Senate passed their version of the bill on second reading. When combined with the version o the House of Representatives the final passage of the bill will be a major milestone in our administration’s efforts to promote health for our people. It will provide the legal framework to allow the production of cheaper medicines in the Philippines instead of just importing them.

We share what is good news for us with the Indian business community. We want it to be good news for you, too, by encouraging your pharmaceutical companies to set up production facilities in the Philippines so that you can keep your Philippine market. You can even use it as a base to export to other markets in the Far East.

(7) Memorandum of Agreement on Enhanced Cooperation in the Field of Renewable Energy: We are developing a biofuels industry that helps our energy independence, create jobs and keeps our nation clean for future generations. Yesterday Praj Industries informed us that they are ready to roll out their Philippine bio-ethanol plant soon. We also want to explore joint ventures between Philippine and Indian institutions to produce biofuel from sweet sorghum and jatropha.

(8) Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation between the Foreign Service Institutes of the Philippines and India.

(9) Memorandum of Agreement on the Waiver of Visa Requirements for Holders of Diplomatic Passports and Official Passports. But more important, we have liberalized our visa policy towards Indian nationals.

We had an anachronistic policy considering Indians as restricted nationals. How illogical to restrict nationals of the fourth largest economy when we should be courting your instead.

The Philippines is on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. Six years ago, no one thought we could get more revenues, cut down on tax cheats, strengthen the peso, move the stock market, pre-pay our debts and raise employment, but we have.

We are bullish on 21st century India and on your ability to help drive positive change in the world. We have the unique opportunity to learn from you and create our own path to development. And we want to do business with you. Thank you very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].