Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the First National Convention of the League of Cities of the Philippines (LCP)

[Delivered at the Fiesta Pavilion, Manila Hotel, Manila, January 18, 2007]

Damo gid nga salamat, Mayor Treñas.

Mayor Sarmiento, all the other city mayors, your vice mayors and your councils and your barangay officials. Congratulations! To the first ever National Convention of the League of Cities of the Philippines.

This convention is a long-overdue recognition that our cities and your league have become a force to reckon with in our country’s march to a better future. If you remember before I delivered our State of the Nation Address, we went around the country and consulted with you on our super regions which became the focus of our State of the Nation Address.

Our super regions approach to national development is founded on the concept of a strategy that leverages the best out of local leadership and resources, and projects them to a national and regional plane. And I am very happy and I look forward to the day when the league of cities would indeed be able to submit legislation to the national government in order to strengthen the local governments and the cities in the challenges that face your cities.

Your cities are the hubs whose spokes extend along all points of the compass to other cities and hubs of prosperity within the region. With hardworking and dedicated city mayors like you, we will continue to move forward in the global arena of competitiveness and excellence.

We thank you because your economic activities have helped our economy go on this extended bull run that it is enjoying higher than ever OFW remittances, a strong peso, surging stocks, tamed inflation, stable interest rates, and increasing investment inflows.

We have regained our place in the international landscape as a strong player in the fight against terror. This morning before I came here, I was at the Department of National Defense for we had a meeting with the U.S. officials who are supporting us in our Philippine defense reforms. And I took the opportunity to congratulate everyone involved because the highest Abu Sayyaf leader, Abu Sulaiman, has been slain.

I commended the Armed Forces for another milestone in the campaign against terror. This milestone caps with glory the signing of the ASEAN Convention on Counter-terrorism. We are resolved to work with our strategic partners in the region and with the United States to tighten the dragnet and stop the movement of terrorists, their finances and their deadly materiel across the seas and borders.

We mark every high point in the campaign against the Abu Sayyaf and the JI with greater resolve to move forward in strengthening domestic, regional and global security. The Philippines has a stake in a safer world where eight million Filipinos work and reside. We have a stake in an East Asian region that builds on prosperity and stability and peace. The relentless pressure we have applied in the field is taking its toll. We will keep it up until all the terrorists and their clandestine cells are accounted for.

This government is determined to finish the job with a hand of steel against evil. And I call on all the city mayors, let us all be determined to usher in a durable peace through economic development, interfaith dialogue and international cooperation. As I was coming in I saw City Mayor Jun Acharon of General Santos City which was the victim of the latest bomb terroristic activity. And I hope Jun that with the killing of the top Abu Sayyaf leader and with the continued support of the United States, as they have again reiterated to us today, we will be able to put an end not only to the violence in Sulu — which has really become very peaceful — but to the violence in the great cities like General Santos City.

We have championed a social agenda that weaves the spirit of one caring and sharing community that’s given a tangible share in the 2007 budget. And I thank the city mayors, because you have also put so much of a caring and sharing community in your own city budgets.

Social services is now the biggest component in the national budget, pulling away from debt services for the first time in many years. For the first time in many years our social budget is bigger than our debt service budget. And that is excluding the IRA, and your IRA after all is supposed to be devoted to agriculture, health, social welfare. In other words, the social budget would even be bigger if we were to include the social expenditures of our local government. While you are primarily responsible for social expenditures, the national government stands ready to help those who are already devoting much of the resources to social services.

For example, 700 million has been added to funds for job training scholarships under the TESDA, and part of this is that we are providing at least one scholarship for everyone of your barangays. Please give us your list of beneficiaries. This will broaden the wellspring of Filipino talent and excellence for a well-paid employment. You know we look for well-paid employment. And so TESDA is concentrating its training on those things that give us well-paid employment. For example, call center agents like Iloilo, what is your hiring rate? For every 100 that the call center companies interview in Iloilo, they hire forty. The highest in the country, congratulations! And we want more of your cities — because your children already have the basic English — we want more of your cities to study what we call the call center English.

Another very important, very popular livelihood for a living is seafarers. We have a great demand for seafarers all over the world. The Filipino is considered the best seafarers, so we want to train more seafarers. And then sometimes when I go to some of these cities or even the provinces, some of the older men… Well, middle-aged — not, not, not older, very old — but the middle-aged say, how can we become a call center agent. We’re already way past high school, or we didn’t go to high school, we don’t speak English well enough, we can’t even train for call center English. Well, another huge opportunity available, we have tens of thousands of demand for welders, high-income paying jobs. So, we are also promoting training in that activity.

And finally, you will be surprised, I think Marides, Marikina is one of the sources of demand. We have a very very big demand for butchers. So for those who didn’t study high school, isn’t it Marides, you have a big demand for butchers in Marikina? But not only in Marikina, in Australia, all over the world, there’re thousands, tens of thousands also of job orders for butchers. So, we want to concentrate our training on this high-paying occupations. And we invite you, as I said, to submit the names of your nominees to TESDA so that they can give them the scholarship certificates.

Another very important activity where we want to help our cities is half-priced medicine. The target for half-priced medicine outlets has been doubled to 30,000 nationwide. This is one of our success stories that we have been able to bring half-priced medicine to the people, but we want to bring it even more. Please, also nominate to us the locations in your cities where we need to put an outlet for half-priced medicines.

All of these and more, we shall pursue as we meet head-on the challenges of a new Philippines in the context of highly-invigorated ASEAN and East Asia communities.

And as Jerry said, I am a strong advocate for local autonomy. As always, let me renew my pledge that I will stand as your partner for development, security and good governance. Let’s remain focused on the task at hand.

I shall continue to wait upon your leadership to serve the people. The ideas come from you, in the end, the ideas will be implemented by you. And so I salute the cities for your great work and may you continue to achieve greater height in the years to come.

Thank you. More power. Mabuhay!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the First National Convention of the League of Cities of the Philippines (LCP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412152636/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1797&Itemid=38