We welcome Governor Erico Aumentado, the local government officials here, and the people of Bohol on the completion of the Bohol Irrigation Project.

We commend NIA and the consultants for a job well done.

We owe ₱3.6 billion to Japan for this project which took seven years to complete. Now, 5,300 hectares of farmland will receive irrigation from the Bayongan dam and Capayas dam. We also constructed 41 kilometers of farm-to-market roads and access roads to support this project, and there is also road improvement for the Ubay-San Jose-Cabulao road spanning 16.7 kilometers. Because of this, 42,500 tons of rice and other products will be harvested here annually.

Because of this, we can foresee that the next center for agriculture and business here in Bohol will be in the northern and central parts of the province – from Pilar to the cities of Ubay, Trinidad, and San Miguel.

We are committed to consolidating the gains in new revenue by making long overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure. This includes billions of pesos in education, healthcare and training along with billions in new bridges, roads, ports and irrigation to upgrade the competitiveness of the Philippines.

We take great pride in the discipline of our administration to focus on the economy and our overall economic health. I am proud of the fact that we are pre-paying our external debt. We will balance the budget in 2008, two years ahead of schedule. We are making sure to use the gains to invest in vital social and economic needs. We will not sacrifice long term gains for short term political expediency.

In 2001, your province was seventh in the “Club 20” list of the 20 poorest provinces in the country. In 2002, your rice harvest was only 144,781 metric tons, there were only 895 registered businesses throughout the province, and only 774,000 tourists visited despite the many places worth visiting.

During that time, 30 percent of the population were rebels or were supporting the rebels. Bohol was a classic case of a vicious cycle of poverty and hunger driving insurgency and unrest.

Governor Aumentado utilized a comprehensive strategy wherein anti-poverty programs and military operations were combined, along with peace programs initiated by the church, development programs launched by the national government including foreign debts, and appealed for trust and community cooperation. The strategy’s effectiveness proved that the Boholanos greatly believed in the Governor’s vision.

In 2005, almost all Communist fronts were defeated. One remaining front was located in the remote mountainous areas in the middle of the province. Also in 2005, Bohol exited the Club 20 and 40 slots away from being the poorest province.

In 2006, Bohol was recognized as the 2nd best performing province in poverty reduction and identified as one of those with the highest annual growth rate. No longer an insurgency hotbed, the province recorded in 2006 tourist arrivals triple that of 2001 figures; the number of business establishments doubled and the employment rate shot up to 92.3% from 87% in 2004.

This irrigation project will increase the reach of farms in central and northern Bohol, including areas near Pilar which was a stronghold of the remaining communist front in 2005. The roads that were repaired serve as routes for products from the farms and also bring tourists to various places in the province. Investments will increase and social services will be strengthened. All of this will ensure that the Boholanos will enjoy permanent stability and growth.

I shared the good news about Bohol and your convergence strategy with the Peace Assemblies nationwide. Bohol taught the entire nation that: The way to peace isn’t through the barrel of a gun. Rather it begins with providing a person a job, food on the table and human dignity. And central to that success is to invest in the people – in education, healthcare, irrigation, roads, bridges and schools.

Let us continue this unity and support all efforts to achieve peace and progress for Bohol and the entire nation.

Thank you very much for your continued support for me. Long live us all!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech at the Inauguration of the Bohol Irrigation Project Phase 2. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140245/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2230&Itemid=38