Balbaleg ya salamat Speaker de Venecia. Thank you very much to the father of Pantal bridge and my super ally, Speaker Joe De Venecia.

Madame Gina de Venecia and my companions at mass earlier this morning, Congressman Tulagan and Espino; Ambassador Yamazaki and all our friends from Japan who have helped make this project a reality; our Cabinet members; our host mayor, Mayor Benjie Lim and the other officials of the City of Dagupan; Governor Agbayani and the other officials of Pangasinan and the other mayors who are here today to help us celebrate this beautiful affair; Commissioner Fernandez; all of the officials and people of Pantal and Dagupan, Masantos ya ngarem ed sikayon amin. Tuloy-tuloy so schedule ko ya bisita ed saray naduma-duman probinsya, tan malike-liketak imbita-an kayo a mila ed martsa, intayon amin paunla ed progreso na baley tayo.

Your Excellency, Ambassador to the Philippines Yamazaki, please relay to your government and people the deep appreciation for your continued support for Philippine development. Japan is by far the biggest source of official development assistance to the Philippines. And I thank you ambassador and the other Japanese guests for joining us in this groundbreaking and also for joining us later for lunch because I understand bangus is the favorite dish of Ambassador Yamazaki.

Ambassador Yamazaki told us about the almost 200 projects under this package, 200 projects amounting to eight billion pesos. But this one project alone is 800 million pesos, one-tenth of the whole package. So, this Pantal bridge, as said earlier by our different speakers, is the only long-span bridge of the bridges to be built nationwide under this Japan facility that’s why it cost much much more than the other smaller bridges. This is called Package III of the loans from Japan. Ayan tatawagen nga Package III met so sanka-unan ed samay apat era ya packages manlapo ed samay urgent bridges construction project for rural development, as Ambassador Yamazaki has explained to us, for the bridges of the rural areas of the Philippines. But Dagupan is not a rural area. It’s an exception to the rest of the bridges because Speaker de Venecia was so active in making sure that this bridge would be financed after 100 years of waiting by the people of Dagupan.

For those of you who are not from Pangasinan, this Pantal bridge is part of the Dagupan bridge diversion road. This is the speaker’s pet project to make commerce here more convenient. And this will increase the land area, the usable land area of Dagupan by one-third. Yes, and in that part of the country, as Mayor Benjie Lim said, it will not only help Dagupan but also the entire Philippines. Increase the value of Dagupan as a center of investment, jobs, education especially in the north or in the northern part of our Luzon.

This is one of the big projects in our Medium-Term Public Investment Program.

In my State of the Nation Address, I mentioned some of the programs in the MTPIP and I said that these projects will be divided into four sub-economies of the Philippines, the fifth being the Cyber Corridor from Baguio to Davao. Why are we dividing the country into sub-economies? Because each super region has its natural advantages and we want to focus on these advantages so that we can speed up the programs vital to the main growth strategy and reduce the dependence on Imperial Manila.

Dagupan, the Bangus capital of the Philippines; of the world, the queen of aquaculture in the North Luzon agri-business quadrangle. It provides not only bangus but other high-value fish not only to the rest of Luzon but also to the rest of North Asia including the country of Japan. Dagupan and Pangasinan are also an important part of the Cyber Corridor because you have many excellent colleges. And I want to congratulate the people of Dagupan and Pangasinan for your excellent tradition of academic excellence.

This North Luzon agri-business quadrangle, its biggest project is also here in Pangasinan, the Agno River Irrigation Project, its value is five billion pesos. And I also want to tell you that this is not the only irrigation project in Pangasinan, there are also various small irrigation projects worth — there are 35 other irrigation projects — worth 354 million pesos. How do we fund this, how do we fund what I mentioned in my State of the Nation Address? Thank you, Joe, my super ally, for your leadership and support so that we have a budget for these big projects needed for the development of the North Luzon agri-business quadrangle and the entire Philippines.

Yung Medium-Term Public Investment natin over the rest of my term as president… Ah, hindi. Yung budget lang natin for year 2007 is more than one trillion pesos. And that is the economic dividend of the greatest fiscal reforms of our generation, achieved under the great leadership and support of the beloved son of Dagupan, Joe de Venecia and our other congressmen represented here today by Gener and Madz.

Our difficult reforms in the economy and finances of the country are bearing fruit. And we not only successfully sourced funds for our programs, we also gained international confidence and support for current and future projects. And I am very very grateful to the government of Japan because they have more projects like this lined up for our Philippine future.

Just last week we received more than seven billion dollars in commitments from Japan, China, World Bank and Asian Development Bank to fund our super regions including the North Luzon agri-business quadrangle.

And while I thank the congressmen, I think I’d like to say also that I am happy that our senators heed well the voice of the people in suspending the investigation of the OWWA funds that after all had been certified by the COA as intact and readily available. Our OFWs stranded in Lebanon have to be served with our undivided attention until they are all rescued. Meanwhile, other national priorities have to be attended to.

Now for instance, we promote agri-business and commerce more aggressively through more and better infrastructure projects not only to the Pantal bridge, not only to Redios-Dagupan diversion but other major roads and bridges. And this is the role of the Pantal bridge. But aside from that, we also need other roads.

Every month we are allocating 500 million for farm-to-market roads all over the country — 200 million pesos are for the North Luzon agri-business quadrangle; 200 million for Mindanao; 50 million for some farms in the Luzon Urban Beltway; and 50 million for the Central Philippines.

Here in Pangasinan alone, the Regional Development Council has already approved sixteen farm-to-market roads amounting to 25 million pesos and counting. Throughout the Philippines, we are increasing the spending on social services such as health, education, especially education in the Cyber Corridor where Pangasinan is a very big part.

Our reforms are taking root and our growth is irreversible. Your government is committed to development.

Let us all support these reforms to create a strong and progressive Philippines.

Congratulations! Joe for this bridge. Thank you Ambassador Yamazaki.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Groundbreaking Ceremony of the Pantal Bridge. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212219/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2887&Itemid=38