Thank you very much for your visit to Malacañang. Your concern for the country is commendable. You are a great inspiration to our administration.

You elected me and the legislators to work for the good of all. Thank you for expressing your weariness of the politics of division and despair. Thank you for your statement that you want us to make difficult but correct decisions for the economy, fight poverty, and keep our country peaceful and prosperous.

This is what I had in mind when I signed on Tuesday the largest budget passed in the history of Congress – P1.2 trillion for 2008. This funding will promote the three E’s – economy, education and environment – the programs most important to improve our lives.

Our budget demonstrates our action and policy priorities to invest in our people.

Doesn't every Filipino want a good job, food on the table, good education for their children, and a clean and pure environment with fresh air, clean water and fertile land?

Perhaps some people and politicians have forgotten, but for the first time in a generation, we have a budget and economy that generates revenue that can be spent to improve and uplift the lives of Filipinos. In the past, the budget was only enough for salaries, interest on debt and IRA (Internal Revenue Allotment) to local governments. In the past, we still had to borrow money to build infrastructure. Not anymore now. We can now spend on infrastructure and social services with our own capabilities and no longer through debt.

This, which we call “Social Payback,” began a year ago when we started increasing funding for infrastructure and basic services for our people, including education.

Education, in particular, is taking a front seat in our budget this year. Doesn't anything matter more to Filipinos now than education? The opportunity to have quality education is the way for your youth, who belong to the next generation, to escape poverty and live comfortably.

Education is a core value of Philippine society and family life. Education is the most precious gem that every parent, older sibling, aunt or uncle bequeaths to their child, sibling or nephew/niece. To have a family member graduate, Filipinos will stay up all night working or go abroad, scrimp on lunch, scavenge for garbage, and make other sacrifices, all for the diploma they aspire to. That is the value of education.

Because education is most important to the Filipino family, the government strives to allocate the largest fund of the country to education.

Now, due to our tax reforms, there is a larger allocation to social programs than to debt payments. Almost two hundred billion pesos goes to education. This is also the largest portion of the budget that has gone to education in a long time.

The Department of Education (DepEd) will receive a large fund for education with P150 billion for elementary and high school, Commission on Higher Education (CHED), state universities and colleges, Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA), Department of Science and Technology (DOST), Commission on Information and Communications Technology (CICT) and Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD).

The DepEd will implement pre-school with two billion pesos. Day care centers will gradually be converted into pre-schools.

Three and a half million poor pre-school students will receive rice under the Food for School Program.

P6 billion is allocated for 11,000 classrooms.

More than 35 million books will be distributed.

The budget also includes the hiring of ten thousand additional teachers.

There is P1 billion for teacher training in Math, Science and English.

And there is a provision to increase salaries, possibly mid-year.

More than 60,000 students nationwide will be given assistance to study in private high school under the Government Assistance to Students and Teachers in Private Education (GATSPE) Education Service Contracting.

The high school voucher will be increased in the National Capital Region (NCR) to P10,000 from P5,000.

Almost a thousand computer laboratories will be purchased for high schools.

Three billion pesos for providing more vocational training, including a one billion peso scholarship for 100,000 poor individuals and P350 million for training for business process outsourcing (BPO) and call centers.

Strengthening the ROTC program consistent with the doctrine of a citizen’s army enshrined in the Constitution.

College scholarships worth P700 million, including P300 million for science.

Masters and doctorate degrees in Science and Engineering exceeding P1 billion.

We have already done much, and there is still much remaining to be done. We plan to work hard in the next two years until the day my term ends in 2010, to implement our Philippine Reform Agenda. We need to move forward and we will move forward with further reforms. We will fight for the Economy, Education and the Environment.

Overall, we remain bullish on our country, optimistic about our future and deeply committed to being a force for good. Thank you for being here today. Thank you for demonstrating your commitment to our nation’s stability and to investing in the people.

“Promote Knowledge — as a Weapon Against Poverty.”

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during her meeting with Students and Teachers on Education Budget. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123006/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1065&Itemid=38