Dakal a salamat, Ed.

And before I begin, please join me first in a moment of prayer for President Cory Aquino.!

Thank you. First of all, I’d like to thank our speakers earlier, Bert and Romy and Jackie for your very kind words. And I’d like to acknowledge some of the members of our official delegation: we have our two senators with us, chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations, Senator Miriam Defensor Santiago and Senator Lito Lapid; we have Cabinet members who met with their counterparts headed by Executive Secretary Ed Ermita; we have members of Congress who certainly had many counterparts because we spent one whole day in different events with the members of Congress of the United States of America headed by Deputy Speaker Girlie Villarosa; and we have local governments: Governor Tet Garcia of Bataan and City Mayors Nitoy Durano of Danao in Cebu  and Marides Fernando of Marikina.

I’d like to acknowledge also our officials from the Philippine Government but representing our government here in the United States. Our Ambassador to the United States, Ambassador Willy Gaa and Consul General Cecille Rebong and all the officials of the Embassy; and our ambasador to the United Nations, former Chief Justice Davide. And to all of you, magandang gabi sa inyong lahat.

And so, to the 60 percent of attendees this evening, good evening to all of you. To all of you from the Visayas and Mindanao, good evening. To the Bicolanos, a good evening to all of you. To the relatives of my husband and Miriam, good evening to all of you. And to the Ilocanos, a good evening to all of you.

And of course, congratulations to the Filipinos International United States of America or FILUSA here in New York headed by Bert, in New Jersey headed by Romy, and in California headed by Jackie, thank you for your touching words — Girlie said her hair was standing when you are telling your story — and even George from Michigan. So, thank you all for being here and Congratulations to the FILUSA and to the other Filipino-American organizations here tonight! To our two wonderful singers, congratulations, bravo! To them and to you for coming despite the very short notice, maraming salamat sa inyong lahat.

Last month, we met with the FILUSA Chapter in Los Angeles and last Wednesday in Washington, D.C. I congratulated your organization, as I congratulate today FILUSA-New York and New Jersey, for your efforts in helping unify the Filipino community here in the U.S., and projecting the good news about the Philippines.

As Bert said, we are pleased to… and of Ed, to be the first Southeast Asian leader to meet with President Obama at the White House. The fact that he sought out the Philippines for this historic opportunity is a testament to the strong and deep ties between our two countries. Our two countries have a shared history, our two countries have a commitment to a vibrant democracy, but most of all today, our two countries have family ties. Four million Philippine-Americans here in the United States and four hundred thousand Americans in the Philippines, so those are our family ties. So you, the Filipino- Americans here in America are the strongest link between the Philippines and the U.S., and thank you for being that link. The meeting with President Obama, early meeting in his administration also reflects the ongoing relationship we have established through a series of phone conversations and correspondences reaching back to when he was a candidate for President.

Sabi ni Bert, sana marinig kung ano ang mga pinag-usapan doon. Well, President Obama and I high in our agenda — and Miriam was there and Ed Ermita was there — high in our agenda was peace and security issues. The U.S. is essential to our economic, diplomatic and national security. And our meeting, our visit here and our meeting with President Obama has served to ensure that these objectives remain front and center and on track between our two nations.

We discussed the strong cooperation between the U.S. and the Philippines to combat terrorism. That will continue to be strengthened. In addition to the ‘hard’ power of military engagement and intelligence sharing is the need for ‘soft’ power — the pressing need to win over the hearts and minds of the people. And we shared with President Obama the successes of this ‘soft’ power paradigm that we have developed with America in Southern Philippines.

I don’t know how many of you here are from Southern Philippines, from Mindanao, but like the rest of the country there is a very big difference between the Mindanao of eight years ago and the Mindanao of today. If we go to the whole country, there is a very big difference between the Philippines today and the Philippines of eight years ago. Eight years ago, Asia was surging but the Philippines was on the brink of bankruptcy.

Today, two-thirds of the world is in recession, but the Philippines just got upgraded in his credit rating by Moody’s. For Mindanao, eight years ago, I inherited an age-old conflict exacerbated by a popular but nearsighted policy of massive military retaliation. That only provoked the other side to continue the war.

Today, we were very happy to share with the Filipinos we’ve met, with the officials of America that we’ve met including President Obama, that the Philippine Government Panel and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front have just announced that they are working towards the resumption of formal peace talks and that we are now on ceasefire. So that is the difference between eight years ago and today.

And how did we get to where we are, it was difficult to get there. We see it in Jakarta itself, the capital of Indonesia, there was a bombing but we are entering into a sentence of peace and that is our partnership with America. The hard power trained our soldiers and is engaged in intelligence. And also the soft power, building schools, roads, bridges so that the community becomes better.

And another thing that we talked about is we applauded President Obama’s leadership on climate change especially because just recently, the U.S. House of Representatives — and their counterparts among our delegation congratulated them — just passed the ACES Act. What is this ACES Act ? This is the American Clean Energy Security Act. It is now pending in the Senate, in the U.S. Senate, but the important thing about this bill passing in the House after a longer date is that under the Obama Administration they recognize the pressing need for the U.S. to step up and take action against climate change by reducing carbon emission.

And that’s important to us, as a developing nation, we need to balance economic growth and environmental sustainability very seriously. Because we are an archipelago with a very long coastline, so the Philippines is particularly vulnerable to dramatic changes in our weather and our rising seas. I’ve often said, oceans rise and Florida gets wet; oceans rise and the Philippines and our nation is gone. So that is how important it is, for us to avoid climate change. We will do everything in our power, I said, to work with the U.S. on this vital issue that confronts the Philippines but also the entire human race.

This is but one example of efforts we are taking to preserve our environment. On another front, we have been active in the Coral Triangle Initiative. Itong Coral Triangle, ito yung “Amazon of the Underwater.” It covers the entire Philippines and parts of five other neighboring countries: Indonesia, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Timor Leste and Solomon Islands. And this initiative is to bring together the food users of the world to protect the breeding grounds of the fish that feed the world. Yes, the Coral Triangle wherein those six countries are located is the one that provides the fish that feeds so much of the world.

And therefore we need to protect our natural environment. We also need to protect the livelihood of the fisherfolks, and we have to protect the source of food supply for much of the world.

A lot of you are very fond of tuna, and when you’re eating tuna whether a nice tuna sandwich from a fast-food store or a fancied tuna meal in a fancy restaurant, if you’re eating that chances are it comes from the Philippines. Or for sure almost it comes from the Coral Triangle, and that is what we are seeking to preserve.

In addition with President Obama, we met with Secretary Clinton and other members of the Cabinet. We also met with Speaker Pelosi and other Congressional leaders. And I hope that you don’t mind, that I said in your behalf, we are thanking them for passing the recognition and benefits of Filipino World War II veterans that they included in the Fiscal Stimulus Package or the American Recovery Act, after 60 long years of waiting we finally got that stage. And as important as these official meetings are, I always meet with the members of the private sector, including financial leaders in New York.

This morning, we met with Coca-Cola, who had just bought back their plant just a couple of years ago with a hundred million dollars, but today they announced their expansion plan of — that will total including what they’ve put in since they bought the firm back and what they’re going to put in in the next few years — they announced that their total investment is going to be one billion dollars. So they have joined our Billion-Dollar Club.

We also met with members of the ICT industry. You know, there’s a World ICT Conference that was taking place here in Jersey City, Thursday and Friday. I couldn’t attend that because I was in Washington but the big participants came to see me in New York today because they reported how this a world conference, they reported how the Philippines together with India dominated the Conference in terms of attractiveness as a destination for investment.

And it shows in the Philippines. When I first became President there were 6,000 employees in a virtually non-existent BPO industry. Today there are 600,000 workers, young Filipinos in a six billion-dollar industry. In fact one of the leaders of the ICT industry in the meeting I had today was saying about how he met me five years ago and how we were talking about ICT, call centers and BPO, and at that time nobody could imagine what a big driver of growth it would become. Now it has begun such a big driver of growth with unprecedented investments, and so it gives terrific jobs to young people, good paying jobs that keep them at home and not abroad.

You know, we really value how much you our Fil-Ams love the Philippines. We value your dedication to your family, to your nation, to your work like Jackie says, she brings her son to the Philippines so that he will be proud of being a Filipino.

But we are working for the day when there will be enough jobs at home, good jobs so that going abroad will only be a career choice and not the only choice for a hardworking Filipino. But we could not do that with the condition that I inherited eight years ago. As I said at that time even when Asia was surging, the Philippines was on the brink of bankruptcy. At that time, what was it? Our budget was like maybe 900 billion pesos and our tax revenues where 700 billion pesos.

And the tax revenues were only enough to pay the Local Governments’ Internal Revenue Allotment, the salaries of the government workers, and the debt service, because for generations they have been living on debt. If we want to spend on infrastructure or for social services, we would have to borrow, we could’nt finance it from our own internal resources. And the more we borrowed, the bigger our debt service would become. And in fact there was a scheduled moment in 2004, had we not done our proper financial management, that our expenditures including debt service would have been bigger than our budget, than our tax revenues and that would have been really a financial collapse on our country. But quietly without headlines — because how do you headline restructuring of debt with foreign creditors, it’s too technical — we did it and no financial crisis happened, and then in 2005 our senators and our congressmen helped us with our financial tax reforms.

Bitter medicine to raise taxes. We took the bitter medicine at economic reforms those years ago but those efforts have helped to create a firewall that softened the pressures arising from the global economic downturn. Why did they get a Moody’s upgrade? Because we could spend on our own fiscal stimulus and at the same time our deficit is a smaller percentage of GDP compared to our neighbors. In fact in 2007, we virtually balanced the budget. And we could have balanced it in 2008 except that the world economic crisis happened. And what is the use of balancing the budget if it’s going to be on the backs of the poor. So we had to do our own fiscal stimulus package, but our deficit this year of three percent is lower than the deficit of our neighboring countries, our peers which is why Moody’s said that we are more resilient and we deserve a credit upgrade.

That is also why we were able to maintain positive economic growth during the global economic downturn up to the first quarter of 2001 while many of the rest in the region saw contractions. Our macro-economic stability is a major strength that will put us in a stronger position as an attractive investment and business destination.

In fact, to all those Brookline activists who say all those terrible things about our country and our administration, if during this crisis we were able to have a credit upgrade, if we are growing while many other countries are experiencing recession, if we had been able to create in this last twelve months 1.4 million jobs, while many other countries are losing jobs, we must be doing something right. Thank you.

That said, yes, we have additional pressures. We’re working hard to keep the global economic wave from washing over the Philippines, so we have been tireless in securing our fuel, food and rice needs. Because of the revenues our senators and congressmen raised for us, we are investing in energy and rice self-sufficiency, we’re building up our schools, we’re jump-starting the economy with long-needed infrastructure. These projects are geared to investments in human and physical infrastructure including education and healthcare along with roads, bridges and ports. For instance in education, do you know that almost half of private high school enrollees are receiving government scholarships in private high schools?

And do you know that in skills training — that’s why our work force continues to be so competitive — our administration is spending, investing three times more than the three previous administrations combined. And as far as roads are concerned, I guess many of you have just come back or who’ve been to the Philippines, have been on the Subic-Clark-Tarlac Expressway. Well, that’s the corridor that’s overseen by Ed Pamintuan. Its… everybody who passes it says, “Wow! its like being in the first world.” And yes that’s a preview because our vision is to make the Philippines ready for the first world in 20 years. These infrastructure investments, human and physical, will ensure also that we are well-positioned for higher growth once the global economy rebounds.

One of the drivers, growth drivers in Asia is our ingenuity and the ability to identify new opportunities and to play niche roles in the global economy. And in the Philippines, as I said earlier, a number of high growth, high potential industries that nobody ever thought could become a major driver of growth are now taking off and bringing unprecedented amounts of investment in our country like BPO, like the 6,000 workers which have become 600,000 workers. Have you ever heard of an industry that grew 100 times in an eight-year period? And so we are very happy that today the BPO and call center industry employs 600,000 young Filipinos. And another industry that is growing in a similarly dramatic manner is tourism. Nitoy Durano’s son, Red Durano’s brother, Ace Durano is the Secretary of Tourism, and since he became Secretary of Tourism in 2004 up to today, tourism has almost doubled and has become a five billion-dollar industry.

The good thing about tourism is that, Ace calls it a big tent industry, because you have employment opportunities from the least skilled to the most skilled, it covers everyone, it accepts everyone of all level of skills, and the jobs are very good. I remember the story of a single mother in southern… Oh, yeah, Lupita and I were there in Badjan Island. Remember, Lupita? Beautiful spa and there’s the story of a formerly single mother, hand-to-mouth as far as feeding her child was concerned, she became a spa therapist and she’s earning terrific now and she has no more problems about the future of her child.

So as I said, these are good paying jobs that keep our people home and not abroad. And I repeat: we are doing our best to create good paying jobs at home. So that if anyone of you want to go back home, or if anyone of you would want to stay, it’s a choice, you can stay and have a good life, you can go back home and have a good life — that is our ambition for a Filipino-American.

Meanwhile, while we strive for that and the economy, in hardship and ease, you, our countrymen abroad, are really strengthening our economy. The 16 billion dollars you sent last year was a record. It was a record last year, this year, it is rising compared to last year. And the largest part of the remittances comes from our countrymen here in North America. So thank you very much to all of you.

I’ve given you a few pieces of good news. I have given you some news that Bert asked about our meetings in Washington. I hope that we can continue to exchange news and I count on the continuing support of FILUSA and the Fil- Am community. And thank you for being proudly Filipino.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during a dinner meeting with FILUSA (Filipinos International of the U.S.A.). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412100409/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25855&Itemid=38