Thank you very much, Secretary Pamintuan, for your introduction of me. And I would also like to thank Ambassador “Tonet” Lagdameo, for your greetings, our new ambassador but I am not surprised, Tonet is very, very active, Mrs. Linda Lagdameo is also here.

And with us today are some of the officials of our government who are part of our delegation. Of course, Secretary Bert Romulo, our Secretary of Foreign Affairs is here; Deputy Speaker Girlie Villarosa is here; and Secretary Pamintuan’s team, you probably met them earlier; Secretary Cerge Remonde, our Press Secretary is here; Congressman Martin Romualdez of Leyte; Congressman Dong Gonzales of Pampanga; my son Congressman Dato Arroyo; over there is Congressman Danny Suarez of Quezon; Congresswoman Ana Bondoc of Pampanga also; and Chairman Rey Chua of the Commission on Information and Communication Technology. I would also like to greet our staff from the Philippine Embassy who are very diligent in preparing the events during my visit here.

And I understand, we have our Honorary Consuls from the different parts of the United Kingdom and of course our leaders of the Filipino Community who are always helping, thank you very much for attending this morning.

My fellow Kapampangans, good day to you all, thank you very much for your presence. To those from the Visayas and Mindanao, thank you very much for coming. Fellow Ilocanos, good day to you all. (applause) And many of you came not only from here in London but from distant places like Manchester, Birmingham, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and even the Isle of Man for joining us here today, thank you very much.

This trip, as Ambassador Tonet said, I have been to England four times already. And this is part of our overall strategy to engage the global community, to benefit our economy, to promote the welfare of our overseas Filipinos and to enhance our national security.

Regarding national security, we are grateful to the United Kingdom for helping and supporting our peace efforts in Mindanao. This includes them expressing and sharing their own experience with securing peace in Northern Ireland. And regarding common crimes and international crimes such as terrorism, during this trip, yesterday we concluded an extradition treaty and a mutual legal assistance treaty between our two countries.

Regarding the economy, our trips have helped achieve important trade and investment opportunities that have in turn helped us to achieve, perhaps this came out in the presentation earlier, 34 uninterrupted quarters or more than eight years of uninterrupted growth, a first in the Philippines and even in the whole world, only a few have achieved this. And it is this achievement that enables us to withstand the recession that is now raging around us. The recession that I think those of you living here in the United Kingdom are very familiar with and are experiencing.

Although the United Kingdom is among the economies struggling here in Europe, it is still among the leading foreign investors in the Philippines. So that investment should not be lost to us even though they are economizing and carefully choosing where to invest. The United Kingdom is always at the top of our portfolio investors. And portfolio investors are easily scared, when there is an economic crisis, so it is important at this time, when they have to be more choosy about their investments due to their fewer resources and the global crisis, we have to affirm to them that the Philippines resilient economy, improved credit ratings, and continued fiscal reforms have produced a country with an economy that should be in every emerging market investor’s portfolio.

And this is what we did yesterday, we spoke with Bloomberg, we spoke with the influential economic publication The Economist. And I am pleased that yesterday at the Economist conference, they named the Philippines as one of the top emerging market destinations for investors.

So as Ed said before, we were called a basket case, now, one of the top investment destinations among emerging markets. And we also went here to ensure the investments in the Philippines from British companies that they still have a great capacity to invest in power, in energy, in water, financial services and other services.

Yesterday, and even later, my meeting, our meeting with various companies and business personalities here in London continues. For example yesterday, we had a meeting with the Bronzeoak group, they built the first bioethanol plant in the Philippines. In 2005, I went to San Carlos City, in Negros Occidental to break ground on their first bioethanol plant, and earlier a few weeks ago, I was also supposed to go there for the inauguration because it takes years to construct and policy regulations have to be refined because these policies are new, I wasn't able to go because of bad weather. But thankfully they paid a courtesy call here and we discussed the various needs to further increase their investments in the Philippines. And they plan to build a larger investment – a bioethanol plant in Capas, Tarlac.

And Lord Peter Mandelson also brought the desire of some British businessmen to invest in our renewable energy sector and what policies would help make their investment easier in our country.

Last night, we had dinner with HSBC, which is very helpful in conveying to businessmen the positive growth aspect of the Philippines. HSBC has a large bank in the Philippines, they have been in the Philippines for more than 100 years but a large addition to their investment is that they brought their business process outsourcing there. Their accounting, their financial services they brought to the Philippines so now HSBC has 7,000 employees in the Philippines. And not only that, because of our good relationship they will add to their business process outsourcing in the Philippines. Because those coming from other countries will be transferred to the Philippines.

In fact, we have become the favorite business outsourcing and call center destination of the British firms since I led a BPO investment mission here about four years ago, and during that time, when we introduced the British to our BPO and call center attractions, they made the Philippines the outsourcing destination of the year for British firms and this continues. That is a result of one of our four trips here to England.

We are doing all of this because we are working to create high paying jobs at home so that overseas work will just be a career choice and not the only option for a talented Filipino in search of a better life.

Meanwhile, it is gratifying that our countrymen here in the UK continue to reap praise for your professionalism, organization, and your pleasant demeanor. And that is one of our competitive advantages, right? Whatever your work may be — doctors, nurses, senior carers, radiographers and other health workers; our bedside manner is very important. Our world-class performing artists, we see them in the theater. Our chefs, hotel workers; our domestic staff here; our IT experts, engineers; social workers, teachers; bankers, financial analysts. Yesterday, I met a high-ranking employee working in the accounting services of Harods for example; artists, designers, aerospace workers — however you choose to serve, wherever you work and earn a living, the United Kingdom admires your dedication — your dedication, your intelligence, and ability. And just now Ambassador Tonet mentioned that one of our very own, Ms. Naty dela Cruz of London and Cagayan de Oro was just recognized as the “Amazing Carer” of the year for UK.

So if the Philippines until now I think will hopefully will be named again outsourcing destination of the year, Naty on the other hand is ‘Carer of the Year,’ so we are both ‘of the Year.’ Thank you Naty for the example you have shown and you have further increased the respect given to Filipino workers here in the UK. A thousand competed with Naty in her competition but she won.

And we hear that the professionalism and dedication of the Filipinos in the UK now cuts across not only different professions, but different generations. We learned that there are already second and third generation Filipino-British nationals, they are apparently called “Britnoys”, but we are happy to hear that these second and third generation British-Filipinos are rediscovering their Filipino roots and have in the process become active in promoting our country.

We are told that among the next generation of Filipinos, some have even formed an association called “Philippine Generations.”

So to all of you, Filipinos in different professions, in different places of the United Kingdom, in different generations, thank you all because you are the ambassador of our country and our people.

And above all, long live your concern — for your work, for your family and for your country. And I bring the gratitude of the entire Filipino nation as well as my own.

Thank you very much! Long live our Filipinos here in the United Kingdom. Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during a meeting with the Filipino Community in the United Kingdom. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134422/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26266&Itemid=38