Thank you very much, Brother Rolly Dizon, former president of La Salle University and now chairman of the Commission on Higher Education.

Earlier, when I was arriving, the emcee, I also want to greet him, the chairman of the National Youth Commission, Bambam Aquino; and we are here now at the Araneta Coliseum through the kindness of Mar Araneta Roxas. Thank you very much, Mr. Palengke and future senator; I also want to greet the project manager of what we are doing now, my new assistant for student affairs, Dennis Cunanan; also here is the one managing the police throughout Metro Manila, General Dick De Leon; I want to greet the former… One of the beloved at the school where I came from, at Assumption, Sister Luz Soriano; and a very handsome congressman, Migs Zubiri; students, teachers, members of the National Youth Commission.

I will not beat around the bush, my speech will be short because we are all bored with long discourses. We want, we are looking for words. Not words, we are looking for words that are short but work that is long and good.

So, let's proceed directly to the launch of this program, “Safe 4 SR – Safe for Sure.” what we are launching now is a program to help those who are forced to stop studying, when they are about to finish because of lack of money.

In my going around the country with people, I have found that many students and their families spend time and money for three or four years of college, only to run out of resources on the final lap. Many times I have encountered those who cannot get a clearance for graduation or take a final exam because their debt from first year has not yet been paid or the last leg ran out of money, because for the ordinary Filipino, basic needs of the family like food must be met first. That's why many have difficulty funding their college education, especially if the family's funds are dwindling.

I understand this problem because this is the story of my father, former president Diosdado Macapagal, who started his law school, then couldn't continue because he got sick, couldn't work anymore, couldn't be a working student. The doctor told him, because he had tuberculosis: “either you stop working or you stop studying.” but if he had to stop working, he had to stop studying, because he had no more money. Thank goodness there was Don Honorio Ventura who continued his final needs. And because he was able to continue with the help of a kind person, he became a bar topnotcher, achieved his success through his perseverance to finish his studies despite their poverty. Well, you, the students who have started but cannot finish because they ran out of funds like what happened to my father, well, not all of you will find a Don Honorio Ventura individual so I decided to take action to solve the problem of the Diosdado Macapagals in the current generation.

I learned that we have four hundred thousand scholarship programs in our country but this is not enough. I found out that the scholarship and student loan programs of CHED do not reach all those we want to help. This reaches 20 percent of students in private schools but the students in private schools are also few compared to the students in our country. And not only that, that scholarship, even if it reaches four hundred thousand students, their provision is not enough to cover the whole cost of college education. Now, the 2004 budget will give the biggest funding support to education and scholarship in our history.

This is what we are launching now, an interest-free student loan program that we are offering now, those who are lacking in 3rd year, 4th year and graduating college students will no longer worry about where to get funds for your studies. You can borrow up to 8,000 pesos per semester. To be paid, two years after graduation. If you borrow less than 4,000, it will be paid within five years. If you borrow more, beyond 4,000, you will pay it within ten years.

That's really ‘study now, pay later.’ get your degree, get a job, and then repay your loan.

This is our fight for education for the average Filipino. I hope some of you who are lacking funds to continue will be able to finish because of this. And I hope that some of these students will become the next presidents of the Republic of the Philippines in your generation.

Congratulations, thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during a meeting with the Student Summit and Launching Ceremony of the Student Assistance Fund for Education for A Strong Republic (Safe 4 SR or Safe for Sure). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412091104/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5496&Itemid=38