Thank you very much Secretary Dinky Soliman for your very good introduction of me.

Our esteemed new head of the NCRFW, Ms. Myrna Yao, whom I chose as chairperson of the NCRFW because what I want to emphasize in the NCRFW during our administration is the entrepreneurship of women, and Myrna is a model woman entrepreneur. Madame Imelda Marcos and the other… And Madame Letty Shahani and the other former chairpersons of NCRFW, including the secretary of NAPC, Secretary Imelda Nicolas. I also want to greet those who help in NAPC and also in NCRFW in managing the funds of our foreign friends in the NCRFW for the programs of our women, Secretary Romy Neri. And well, I also want to greet the other chairmen of NCRFW, Oyi de Dios and Tati Licuanan. I also want to greet the head of our peace movement, Secretary Ging Deles.

That one who will train our police and enforcers on how to do their job are also women, the president of the Public Safety College, Tingting Cojuangco. Our former Secretary of Foreign Affairs who is now helping us in various parts of our investment promotion, Ambassador Delia Albert. And she also joined because her agencies are helping me monitor all our job generation activities including the work of managing microfinance and women entrepreneurs, Secretary Cito Lorenzo.

Excellencies of the diplomatic corps and the heads of international agencies. I’d like to mention Deborah Landey because of the support of the U.N. for what we had just launched today, the publications; members of congress and the local governments especially those who received their awards today as models of gender sensitive local governance in how well they used their gender and development budget; officers, Employees of the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women, congratulations on your work.

My fellow workers in government; the guests of honor I invited; our women in microfinance; also here is the head of our pidcor along with our friends representing our OFWs in Hongkong, good afternoon and welcome; ladies and gentlemen:

First of all, congratulations on the Pearl Anniversary of the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women. It has a very long name. So for me, as long as it’s Commission on Women, that’s our shortcut there. And happy anniversary to all women because we are celebrating the one hundred year celebration of the women’s movement in our country today. Let us first remember the courage and heroism of our grandmothers, mothers, aunts who fought for our freedom and dignity. From Tandang Sora until now the millions of Filipinas working abroad — thank you to our OFWs in Hongkong — to those who build our homes and take care of our children. Their heroism shines in great deeds in the global and national arenas. These women are truly something we can be proud of.

By the way, we have another famous woman we should be proud of. The United Nations has just elected as the first Filipina to chair the U.N. Committee on Discrimination Against Women, former Ambassador Nena Manalo. From us here in Malacanang, to you out there Nena, congratulations from all the women of the Philippines.

This year, as Myrna Yao mentioned, it is also the international year of microfinance. It’s just right so I also requested that we celebrate today the leadership of our women in the revolution of microfinance. And I just want to be proud that in the past three years of my first administration, more than a million women have benefited from microfinance programs whether from the government or NGOs, and the NGOs are really the main guide in the microfinance movement. As Cito Lorenzo said, who is the chairman of Quedancor, in Quedancor alone last year more than a million women have already benefited from microfinance. So today many of our beneficiaries, we can’t fit a million women here, so a thousand of them we invited as guests of honor.

So how are you, women in microfinance. Then when I swore in as president again last June, I gave ten legacies that I want to leave in the Philippines when I step down from office in 2010. And number one here, first of all, is the creation of six to ten million jobs within six years, especially by supporting three million people who are establishing their own businesses. Supporting three million entrepreneurs. So I ordered that from 2004 to 2010 the fund for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, which we call MSME, should be tripled.

The SSS has promised 1.2 billion pesos for the Sulong program. The GSIS has put in one billion pesos which will pass through the Land Bank of the Philippines where Cito is the chairman. There is also the National Livelihood Support Fund or NLSF and the People’s Credit and Finance Corporation or PCFC which was established when the NAPC was established. These NLSF and PCFC, their main job is microfinance. The microfinance system does not mean that the SSS, GSIS or PCFC are lending directly to small businesses. They pass their funds through what we call microfinance conduits such as CARD, AHON — what is that called, AHON nayon ba yung tawag ng Negros women for tomorrow? — there are about a dozen of them, microfinance opportunity bank, Quedancor, DSWD-SEA-K, that is also a conduit for microfinance and others. And those who work here, they themselves go to the communities, our women small business owners or microfinance or microsupport. They don’t go to Makati to look for DBP, no. Those who lend go directly to the community lending to groups of women. This system is almost home service or door-to-door, so to speak.

So that’s what we want to implement, that’s what we want to declare today. That’s what we want to promote in our next five-and-a-half years of our administration.

So today, to our NCFRW headed by a model entrepreneur, to our beneficiaries of microfinance, our friends from all over the world who are supporting our women’s movement and our microfinance movement, to all of you, long live the women in microfinance! Long live the women entrepreneurs! Long live the women professionals! Long live the women workers abroad or in our country! Long live you all!

Happy anniversary!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Pearl Anniversary of the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women (NCRFW). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412082443/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3063&Itemid=38