Thank you very much to our new Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources, Secretary Lito Atienza.

Congressman Manny Bamba, the congressman of the 3rd District of Cagayan where Peñablanca is located; Doctor George Ty, Chairman of Toyota Motor Corporation; Okabe San, Managing Director; Mr. Prickett and Mr. Hess of Conservation International; Mayor Julia of Peñablanca; other local government officials of Peñablanca; other officers of Toyota; ladies and gentlemen.

Today, we move forward with all the stakeholders of the Peñablanca protected landscape and seascape — with the full support of the people. This is another milestone towards Green Philippines.

Toyota Motor, the biggest automaker in the world, as Mr. Okabe said, is funding this six-year project with a grant of 350 million yen. Thank you, Toyota.

Conservation International — a very well-known and prestigious team dedicated to conserving the earth’s living heritage in global diversity — will lead the implementation of the project. I understand that Conservation International has long been a partner of the Filipino people in protecting vast conservation corridors in the Ssierra Madre mountain range, in Palawan and Eastern Mindanao. Thank you, Conservation International.

The Department of Environment shall identify the 2,500 hectares of forest land for the two phases of this project. And it shall facilitate project implementation to make sure there are no hindrances to full success. Good luck and congratulations, DENR!

A key partner, the local government of Peñablanca, which is located at the northern tip of Sierra Madre — that’s where Sierra Madre ends to the north — will lead the people, particularly the forest dwellers, to win the future with us. Kablawan dakayo amin tiga-Peñablanca ken congressman.

It’s a great time to have this meeting, this launching because last Tuesday, we also launched the updating our Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan. And there is no better audience than this distinguished group with which to restate our environment agenda for the year 2007 and beyond — the main skeletal structure of what will be the chapter on the environment.

We are a young nation: our people are young; those under 30 years old make up 65 percent of the population. We are a young nation because our democracy, our functioning democracy is just 60 years old even though we declared a republic more than a hundred years ago. The growing pains are still with us. We are a young nation because our spirit is young. We love life: we sing, we dance, we love sports, we love innovation and technology. So we are a young nation because we are modernizing. We are young because we are true citizens of the world, part of the rapid pace of change that is taking place around the globe. We are young because we are on the cutting edge of the global workforce. Toyota knows this, and so we thank Toyota for your new expansion. Thank you.

We have a vision for a young nation, and that is what we will have in the vision paragraph of our updated medium-term plan. Our vision is that we will take our place alongside other modernized nations in 20 years. To that end, no nation can aspire to be modern without thinking of our environment. We want to press ahead with our massive Green Philippines environmental plan that is comprehensive in scope and thorough in execution. A plan that includes first, reforestation; and second, scrubs the land and air of pollutants that endanger the health of our citizens; third, energy independence; and fourth preservation of our reefs and waterways and wildlife.

On reforestation: we must take back our forests and replenish fallen trees with new, protected forests to protect our land and our people. We must reforest that land and bring back the beauty of the Philippines we all love and want. And we thank Toyota and conservation international for this task of replenishing the forest of the Sierra Madre in the northern tip in Peñablanca.

On anti-pollution: we want to tap the enthusiasm of young and old alike to clean up our environment. We need to beautify our villages and cities of trash; build more urban parks and recreation areas; purify our water; and clean up industrial sites that are an eyesore and are unhealthy.

On energy independence: as part of our Green Philippines, we want an energy- efficient nation, free from reliance on costly and exhaust-spewing cars and smokestacks. We thank Toyota for producing clean cars and providing Malacañang several years ago with the sample of that car. Part of a bright new future for our nation is to control our over reliance on energy, to become free from overdependence on foreign oil and become more self sufficient through the use of sustainable, alternative forms of energy. We can harness our sun, wind and geothermal resource, and produce our own clean fuels through biofuels and not overly rely on foreign suppliers.

And finally, conservation: preservation of our reefs and waterways, and designation of nature parks and wildlife refuges. We want to turn our coral reefs and beaches, the wonder of the world, and other wildlife refuges into national parks and international sanctuaries for eco-tourism and scientific research.

In 2002, I signed Proclamation 484 expanding the Peñablanca protected landscape in the Sierra Madres from 4,130 hectares to the Peñablanca protected landscape and seascape covering a 118,782 hectares of terrestrial, freshwater and marine ecosystems.

We are determined to conserve the Sierra Madre mountain range. It constitutes the largest remaining block of natural rainforest in the Philippines. We will protect the refuge of some 50 percent of threatened animals in our country, including the Philippine eagle, the Philippine crocodile, and other known species.

We have the chance to develop our nation right from the start: clean, healthy, productive and beautiful.

Investing in vital infrastructure — which is what I have largely discussed and presented in my State of the Nation Addresses for the last two years now — includes not just building up new steel structure that will endure, but to tear down those old and unreliable buildings and bridges that are no longer safe and operational. And we must also build up our environment as a reflection of our commitment to our quality of life. People need to breathe clean air and swim in clean water while we also build manufacturing and bridges to span our waters.

This will enhance our national security, lift up our economy and preserve our environment.

All the leaders and the ordinary folk who join us today have their face to the sun and feel the rays of a new day.

I want to congratulate the 3rd District of Cagayan and the municipality of Peñablanca, and thank Toyota and Conservation International for being an important part of the new Philippines.

We hope that other global citizens will invest in our environment, following the lead of Toyota Motors Corporation and Conservation International.

As the people of Peñablanca would say, ” Dios ti agngina kadakayo amin apo.”

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Signing of the Memorandum of Understanding among the Conservation International Foundation, Toyota Motor Corporation, Department of Environment and Natural Resources and the Municipal Government of Peñablanca, Cagayan. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412143126/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2176&Itemid=38