Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, upon the arrival of the first group of 232 Overseas Filipino Workers from war-torn Lebanon

Returning compatriots, let us begin with gratitude.

First of all, on behalf of the entire Philippines, we must value the great sacrifice made daily by Filipinos working abroad, thank you very much. Eight million of you are offering your knowledge and skills all over the world. And in doing so, many of the eight million… The eight million lift up our nation, even as they are often separated from their loved ones here at home for long periods of time.

Today, especially, our thoughts are focused on our countrymen in Lebanon who are now in the grip of the terrible escalation of war. And I welcome, we welcome, the entire nation welcomes the first two hundred OFWs who evacuated from there. And with those I spoke to earlier, I am pleased to say that they are grateful to be home with our help. And I assure you all, I assure the nation, that we are doing everything in our power to secure the safety of those who need to remain in Lebanon and those who wish to leave are being transported out in an orderly way.

The first two hundred arrived today, with God's help, we are striving to have another group arrive tomorrow and this is courtesy of the government of Bahrain who will provide… assistance with transportation. And we expect a third group to arrive the day after tomorrow. And we are working with international partners on how to restore peace in that troubled land.

You are truly new heroes, my fellow countrymen who strive abroad. In your service to family, to the nation, and to God, long live! And thank you very much.

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Tunay na mga bagong bayani kayo mga kababayan na nagsisikap sa ibayong dagat. Sa inyong paglilingkod sa pamilya, sa bayan at sa Diyos, mabuhay! At maraming salamat.

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the arrival of the first batch of 232 OFWs from war-wracked Lebanon. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212342/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2819&Itemid=38