Thank you Secretary Gonzales for your introduction.

Other Cabinet members and national officials who are here with us today; ang atong host diri sa Bacolod City, Congressman Monico Puentevella and Mayor Bing Leonardia; and then although jurisdictionally Bacolod is not part of Negros but geographically it is, so we also consider as our host, Governor Zayco. Congratulations! (applause)

I’m also happy to see Governor Niel Tupas here, thank you very much for joining us; (applause) and I’m happy to see Mayor Jerry Treñas here aside from the other city mayors and municipal mayors all over the country; (applause) Congressman Jeffrey Ferrer, I have him listed here. He’s coming. Okay, alright. Soon, okay.

So, sa inyo nga tanan, maayong aga and thank you for your resolutions. Many of your resolutions are very welcome — well, all are welcome — but many are especially welcome because they give us a good reminder of our Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan 2004-2010 where we have a whole chapter on the peace process. And in this Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan on the Peace Process, the peace process consists on the one hand, peacemaking and peacekeeping, and on the other hand, peace-building and conflict prevention.

Peacemaking and Peacekeeping include:

1. Continuation of peace talks and the conclusion, hopefully, of a peace agreement with the CPP-NPA-NDF which is why Nieves Confessor has just come from Netherlands with an informal no agenda discussion with the leaders of the NPA-NDF-CPP;

2. Complementary measures to reduce the level of violence arising from armed conflicts. And there are many examples of these but I think the most relevant is the LGU or civil society-led localized “peace talks” that is something that we encourage;

3. Full implementation of existing final peace agreements. And that is also very relevant to Western Visayas because there is an existing peace agreement with the RPA-RPM;

4. And this is very strong in your recommendation, the Implementation of an Enhanced Reintegration, Rehabilitation and Amnesty program. The enhance reintegration and rehabilitation is provided for now by Executive Order under what we call the Social Integration Program. And the Amnesty Proclamation has been done; we are awaiting the concurrence of Congress. But I think Congress has already concurred, right Monico? We’re awaiting the concurrence of the Senate for this amnesty to take full place although even now we’re already beginning to implement it at the Executive level.

The other aspect of the peace process – Peace-building and Conflict Prevention include:

1. Rehabilitation and development of conflict areas, and I have more to say about that here later, and

2. The conduct of healing and reconciliation programs in conflict-affected areas.

Because as we improve the security in parts of the country that have known some degree of violence, we should be able to move quickly to develop the economy of those areas. Because when we do that we ensure a lasting peace and order that will ensure that security will no longer be an issue.

And indeed, considering how important development is to former NPA- controlled areas, I want to thank again Mayor Montilla for her hospitality yesterday, because yesterday some friends and I went diving in Sipalay. And I couldn’t help thinking Sipalay for one, more recently, it was named by the Women in Travel as the best-kept secret in tourism destinations. And I remember saying that in one of my speaking engagement here in Bacolod, but it’s a secret no more. So many beautiful private vacation houses and commercial resorts are now located there. It’s amazing especially when we remember that Sipalay is the S in the once dreaded CHICKS area, the area of the NPA stronghold. Now it is a popular tourism destination. It validates the thesis that when insurgency is defeated, it has been defeated in the CHICKS area that promotes growth.

One of your recommendations indeed recognizes that Western Visayas as a growth sector tourism. And you have asked for assistance for a Masterplan for tourism development, it dovetails with Mayor Montilla’s number one recommendation which she gave me yesterday. She also would like to have a Master Development Plan for Sipalay Tourism. I think that is one very important resolution that we must follow through because Western Visayas is truly such a beautiful region.

And it highlights that the way to peace isn’t through the barrel of a gun. Rather it begins with providing a person a job, food on the table and human dignity. And central to that success is to invest in the people — in education, healthcare, roads, bridges and schools — that is part of the resolutions made here and we are making those investments.

Now to go to that portion of the peace process about implementing peace agreements that are already there, and I said that is very unique here in Western Visayas because of the peace agreement with RPA. We want our peace agreement with the RPA to bring a new era of economic development to areas like — and I ask my new P.A., Mayor Banias, to take this all down — Barangays Caliling, Lumbia, Tomina, Sura, Talacdan and Tambad in Cauayan; Payauan and Agboy in Candoni; Bago, Bagong Silang and Pinowayan in Don Salvador Benedicto; Alegria, Amayco, Pandanon, Silos and Santa Cruz in Murcia; Guimbala-on in Silay; Ara-al and Yubo in Carlota; Amontay in Binalbagan; Baviera, Bulanon, Himoga-an Baybay, Himoga-an and Puey in Sagay; Laga-an and Villasin in Cadiz City; Magsaysay and Paitan in Escalante; Winaswasan in Calatrava; Cayhaga in Sipalay; Asia, Bulwangan, Daug and San Rafael in Hinoba-an; Magballo in Kabankalan; and Pinggot in Ilog, all in Negros.

In Aklan, Aparicio, Malindog and Monlaque in Ibajay, where I will visit this coming, I think… June 2, I’m going to Ibajay, and I hope to have a report on what we are doing in those barangays. In Iloilo, Governor Tupas’ province, Isian Victoria, Cabutongan and Salngan in Leon; and Camia, Jawod and Santa Ana in San Joaquin. What are these areas? These are the RPA areas that are now the subject of our concluded peace talks and should be the subject of the implementation of bringing development in a post-conflict areas.

Coupled with this is our new paradigm for peace even in areas where we still have no peace talks or no peace agreement. At a time when hard power has not proven its value in the world, our model for dealing with flashpoints has focused on a unique combination of soft and hard power to promote peace. We have been able to meld together confidence-building measures, investments in economic and basic infrastructure development financed by the Kalayaan fund, and mutual security arrangements to keep the peace.

We are very happy on the other side of Negros of a post-conflict Rebel Returnee program in Seaton and when General Yano was still the PA Chief. We remember we discussed that about how to bring that same Seaton model here in Negros Occidental. Because when we were in Dumaguete a few weeks ago, we met with some recent rebel returnees and even with oldtime rebel returnees. Well, the one in Seaton is going quite well because they have a livelihood program with a ready market because the program was market-driven. It started with a demand and then the DTI brought the demand to the community of rebel returnees. We want to do the same thing here in Region VI. So my friend Nick Abad — I don’t know if he is here – we’ll be counting on him for that.

We have achieved a great deal. Well, not only in CHICKS, but Western Visayas is vastly improved in terms of security and economic growth. And I believe that one of the reasons for that is the current agreement with the RPM-RPA is making things better. And because our soldiers have been able to very well combine soft and hard power to defeat insurgency in many areas.

We are making headway in reducing poverty and building a bigger middle- class. Self-rated poverty is down, employment is up. Our education and healthcare services to the poor are vastly improved. That said, we have a long way to go.

And the results of our efforts comes none too soon because there are global clouds on the horizon that are driving up the price of oil and food, particularly rice. Thankfully, we are now in a vastly improved position to weather this storm than at any time in recent history.

As the recent global oil and food price surge has underscored, the Philippines is a price-sensitive nation. The poor who are doing well can be setback very quickly when these types of price problems arise. So we are very concerned about that.

On the issue of rice management, this is a global problem that we have seen coming. We have worked to head it off for some time now. Our response is based on three fundamental needs: One, to ensure supply. We reached out to Vietnam and Thailand long before the shortage hit. I was wanting to stay here in Negros longer but I have to go back today to Manila because the Prime Minister of Thailand is making an official visit and it’s a good opportunity to thank him for selling us rice very, very early in the day. So that now, at least we have enough rice in our bodegas.

We have also invested heavily in production efficiencies and new strains. And here again, I saw in your recommendations that we have to strengthen also agriculture in Western Visayas, especially Iloilo is a rice granary not only for Western Visayas but also for the rest of the country. We used to be a rice granary for Luzon but now with the Roll-on/Roll-off ferry you’re a rice granary for everywhere else. So, it is also very important to continue to strengthen agricultural productivity in rice granaries like Iloilo and also in Antique.

Second fundamental need, make sure the distribution of rice gets to the people who need it most efficiently and cost-effectively. To this end, we have moved to utilize distribution through churches and faith-based organizations, in addition to our own government distribution network.

Lastly, we must be vigilant that unscrupulous traders do not price gouge and exploit the situation. Anyone caught robbing the people of rice shall be punished. We have done this in Bicol. We are doing this in Northern Mindanao. I hope nobody is committing the crime in Western Visayas so that we don’t have to do anything in Western Visayas.

Aside from rice management, in Western Visayas you have in addition a special problem. And that is the issue of fuel management, especially in Panay and to a lesser extent in Negros Occidental because it is affected by the situation in Panay. Panay has no indigenous source of power. Including what it imports from the rest of the Visayas, including Negros Island which should be going, I mean from Oriental it should be going all to Occidental, but it has to go to Panay as well. Panay has just enough electricity for its basic needs. No buffer supply. So that if there is any shutdown whether accidental or for maintenance, there will be a power shortage. And since Panay has to import from Negros Island, Negros Occidental is also affected. And therefore because Negros Occidental is already affected by the lack of an indigenous power source in Panay, there is no additional power for additional economic or population growth.

So, I see here about energy and I see here about… but at the same time protect the environment. Of course at the same time protect the environment, but let us be reasonable about believing whether the technology can protect the environment or not. Let us be reasonable about looking at the track record of the proponent in other countries whether they have protected the environment or not. Because if the opposition to new power plants prevails, and if investors are driven away from the Panay power sector, as they are being driven away, the people of Panay will indeed face a dark future. But let that not be said that we told you so this early.

And now, Panay has another problem, we suppress our sadness because many families in Iloilo, Governor, were affected by the recent ‘Cosme.’ The government will send continuous aid.

Just like before, soldiers will be busy with deployments and various disaster response activities. Soldiers will continue their work in civic action and development activities. They will help with rescue and rehabilitation during natural disasters, and also for longer-term basic infrastructure development especially in former conflict areas.

However, police and soldiers remain alert to the activities of large rebel groups who continue extortion and the recruitment of members.

The Communist rebels have spent years as a low-level threat. It is time for their disruption and violation of human rights to be put to rest so that the nation can move ahead. Look at Sipalay, how long it was a well-kept secret because the Communist rebels were impeding the progress and development of CHICKS, and that is true of a number of rural areas. And not only that, I’m glad when you talked about human rights here by state and non-state agents — I think the Armed Forces and the Police are doing their part to put their house in order — but let us not forget that the Communist rebels are responsible for a wide range of human rights abuses.

Thank you for putting in your preamble that we want to become a first world country at least in 20 years. If we are to become a first world country, we have to put a stop to their ideological nonsense and their criminal acts once and for all.

Some would ask why do we want to be a first world country in 20 years, because in a first world country poverty is marginalized; in a first world country the marginalized are raised by a robust middle-class. In a modern country, institutions are strong and all your issues of governance become very minimal. But now we are not yet first world we have to work doubly hard on good governance.

By 2010, we hope that the Philippines should be well on its way to achieving that vision. But for that to happen, by 2010 insurgency must be defeated.

We demonstrate peace because we desire peace and progress.

And so, I thank you for your very wise resolutions and action agenda. Secretary Bert Gonzales and his group will put this together with the results of the other Regional Peace and Security Assembly so that they can come up with a master work program that will be implemented and that the National Security Council will make sure will be implemented.

So my dear friends, mga kasimanwa, salamat gid sa very very active workshop that you had yesterday and I do hope that our success in peace and security will be something we can be proud of in the years to come.

Thank you very much to all of you. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s Speech during the Region VI Local Peace and Security Assembly. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412121659/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1397&Itemid=38