Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Inauguration of the Hinduja Technology, Media and Telecommunications (HTMT) Ltd. Customer Contact Facility

[Delivered at the CyberPark, E. Rodriguez Ave., C-5 Libis, QC, May 20, 2006]

Thank you very much, Secretary Syjuco.

Mayor Belmonte and Mr. Hinduja, our bigtime entrepreneur, global entrepreneur who is putting up this call center here in the Philippines; Mr. Sarkar; our Cabinet members who are here today: chairman of MMDA, Bayani Fernando and our new chairman of the ICT commission, who nobody seems to know because he’s brand new, but I decided to introduce him to you, Mon Sales; management and staff of HTMT Philippines; guests; ladies and gentlemen.

We’ve already heard what Mr. Hinduja said, that this facility expects to generate 2,500 seats, out of their 7,500 everywhere. And we thank you for making the Philippines right now one-third of your BPO force and soon to be a bipolar member of your two important seats of operation. This is a prime example of Philippine excellence in good paying jobs.

And I’m happy to hear the growth of this company of 70 percent over the last two years in the Philippines. The company came about two years ago and maybe it’s good to just recount that five years ago there were less than 2,000 BPO agent on our country. Now, as he has said earlier, there are a hundred thousand or more BPO agents in the country. That means that we’ve grown 50 times in the last five years.

The industry is very large. India has a million workers in this industry and the way we’re growing, we also expect to reach a million by 2010, as long as we have the readily available manpower. That’s why we’ve made English the medium of instruction once again. That’s also why we have released 500 million pesos for what we call the call center finishing schools to increase the hiring rate of call centers and BPOs.

And I would like to congratulate our seven young people who received their finishing school certificates. And I hope that with your additional training you will be one of the next 100,000 new call center and BPO agents in our country.

This morning, I was speaking with the President of the Development Bank of the Philippines and I repeated my instruction to him to earmark one billion pesos to lend out for company shuttle buses that use clean air fuel. This is part of the 40-billion peso non-wage benefits for workers that I unveiled last Labor Day, the same day that we unveiled this 500-billion peso program for call center finishing schools. I mentioned this lending facility for shuttle buses for companies because many of the call centers have been telling me that because they work on the night economy their staff would like to have some special transport facilities.

I was thinking first that I should ask the MRT to operate 24 hours a day but that would be very difficult for the MRT. So we’ve tried that before and there weren’t that many customers during that dead hours to make the operations worthwhile during those hours. So the next best thing is to make available this facility to lend to buses that use either CNG or coco bio-diesel or LPG or any of our more economical and clean air fuels. And I hope that the call center companies will avail of this loan package especially for the convenience of those on the night shift in this 24/7 business.

I’m indeed happy that we are inaugurating this call center here in Sonny Belmonte’s jurisdiction. And this is an inauguration happening again as an encouraging backdrop of Bangko Sentral polls showing that companies expect better times ahead.

Our tough fiscal reforms and revenue generating measures are reaping a tide of confidence and investments and the social payback is staring to flow down to the people. The Philippines faces the largest budget surplus in the last nine years on the back of a hefty additional 16 billion pesos of revenue in the first quarter because of the value-added tax. Analysts affirm that we are on track in the economy, aside from the positive outlook of business surveys. Pump priming is stepping up better infrastructures, broader education and basic social services.

We’re on C-5, but Bayani we’re working on C-6 already, aren’t we? So that’s part of our infrastructure expansion to make the heartland or the urban beltway of the Philippines from Clark-Subic through Metro Manila to Calabarzon very convenient in terms of infrastructure. Our blueprint for economic take off is on the move on the back of growing global confidence in the Philippines.

And speaking of global confidence, to HTMT Global, my sincere appreciation for your confidence, for your continued faith and confidence in our administration and in our people. For those who may not know, HTMT or Hinduja Technology, Media and Telecommunications is a transnational conglomerate founded even before the birth of our young tycoon here and it spans 50 countries in five continents in many different fields of endeavor.

And so to you, Remi and to the rest of your team, what we can say is we will continue doing our best to meet your expectations in the Philippines.

Salamat. Thank you and have a good day.

Congratulations!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Inauguration of the Hinduja Technology, Media and Telecommunications (HTMT) Ltd. Customer Contact Facility. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213251/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2766&Itemid=38