Maraming salamat.

Maraming salamat, Ambassador Albert del Rosario.

Consul General and Mrs. Paynor, who is not only… Ah, Consul General Paynor is not only Consul General of the Los Angeles and San Diego area, he also doubles up as my Presidential Assistant for foreign travels; Glenn Barroga, thank you very much for organizing this evening together with Ditas Dimani, thank you very much; and to all of the other members of the committee that also joined to organize this evening, thank you so much for taking such a good initiative.

I would also like to greet Bishop Salvatorre Corleone. Thank you for your prayers; and may I also greet the distinguished members of the U.S. Congress who we should all be very proud of: Congressman Bob Filmer; Congressman Randy Cunningham; Congressman Gary Isah and Congresswoman Susan Davis. I’d like to let you know in case you don’t know that these are the congressmen and congresswoman who initiated what is now called the Philippine caucus in the U.S. House of Representatives.

Thank you very much, Mayor Dick Murphy for the key to the city. I’d like to greet Mrs. Murphy, too and Mayor Shirley Horton. Thank you for coming here. Also supervisor Greg Cup, board of supervisors of the country of San Diego. And to all of you, thank you very much for your tireless help to those in need in our country.

And to my fellow Capampangans, my compatriots. I deeply thank you for your support tonight.

To my relatives from the province near my mother’s, the Ilocanos from Pangasinan, including Mayor Murphy’s two angels in his office. I thank you for coming tonight and it is holy, especially to all of you.

To my colleagues from Mindanao where I grew up, thank you very much for coming. Is there anyone from Mindanao here? Ah, you. Thank you very much for coming tonight.

And to the fellow provincemates of my husband who are Ilonggos, thank you very much for coming to our program tonight.

To my Bicolano brothers and sisters, thank you and good evening.

I’d like to introduce my small delegation to you tonight: Press Secretary Ignacio Bunye, who used to be City mayor, too and Congressman of the city of Muntinlupa; and the head of my Presidential Management Staff is Silvestre “Yongyong” Afable; you have met, of course, Ambassador del Rosario, who always visits our Congressmen from the San Diego area and the surroundings, and so they have worked together on this Philippine caucus. And I have told you earlier that Consul General Jun Paynor is not just your Consul General, he is my presidential assistant for foreign travels. So he was with me even in APEC. At kasama ko ngayong gabi ang aking kabiyak, si Atty. Jose Miguel Arroyo.

Mike and I bring you the best greetings and best wishes of our family. Not only of our family but also of the Filipino people who love the Filipino-Americans here in San Diego. Filipinos in San Diego Are truly pioneers. Yours is a story of fortitude and hard work. I learned when I was coming here and reading up that the enlistment of Filipinos in the U.S. navy started with the recruitment of nine Filipinos in 1903. Did I get my year right, 1903? To work as stewards and mess boys in the beginning. I had to ask you because we always thought in the Philippines that the first Filipinos in the U.S. were those who worked in Hawaii in the sugar cane plantations. But that was 1906 and this is 1903. So you are the first Filipinos to live in the United States. And then from the 1950s up to 1992 when the U.S. military bases were closed, more and more Filipinos were recruited to join the U.S. navy through the U.S. naval base in Sangley point, in Cavite. Kaya maraming Caviteño dito, ‘di ba? Later on, at the U.S. naval base in Subic. That’s why this explains why most of you are from Cavite and also from Olongapo in Zambales. Zambales, yes. Olongapo, my Macaraeg relatives from Olongapo, yes. Zambales, Bataan and the neighboring province that includes Pampanga.

Most Filipino navy men and their families settled here in San Diego and in other U.S. seaport cities, and went on to establish themselves in other fields. Because they are now… There’s now a new generation. So after our navy men came doctors, nurses, health care workers, accountants, I.T. workers among others.

And today, Filipino-Americans represent the best in the Filipino. You are the most effective ambassadors of your country. When I was coming this week somebody asked me, how can you help the Philippines? You can help the Philippines by being ambassadors of our country to the United States. And you are such credible ambassadors because your contributions to American life are tremendous. I am proud of all Filipino-Americans, whether well-known or anonymous.

Today, the Filipino-Americans, you, you constitute one-third of overseas Filipinos but you contribute two-thirds of the foreign exchange remittances to the Philippines.

I have said many times that overseas Filipinos should be called overseas Filipino investors because you are the biggest investors of the Philippines. That is why even when I was a senator, I had already filed an overseas voting bill, but like many other overseas voting bills before I became a senator, and others that were filed after I became a senator, my bill did not even progress at that time beyond the committee level.

So when I became president I certified as five… As two out of my five most urgent bills the Overseas Voting Bill and the Dual Citizenship Bill.

When I go to APEC from here, I should go directly to Silicon Valley because I have investors to talk to. But I said no, I will pass through San Diego because I want to tell you about efforts bearing fruit for the first time after so many attempts in so many administrations, the absentee voting bill has passed both Houses of Congress in the Philippines. Now, let's pray that the House and the Senate can iron out their conflicting versions soon. Because as soon as they do so I will sign it into law within 24 hours.

Earlier, while I was posing with the veterans, and I’d like to greet them. One of them asked me, “What about the Dual Citizenship Bill, how is it going?” I’d like to report to you that it has likewise passed the Senate on third and final reading in the Senate.

Of course here led by your congressman and your other congressman and congresswoman in the area in the Philippine caucus, all of us had been working for the passage by the U.S. Congress of improved benefits for Filipino World War II veterans.

And just like the overseas voting bill in the Philippines, here in the U.S., I believe that this is the first time after so many attempts, in so many administrations the bill has been passed in the U.S. House of Representatives to expand eligibility for health care compensation and burial benefits for our Filipino veterans to the tune of 65 million U.S. dollars. And you have our San Diego congressman Bob Filmer as the principal author to thank for. And Congressman Cunningham, Congressman Isah and Congresswoman Susan Davis because it was the Philippine caucus that made it possible for the bill to pass the U.S. congress. And I know that you in the Philippine community will always support those who support the Philippine cause.

The appropriation measure is now in the U.S. Senate. So, like I said about the overseas voting bill and praying, let’s pray now that the bill may soon pass the Senate.

Meanwhile, at the executive level, I have included veterans benefits in the agenda of every bilateral I have had with President Bush. And the veterans administration is giving veterans assistance for the Philippines in the amount of 500,000 dollars per year for the veterans health care in the Philippines. Again, for the first time after so many attempts in so many years. And I’m happy to learn that the first 500,000 dollars will be given to the Philippine government this month of October.

I will continue to advocate for veterans’ benefits. When I was with President Bush at the APEC summit yesterday, I reminded him again about our Filipino veterans.

At APEC, together with 20 other leaders including president bush and the heads of big economies like China, Russia, Japan, Canada and Mexico among others, we resolved collectively to adopt policies that will reverse the direction of the global economy away from a creeping march towards another economic recession.

I hope you still remember that a year-and-a-half ago, I became President, first, I inherited an economy with 4 million jobless Filipinos and a 40 percent poverty incidence.

After a year-and-a-half in the presidency, I have come to realize that to overcome such tremendous odds, we must build a strong republic.

Upon the cornerstone of a strong republic, we have to build a structure of shared ethical values, a firm consensus to serve the common interest and a common vision of our national future, the goal to fight poverty and win it within the next 10 years.

In APEC, one of the rich countries there said that 10 years ago they had a 40 percent poverty incidence. After 10 years of constant and focused policy reforms its gone down to 20 percent. So they could do it — that’s Chile — we can do it.

And this goal is uppermost in my work program for the rest of my administration as well as for the next six months. Even as we are resolving the terrorist threats in our country, I am focused on a tightly consolidated work program for the next six months which I’d like to share with you.

The first is to strengthen our small and medium enterprises. That’s why earlier, when one of you asked me how can you help the Philippines, I said be an ambassador of our country to America. But secondly, I said when you send you remittances send it to your relatives as capital for their small and medium enterprises;

The second program is to jumpstart housing. And I may ask you, too. And if you asked me how you can help the Philippines? Participate in the Pag-Ibig program. You have it, Jun here in the consulate? Buy houses for your relatives in the Philippines. There are a number of good housing projects, and they would qualify the developers and also the take outs will qualify if the houses are anywhere from oh! 15,000 pesos to 2 million pesos. So you have your range for whatever house you think your relatives deserve;

My third work program is to reduce transport costs from Mindanao to Luzon;

The fourth is to begin the infrastructure that will decongest Metro Manila;

The fifth is to mark up the contribution of the PCGG to our fiscal resources;

The sixth is to make Makati a specific urban tourist destination for shopping holidays. It’s very safe in Makati, easy to secure;

The seventh is to stimulate private investment in agriculture;

And the eighth is to begin the complete staff work to make the reclamation area in Roxas boulevard a tourism complex to be called “The Bagong Nayong Pilipino.”

This work program for the next six months is a part of a bigger medium- term Philippine development plan to win the battle against poverty within the decade.

But, in looking to win the battle against poverty within the decade we must also seek permanent national stability.

Thus, I am happy to report to you that because of our aggressive drive against terrorism, despite the desperate resort to hit and run bombings, domestic terrorists particularly the Abu Sayyaf are on the run. They are hold up, the leaders, and the main fort are holed up in the mountain where they were born to begin with, an area where soldiers have never gone before. We are now into two months into a campaign that is called “operations end game”. And we ask your prayers, too that this end game will end very soon. And I’m sure it will be, with the victory for the Philippine Armed Forces. Dapat naman kasi ‘yung Deputy Chief of Staff for operations na pinili ko sa Armed Forces ay si Sammy Bagasit, anak ng isang beterano natin dito, ayun. Kaya magdasal tayo.

You heard about Zamboanga being bombed. You know, when Zamboanga was bombed, I almost cancelled all my trips, the entire trip to APEC and all trips for side trips. They said, how can we cancel when those from Los Angeles already bought tickets? So I said, “Oh dear! What will we do?” but God solved my dilemma. We captured the Zamboanga bombers so I was able to come here. You read that a bus was bombed in Manila. We’ve also identified the mastermind of that latest bus bombing and so a massive manhunt is out there against him.

And today, I just got a report from Foreign Secretary Blas Ople that the European Union has officially placed in its agenda the terrorist character of the CPP-NPA. In addition, most of the European governments have indicated that they will individually support a bid to endorse the NPA as a terrorist organization to the United Nations.

We have crushed at least five of the most notorious kidnap-for-ransom gangs. And even the Philippine Chinese community, the favorite victim of those gangs have said that now all is quiet on the Binondo front.

Our campaign against terrorism and crime is reinforced by sound macroeconomic policies that have kept our nation at an even keel. Inflation is at a 12-year low, driven down by stable prices and declining power costs. Interest rates are at their lowest in 15 years. So it’s just right if you buy a house for your relatives.

International credit rating agencies have rated us as stable, when before I came in as president they rated us as negative. But since late 2001 they have rated us as stable.

And the regional GNP growth figures, our last figures for the first half of this year show a 5.2 percent growth rate in GNP that makes the Philippines the best performing economy in Southeast Asia. Actually, our GDP is 4.8. Our GNP became 5.2 because that difference is the remittances you send to us. That’s why your remittances have helped us grow higher than our neighboring countries. It’s your remittances that made the difference so we became the best performing economy, or the third best performing economy in Asia and the first in Southeast Asia.

And we tried to use this performance for the betterment of the lives of the poor. The price of rice for the poor is stable at 14 to 16 pesos depending on where you buy it. About 200,000 urban poor families have acquired the right to buy the land they occupy so that now they are no longer squatters. Schools are being built in barangays where there used to be none — 1,000 of them. And more than 3 million poor Filipinos now have health insurance. These achievements were only attained during my administration.

But no president can build a strong republic single-handedly. I can do it and do it well only if I can count on the support of the more than 2 million Filipino-Americans including the 150,000 Filipino-Americans here in San Diego.

And so before I join you for dinner I ask you, stay with me. Even as you are helping building America here in San Diego, help me build a strong Philippine republic.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during a Dinner with the Filipino Community. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210650/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8400&Itemid=38