Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At The Economist’s, “Emerging Markets Summit”

[Delivered at the Park Plaza Riverbank Hotel London, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, September 18, 2009]

Thank you for the kind introduction. Many thanks to the Economist for such a stimulating program.

Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen: good afternoon.

This summit has been asking the question. What are southeast Asia’s economic prospects?

The answer is that the region is doing well given the overall global economic picture. The prospects for growth in Southeast Asia are strong. This is reinforced by a recovery that has already started.

The nations of Asia are addressing the challenges of the economic crisis cooperatively and with confidence that the region will recover quicker and emerge stronger than ever. Asia’s response to this crisis has shown that our region is well positioned to accelerate its growing share of the global economy once the storm clouds of this crisis have abated.

When the recovery comes, what form will it take?

Although all Asian economies have felt the pain of the global recession, that pain has not been evenly distributed. There are at least three “Asias” to consider when examining the depth of the current recession and the path that nations in our region are taking to return their economies to full recovery. These three Asias are: First, the nations of China and India; Second, the trade-dependent economies, such as Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Thailand, South Korea and Malaysia, and third, the domestic consumption states, which includes the Philippines, among others.

China and India will long remain regional and global outperformers. While they are growing at levels below their incredible pre-recession performances, that growth is still very respectable. Given that the global recession has led to a virtual collapse in international trade, the most trade-dependent states in our region have been the worst hit. They have endured months of recession that, fortunately, now appears to be easing. The consumption-driven states have been able to avoid recession altogether.

These states, the Asian states that have been performing best, and that are still enjoying positive growth, are those emerging markets where private consumption is a high proportion of GDP. Indonesia and Vietnam both have private consumption at 65%, the Philippines 70%, Sri Lanka 65%, Bangladesh, 75%. These states are outperforming the trade-dependent economies.

Looking to 2010, the three Asias will see differing pace of recoveries. The trade-dependent states will continue to underperform while China and India, as well as the consumption-driven states should be the region’s outperformers.

Also, those of us who took the bitter medicine of reform some years ago have done better. That is certainly the case with the Philippines.

As much of the world sets its sights on the traditional global financial capitals, the world might be surprised to learn of the quiet successes to be found in other parts of the globe – in places such as the Philippines.

My friends, as the final Summit speaker, I want to leave you with an understanding of how your interest in emerging markets can be applied in the Philippines, a country that I am pleased to say has demonstrated the strength and resiliency of emerging market economies during this period of global economic crisis. In that regard, I cite the report of the UK Trade and Investment and the Economist Intelligence Unit that has tagged the Philippines as among the top ten key emerging markets beyond the BRIC countries.

Well before the global crisis, we were setting a new economic course for the Philippines. This course was at the core of our economic reform agenda. Our reforms generated 34 consecutive quarters of growth and the fastest growth in 30 years, they created 8 million jobs, and allowed us to maintain the lowest inflation in a generation. More importantly, poverty went down, revenue went up and the nation acquired the money to invest in human and physical infrastructure for the first time in a generation. We were rapidly heading toward a balanced budget.

Without the global recession, we would be in balance right now.

From the temporary setback in our plans due to the global financial crisis, we are back on track, to balance the budget by 2013. We are confident of our target because we have weathered the hardest part of the storm and we are poised for a rebound.

The rating agencies have upgraded our country’s credit rating in the middle of a crisis. This saves millions of dollars in interest which we can pour into building up our nation.

Moody’s Executive Vice President said: “The upgrade was prompted by the relatively high degree of resilience exhibited by both the country’s financial system and external payments position in the face of the global financial and economic crisis.”

The peso, the Philippine peso has also remained relatively strong and stable even amidst the global financial downturn. Goldman Sachs predicts that the peso will rise 4.7% in six months to the highest levels of 2008 as the growth of remittances from our overseas workers still defy expectations and because fiscal concerns are now recognized as overblown. This is a good indicator and reflection of the stability of our economy.

The Philippines, however is not alone. While many nations in Asia have been deeply affected by the global downturn, many have also been havens of stability and islands of calm during this period of tremendous volatility.

Which industry sector will bounce back the strongest?

In the Philippines, growth never left our outsourcing industry. It will now only gain in strength from 6,000 employees in 2001 to 600,000 soon in large part due to our efforts to continually modernize our infrastructure, the high level of productivity and English language skills of our workforce, and our ability to attract investment from some of the world’s leading companies. Private construction has grown by 17% due to the surge in middle and low-income housing. Small retail businesses are gaining strength. Therefore, the services sector will recover quickly. Our mining sector is also showing strong growth of 16%.

So how is consumer confidence of behavior evolving?

Consumer confidence is coming back.

But we are not relying just on the consumption pattern of our 90 million people to keep our momentum of 34 consecutive quarters of economic growth going. We are relying on a mix of economic stimulus, sound economic and monetary policies, and pro-business reforms to keep our economy steady.

What is happening regarding Foreign Direct Investment flows?

Capital is returning to the region.

The Philippines’ resilient economy, improved credit ratings, and continued fiscal consolidation efforts have produced a country with an economy that should be in every emerging market investors’ portfolio. With Foreign Direct Investment posting an 86% increase in the first 7 months of this year, it is clear this message is getting across.

Are foreign and local banks doing enough?

Despite tight liquidity conditions in the global market, loan growth is particularly strong among the economies of emerging Asia. In Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan, loan growth has improved since the last quarter of 2008. New loans in China make up 50% of its GDP growth. The loans in China in the first half of this year have reportedly exceeded the total amount for 2008. In the Philippines, bank lending growth has remained healthy.

We have one of the best central banks in the world. Its reforms have created the solid fundamentals that underpin our banking sector today. The fundamentals are reinforced by conservative banking practices. These values have significantly sheltered our country’s finances.

We give our central bank team our full trust to implement a sound monetary policy conducive to growth and one that will help us manage volatilities arising from the global economy. The monetary policy of the Central Bank has ensured sufficient liquidity in the market and bolstered confidence in the financial system. This contributed to the resilience of our economy throughout the global economic crisis.

How is the mind-set at domestic and multinational firms currently? Is there returned appetite for risk?

Yes, there is. The EIU report has projected investor sentiment to improve in 2010 and 2011.

The overall business confidence index being tracked by our central bank has reverted to positive territory for the first time since the third quarter of last year. We expect this trend to continue.

But at the end of the day, if the global financial system does not learn from its mistakes and embrace reforms, we will all lose more than we have already.

Therefore, what remains to be done regarding financial sector reform?

As we move forward, we need to look closely at the values, or in some cases, complete lack of values, that led to the collapse of the financial system. A problem in one financial market can quickly become a problem in many others. We must work cooperatively to contain that contagion or, better yet, provide the inoculation that will keep it from happening.

As we are all aware, in the period leading up to the current crisis, there were many cases of inappropriate and misunderstood risks. This was compounded by financial engineering and disproportionate risk-taking in the financial sector that’s motivated by the pursuit of short-term profits. It was also compounded by the emergence of unregulated and opaque financial instruments.

In the Philippines, we have implemented extensive financial and economic reforms. More can and should be done, but my biggest concern is with the lack of progress on global reform. Here we are a year after the Lehman Brothers collapse and subsequent economic contagion, and already some of the same firms that got us into this mess are pretending it never happened. In the euphoria of the emergence of the green shoots that we all hope are harbingers of economic rebound, we are losing sight of the calls early in the crisis for the overhaul of global financial regulations.

Governments the world over must insist that we come to grips with what happened and make sure we put in place rules so that it doesn’t happen again. We cannot expect the poor in places like the Philippines to lose their shirt because someone on Wall Street made a bad bet.

It is my duty to our people to insist on drawing attention to the need to bring sense to a global financial system that is clearly not suited to the complexities of the current global challenges. That is why I am stepping up the call for action for governments to come to grips with the need for a new global financial regulatory regime. The G-20 leaders, in particular, will be meeting soon. They must take strong decisive action to push forward tough new regulations.

What about in the Southeast Asian region? What policy initiatives do we need?

As we did in 1997 and 1998, the region must continue to learn from what happened this time in order to make ourselves even stronger. Our region has made substantial progress with the Chiang Mai initiative that will provide liquidity support to governments in our region. We have taken it upon ourselves as a region to be more self- sufficient. While decoupling from the US and Europe cannot and probably should not occur, that doesn’t mean we shouldn’t take more firm steps to control our own destiny. We must continue to press for closer cooperation and consultation.

The global economic crisis has been a long nightmare for many people and many nations. The poorest – many of them in emerging market economies – have been affected the most. The headlines scream about Wall Street, the failure of government regulation, and the noise of lost wealth. But they should also scream about the need to ensure that the world’s emerging markets – many of them committed free traders – are given the support they need to ensure that any economic rebound is truly inclusive and truly global.

To what extent has the experience of the 1997-98 financial crisis helped governments cope with the storm?

Painful economic slowdowns are not new to the countries of Southeast Asia. As you are all aware, our region went through a gut-wrenching financial crisis more than a decade ago. In retrospect, it seems very much like a dress rehearsal for today’s turmoil. Companies defaulted; banks collapsed, stock markets tanked and economies shrank at double digit rates as foreign investment slowed to a trickle. In addressing this crisis, Southeast Asia dutifully swallowed the bitter medicine of austerity. It devalued currencies and worked off debts while banks restructured and companies patched up balance sheets.

Asia has benefitted, if you will, from the dreadful experience of the 97-98 Asian financial crisis. Thanks to the lessons learned by that crisis, and the actions taken by the government since then throughout Asia, As a nation and a region, most of us are much better prepared to cope with the challenges we have been facing over the past year. The previous crisis showed Asian governments that it was important to rebuild foreign exchange reserves. It encouraged major Asian companies to de-leverage their balance sheet, restructure their businesses and improve their cash flow. It led domestic banks to cut non-performing loans, improve liquidity and consolidate the industry.

This augurs well for our regional trading outlook – and for the development of the ASEAN regional trading bloc we will have in place by 2015. It also speaks well for the prospects of our emerging market economies.

Because of that experience, the prospects for growth in Southeast Asia today are some of the strongest in the world.

Regional and global investors I believe will step up their risks in our region because they know we have been through it before and that we emerged stronger than ever.

But will national rivalries preclude meaningful progress toward regional political or economic integration?

To answer this question I would look at what we have achieved rather than what is left to be done. ASEAN has made significant progress towards integrating our economies, breaking down trade barriers, and asserting macroeconomic control over our regional economies. Of course there are always issues, national issues and regional issues to overcome, but they are not greater than the threats to our region from global forces.

In sum, in spite of the need to urgently address global economic policy considerations, my outlook for emerging markets is very positive. The best opportunities for the medium-term are found in Asia for several reasons.

First, we have a healthy financial system that remains stable and ready to support growth. Our region’s banks are virtually free of toxic assets. They have not needed government bailout money. Years of trade surpluses and high savings rates have contributed to record foreign reserves. Debt loads – for governments, corporations and consumers – are a fraction of those in the U.S. and Europe. Inflation and interest rates have fallen rapidly as our central banks have deftly managed this fluid global environment.

Second, while each market is different, the nations in our region represent a varied mix of opportunities for any investor. The governments in our region have an ongoing commitment to policy reforms which are crucial in any investment decision. They are also committed to address the challenges in the bureaucracy and infrastructure that will shape the direction of their economic growth over the next decade. Most of emerging Asia is addressing these areas and we will return to high rates of economic growth. Because of that, now is the time to prepare for the significant opportunities that will accompany this growth.

There is no better emerging market to take advantage of that growth than the Philippines. I encourage each and every one of our emerging market investors to consider the Philippines as you look for the best trade and investment opportunities that will come out of the return to high levels of economic growth.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech at The Economist’s, “Emerging Markets Summit”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134412/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26261&Itemid=38