Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the opening ceremony of the 7th Annual Publish Asia 2007 Conference

[Delivered at the Polkabal Ballroom, Manila Hotel, Manila City, March 27, 2007]

Thank you very much, Secretary Bunye

Mr. Mittelbach; Mr. Pichay; Don Emilio; the newspaper and magazine executives; movers and shakers of the publishing industry; participants in this Publish Asia; ladies and gentlemen:

Good morning and welcome to the Philippines!

I’m very happy to have the chance to open this conference and welcome you to the Philippines. But your conference is so important, you’re going to see me twice today, here in the welcome ceremonies and also at dinner tonight. And this is our way of saying that we thank you for your role in broadening our regional frontiers in trade, security and political consolidation.

And we also commend the major Philippine newspapers: Manila Bulletin, Philippine Star, Inquirer and Manila Times that comprise the Philippine team hosting this event. Congratulations to all of you!

Why is Publish Asia so important that the head of the country would be with you twice in one day? It is our message, it is our way of saying that we Filipinos believe in the freedom of the press. We embrace the central role of the media in a free society. And we believe that responsible media bridges the gap between the public and the government.

Not that we always agree with members of the media. Many times we don’t agree with the members of the media and what they report. But that is just part of the give and take of politics, and that is just part of our job.

Let me take this opportunity to say that I am optimistic about the future of the Philippines and the well-being of the Filipino people. Our national agenda is designed to move the nation forward toward greater political stability, economic prosperity and peace and order. The national agenda is focused on creating good paying jobs, stable prices and bringing the benefits of a strong economy to every single Filipino.

Our government has made the tough but necessary decisions to strengthen our economy. These painful steps are paying off: we now have the money to invest in job creation, new roads, bridges and ports, and more for education and health care.

For the first time in a long time, the government is doing what average households do: working to balance the budget and not keep going into debt.

We are concerned with real, everyday challenges that confront the people– alleviating hunger, creating jobs, and checking prices of essential items.

This conference of yours shows how you consider it important to have strong international and regional alliances, so also with governments. Through strong international alliances, we have forged new partnerships that have led to billions in investments that helped create five million new jobs. And we have strengthened our military and security alliances in the region and the world. This has led to major gains for peace in Mindanao, the isolation and tracking down of known terrorists, and a reduction in violent crime.

Speaking of crime, let me take this opportunity to once again deplore extra-judicial killings whether they be from left or right, especially against journalists. We have a sorry history in our nation of political violence. We aim to break this cycle of violence once and for all.

We welcome the fielding of a team from the European union, as in the headline of the manila times today, to help our law enforcers get to the roots of these crimes. We are prepared to work with legitimate institutions and well-meaning allies in the international community on this issue. We welcome the U.S. government to help the Philippines in a fight versus wrong and the quest for impartial justice. And it must be said that the communist party and their armed insurgents must also put down their arms and cease their mindless murders.

The Philippines is the most democratic country in the region. I have no tolerance for human rights violations. But let me make several points very clear. I have personally advanced the process of peace in Mindanao to a new level of engagement — focused on interfaith dialogue, economic development and mutual security. We have done so with the largest possible international involvement. Peace there is very much an issue of human rights, just as alleviating poverty is, which is our number one agenda.

Indeed, there is much to do if our nation is to work toward a more modern, just and prosperous nation. And the press has its share of the task.

You come from different countries in Asia, with different kinds of political systems, different levels of development, different social organizations, different histories, but in all the countries in which you do your business, the press has the power to change the nation through information and persuasion.

A free, dynamic and responsible press can set the people moving towards the right direction of national renewal and reform.

And even as we dish out the raw and hard truth, in different degrees, in the different countries, depending on the norms in a particular country, all of us, all of you, would serve your country well by having good news that unite and inspire.

It is in this spirit that we, the Filipino people, welcome all the participants to this great and important conference.

Mabuhay!

Welcome to the Philippines!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Ceremony of the 7th Annual Publish Asia 2007 Conference. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151008/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1958&Itemid=38