Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Congressman Lopez for your invitation, for your explanation, for welcoming me.

I also greet Mayor Lim, Congressman Asilo, the various government officials and all the officials here, especially the youth who are studying here. Congratulations to all of you!

I am happy to visit this newly named Honorio Lopez Technical Institute. The name 'technical' is good because it describes the need of our time. This school, as Congressman said, has been around for several years. And it has helped many, young people and even those not so young, to have decent jobs. We saw earlier the Fashion Jewelry Making, Cosmetology, Hair Science, Reflexology, Hotel and Restaurant Services, Food Trades, Baking, as well as Cell Phone Repair and Maintenance, and Computer Technician and Computer Literacy.

It is my honor that almost a thousand scholars here are scholars of President Gloria. These are in Food and Beverage, Barista, Hairdresser, Masseuse, Motorcycle Repair, Carpentry, Plumbing, Masonry, Welding and coming soon, Culinary Arts will open.

This is very important because the foundation of opportunity is education and in education, technical and vocational education is very important. This is the key… education is the key to a better life. And in these times, strong education must be accompanied by a strong backbone of technology. That is why I am happy that there is a Computer Technician and Computer Literacy course here. Congratulations!

Because we have to build the mind and we have to connect to the world. Education and technology, these are the twin guides where our future, the future of our country is expected. That is why we have a large investment in education and skills training. Thank you also to the congressmen like Congressman Lopez who has been a congressman since I started as president. From 90 billion pesos before our administration, the budget of DepEd, TESDA, CHED and state universities and colleges has doubled to 180 billion pesos.

This is not the only distance reached, the entire Philippines has come a long way since January 2001. Thank you and time has erased many memories about that very turbulent time less than ten years ago, when the country was on the brink of extreme political turmoil and financial bankruptcy.

The economy was in reverse. Very little capital was coming in, very few jobs were being created. The government's debt of 3.6 trillion pesos was more than our GDP of 3.3 trillion pesos. There was almost no dollar reserve.

It was a time of lower wages and higher prices. And with very low tax revenue, we could hardly invest in expanding healthcare, improving education, and providing electricity to remote barangays.

We entered this miserable scene. I did not pursue the Presidency in 2001; it fell into my lap. But we rolled up our sleeves wholeheartedly to reverse the course of the Philippines.

We were focused like a laser beam, to deliver real results to improve the lives of ordinary Filipinos. As an economist, I knew that to recover the economy, it was necessary to impose discipline on the national treasury, so thank you also to our congressmen, we made tax reforms even if they were not popular.

And this was needed to grow the economy and invest in people and infrastructure. For example, the infrastructure we built here, the dredging of the mouth of the Pasig River, that is one reason why the floods in Manila subsided quickly even during the heavy rains of Typhoon Ondoy because of our infrastructure in Manila.

These efforts shaped the building blocks of change that brought an unprecedented 36 quarters of uninterrupted economic growth. We created nine million new jobs, hopefully reaching ten million after our administration. And we added 52 million people to healthcare coverage, and the national treasury remained stable even though we invested in those things because of our tax reforms.

And with this, we built one hundred thousand classrooms because we wanted Education for All. Congressman Lopez was telling me that only a few were graduating from those who started, but Education for All means the UN Millennium Development Goals universal primary education.

The problem was even more serious because only 58% of 6-year-olds were attending school, so we needed to get them in. Some because the school was far away, for example, I remember going to my province of Pampanga, I went to, opened a school in a… ah, no, I visited a barangay in the mountains of the Aeta. There was one who went there and told me it took him two hours to walk from his barangay because there was no school there. So we built a school there, so we built such schools in a thousand barangays where there were no schools before.

And so that it wouldn't be too expensive to enroll, we removed the miscellaneous fees in public primary school, right Superintendent? I hope you’re carrying that out. And uniforms are not required, uniforms are optional. If it’s cheaper to buy a uniform, that’s okay. If it’s cheaper to buy a t-shirt, that’s okay. And for one million of the poorest families in our country in the “Pantawid Pamilya” program, these one million poorest families have an allowance on the condition that their children attend school.

To expand education further, we added 60,000 teachers and increased their salaries. And we allocated 1.5 billion pesos for teacher training, especially for English teachers. We increased the use of English as a medium of instruction from 40% to 55% in grade school, from 45% to 70% in high school because we have to return our competitiveness and advantage in English. And because of the need for technology, we increased Science and Mathematics hours by 50%.

These expenses we made were not only in public school because in private schools, almost half of the students are there on scholarship by the government. And especially in Science and Engineering, we provided college and post-graduate education for over 600,000 scholars.

In technical education and skills training, as Congressman Lopez mentioned, we invested heavily in TESDA and others for skills training. Actually, how much? It is as much as three previous administrations combined, that’s what we put into technical education.

So there are almost a thousand scholars here at the Honorio Lopez Technical Institute. As a result of our investments, the National Achievement Test scores went up from 44% to 65% in elementary schools and 36% to 47% in high school, better than before but still needing improvement.

That is why we remain dedicated in our last months in office to promoting, advancing, pushing for more and better education and better technological infrastructure. We have come far in both, but we still have far to go and we must not rest. We will continue hands-on governance until the day we leave office. We’re both leaving office, right, Congressman? We will focus on three areas:

One, bringing more power and growth to each region to decongest Manila. That is one of our goals.

Two, continue to promote the importance of the three E’s: education, the economy and the environment to our effort to create sustainable and equitable development.

Third, a continuous focus on the youth of our nation as our best hope for a brighter, better Philippines.

We have made progress in many areas, but more needs to be done. Everything our government has worked hard to achieve has been to make the future brighter for the next generation of Filipinos. The youth of our nation are our hope and inspiration. Everything we do must be to build a better life for each and every young person in this nation.

While I am proud of what our government has achieved, past achievement is only as good as the ability of the nation to grow and prosper. I fervently desire that the progress we have made will not stop; that what remains to be done will be picked up by the next generation of leadership.

As a nation, we must set our sights firmly on the future, to build on what is good and work even harder to meet the challenges of what remains to be done. And the young of our nation, like those studying here at this technical institute, they are the bridge between the past and the future. It is for them that we right the wrongs, fight for change and seek to make a brighter day.

As I said, our nation has come far, but it still has far to go. And the youth represent the aspirations of our nation. It is to them that we dedicate the efforts of our government to lift up the Philippines.

I have a deep desire to see a brighter future for the hardworking men and women of this nation. Most important, I have an abiding interest in seeing that the young people today come into their own, seize the value of education and modernity, and use these tools to advance themselves and the nation.

That is why I am pleased that we have institutions like this Honorio Lopez Technical Institute, it is a great help for the future of our country.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the inauguration of the Extension Building of Sentro ng Karunungan Vocational Institute renamed Honorio Lopez Technical Institute. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100505232734/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27470&Itemid=38