Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, in the City of Davao.

…Marawi City as a representative of Muslim Mindanao. Because, truly, what I requested from Prime Minister Mahathir, he granted, because a large part of Mindanao and Malaysia are both populated by Muslims. That is why Prime Minister Mahathir gave a lot of aid to the Philippines, because of the Muslims of the Philippines; the large benefit of his aid should also go to the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao. Because that is what he deeply cares about. That is what all Islamic countries in our country deeply care about. They want to see the success of the Muslim Mindanao Region. And they are all monitoring our upcoming elections on August 14. And they expect the people of the Philippines to fully support this Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.

But how can we get the support of the entire Philippines, the entire OIC, and the entire ASEAN, for Muslim Mindanao if they don't see the Filipino people and friendly Muslims in other countries that all Muslim Filipinos are the first to support Muslim Mindanao.

That is why I am here today to remind you that there is an important election coming up on Tuesday for the future of Muslim Mindanao. And to explain the various blessings that Muslim Mindanao awaits under the new administration of a son of Mindanao, Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo.

First of all, as I said, in Malaysia, what blessings have we received? First of all, there is peace. With the great help of Malaysia, the Philippine Government and our Muslim brothers agreed to continue this ceasefire agreement here in Mindanao. And the MILF and the MNLF also agreed, simultaneously, that instead of fighting each other and instead of fighting the government, they will fight together for the principles of peace.

In other words, peace is the desire of the two former rebel groups. They united for peace. They united for justice. They united for integration and for being equally loyal and all Filipinos, whether Tagalog, whether Visayan, whether Muslim. Justice, equity, peace, these are the principles signed by the MNLF and the MILF when they had an agreement there in Kuala Lumpur.

Now that there are good agreements regarding peace through the MILF and MNLF, and even earlier the MILF agreed to peace in the Philippines there in Jakarta. That MILF also agreed to a ceasefire here in Kuala Lumpur. The MILF and the MNLF also had an agreement, so all in all, the Government of the Philippines, MNLF, MILF, are united for peace.

Now that we are united for peace, let us unite for development. Davao is already prosperous. Cagayan de Oro is already prosperous. Zamboanga City is already prosperous. The development we seek is the development of Muslim Mindanao.

When I was in Malaysia, one of the big requests I made to the Malaysian government and Malaysian businessmen, even to the son of President Khadaffy who went to Malaysia just to meet with me and find out how to help Muslim Mindanao, was this: Malaysia now, Kuala Lumpur, Selangor, which was once a large province surrounding Kuala Lumpur that was once full of palm oil plantations, has become a large city. So they are transferring their palm oil to other places. Some are being transferred to eastern Malaysia, some to Sabah, some to other countries. Basically, they are looking for areas 8 degrees latitude and below going towards the equator. Those are good places for palm oil. I told them, if you are just looking for other places to put your palm oil, bring it to the Philippines.

So even if we can find 160,000 hectares in Muslim Mindanao, Malaysia is willing to come in because right now they are looking all over the world for 8 degrees latitude and down, where to put the palm oil. Let's seize that opportunity because if it doesn't come here, it will go to our neighboring countries. Hopefully, it will come here instead.

And the son of Khadaffy visited me in the Presidential Suite at the Shangri-la Hotel. He said the Khadaffy Foundation has funds ready to invest in 35,000 hectares for palm oil. Our partner in Malaysia is ready to provide their technical expertise, but where is the land in the Philippines? I pointed out a lot of land. I said, you know, Mr. Khadaffy, there's land already opened up in Agusan del Sur. There's land in Bohol. There's land in North Cotabato. He said, no. This is the Khadaffy Foundation, we have a lot of money, but our goal is to help in Muslim Mindanao. So point me to land in Muslim Mindanao.

I also want to mention the various benefits being offered. Congressman Bobby Dimpapuro knows that the Islamic Development Bank is also ready to help, just like the World Bank helps many countries. Just like the Asian Development Bank helps many countries in Asia. The Islamic Development Bank is also ready to help, but it must be in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.

…to inform the people of Marawi about what benefits you can expect, and what conditions must be met to achieve these benefits. Now I thank you for your hospitality. Because initially, the Presidential Management Staff told me that when I came here, the first thing they told Governor Adiong and Mayor Ali was that I wanted a private meeting.

When I was in Malaysia, the other night, I found out, I said, why a private meeting, why should I disclose these benefits coming from Malaysia, Libya, OIC, Islamic Development Bank in just a private meeting? I want all the people of Marawi City to know, so invite others to attend this program as well.

So yesterday, Mayor Ali and Governor Adiong petitioned that it not just be a private meeting. Anyone who finds out about the meeting on such short notice is invited. I am grateful that even though you only found out a day ago that I was coming, with one day's notice, we have a standing room only crowd in the gymnasium. Thank you very much.

Thank you also to Dr. Urva, the president of MSU, because you are always the host at all the meetings I attend here. And I will not forget MSU. Perhaps you won't forget who established MSU? Do you know who established MSU? Who was the president? Oh, maybe you already know, I won't mention it so I don't brag about my family. I will only brag about the improvement of Muslim Mindanao. But, perhaps I can say that our gathering today is very good. I haven't been to any other place to campaign for the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao. But if there is only one place that should be included, I hope it is Marawi City. And if Marawi City is not included in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, it will be very sad, I will be very embarrassed because I will not be able to give you the benefits I told you about because all of them are really focused on the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.

So, can we rely on Marawi City, are you ready to rely on these blessings? Thank you very much for your support, and let us continue to support each other for the betterment of development and peace in Muslim Mindanao, throughout Mindanao, throughout the Philippines.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech – Davao City. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409213313/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8707&Itemid=38