Maraming salamat.

Thank you very much, Governor Lito Lapid. I also greet Speaker Joe de Venecia and the other officials of the Lakas party who came here, although they came on their own accord; we did not organize and ask them to come, thank you very much. I also greet and thank board member Robert David and all the senior citizens of Pampanga who are here now. I want the entire Filipino people to know that this is a convention of senior citizens of Pampanga, but many of our colleagues have crashed it because they learned that I would be giving an important report to our senior citizens.

Thank you also to CREBA, they invited me to their convention at the Holiday Inn earlier. I told them, just come to Centennial Expo, together with the senior citizens' convention, that's where I will deliver my keynote speech. To all the beneficiaries of the Mount Pinatubo housing programs, thank you very much, for always supporting me. To the senior citizens, thank you very much for your support for me and my father, the… President Diosdado Macapagal.

There are many Kapampangans here, but I also greet the entire nation. The senior citizens are here, they are striving for a good future for our youth, represented today by Bambam Aquino, thank you for your support for me. Thank you also to President Dulalia for your good words on behalf of the housing industry, and to Marissa Sanchez, thank you for letting them know about the work of our government for the victims of Mount Pinatubo.

To all the officials here in Pampanga — governor, other provincial officials, congressmen, city mayors, municipal mayors, to the many officials who came here from various parts of Central Luzon and even throughout the Philippines. Senator Bobby Barbers and the other congressmen are here. Thank you all for coming. And of course, my Cabinet members who are always helping to create a good future for our country.

My beloved countrymen and countrywomen:

Today, I address our nation together with our Cabalens. Our historic problem has been the need for economic development to fight poverty.

Historically, our economic development has been slow compared to our neighbors. While we did better than our neighbors during the last two and a half years in the aftermath of the Asian crisis, with the region now starting to recover, our neighbors are starting to accelerate their growth again. This time we cannot afford to be left behind.

Our historic problems cannot be blamed on any single president, because the problems are fundamental caused by our economic and political system.

To really develop our economy and create a stronger republic, we need to change our system, to institute true reforms in our politics and our economy.

We also need to unify as a people.

In view of this need for unification, last December 30, I announced that I did not wish to seek for election for the presidency in 2004. I wanted to pass the torch. I wanted to earn my personal peace from the riveting pressures of presidential work. But most of all, I wanted to give our people relief from unabated politicking.

When I announced in December that I would not seek the presidency in 2004, I thought this was the only way to prevent the country from being burdened by toxic politics that threatened to destroy our political stability and economic progress.

For a while our enemies laid down their disruptive swords of politicking, and we finally moved as a country. In the first six months, we achieved 4.8 percent GNP growth, the highest growth in our country since the Asian crisis. In so short a time, we accomplished one of the most massive housing programs undertaken in our history. That's why CREBA said that the policies of our administration are the most effective for housing in the entire history of our country. And at the same time, we kept the supply and the price of food stable. We won victories in pinning down corrupt high-ranking officials, some of them on the basis of lifestyle checks never been done before in such a systematic manner. Long-awaited judgments were handed down in order to make us overcome the catharsis and trauma of the last several decades including the cases of the Marcos wealth and the coco levy.

In the all-out war against illegal drugs, we confiscated volumes of illegal drugs in the last eight months or so and arrested drug dealers in numbers that far outstripped those achieved in years before. We have sought a peaceful resolution to the Muslim insurgency, and we are well on the way to signing a permanent peace pact. CREBA said we have dismantled a lot of red tape for housing. Not only for housing, we cut down red tape to make sure crucial infrastructure are built — the Roll-On/Roll-Off ferry program. To the people of Western Pampanga, Zambales, Bataan, our officials are here, you can now travel to Manila in one hour from Bataan, not by road, but on our Roll-On/Roll-Off ferry. We built new bridges and we are building highways, like the long-awaited, often-aborted expansion of the north expressway. We began meaningful debates on changes in the constitution, particularly on the parliamentary and federal form of government.

I longed together with our people to savor the gains of unity by taking myself out of the political landscape. For a while our enemies halted and we moved forward. We proved to ourselves how much we can achieve when we defeat divisiveness.

But it did not last, my initial decision did not completely stop the destructive flow of events. Our enemies prefer to sow disunity so that they can wrest power from the people, who become strong when our economy becomes strong. Our immediate successes were met again with intense politics. Politics even changed form, there was even a secret conspiracy to overthrow the legitimate government. Fearing that our success would frustrate their plans, our enemies once again resorted to their machiavellian schemes in Oakwood and in the hit-and-run exposes. Black propaganda, rumors, dissatisfied soldiers, weapons, profits from corruption and crime, and even parts of the media were able to gather forces disloyal to our democratic system. They do not really want our people to be strong. They want to hold the monopoly of strength through guns and gold, drugs and dregs.

The conspiracy matured in Oakwood, which clarified the hidden ambitions of people who want to return our country to the dark days of dictatorship, who want to overthrow democracy, and conquer freedom.

Oakwood targeted the heart and soul of our republic, so it is only right that I invalidate the results of it.

We suppressed the coup within less than a day, but we only scratched the surface of its evil meaning: the connection between crime and politics, the use of naive soldiers, the evasion of justice by criminals in the corridors of political power.

And most of all, Oakwood broke wide the deep social and political divisions that we now have, that we have had for the past three years because for a long time, we have not been able to strengthen our Republic.

We need to heal the deep divisions within our society. We must have justice, but we must also have reconciliation. We must put a closure to our national divisions. We must give ourselves a fresh start.

The path forward is not easy. And in the more than two and a half years of my presidency, I have gained the experience necessary to understand what we need to do in order to change society in a way that leads to economic development and the elimination of poverty. Thus, I have deferred my retirement. I will sacrifice my yearnings for personal quiet and release from presidential strain and anxiety. And I will offer myself to the electorate in 2004 I will offer myself as the leader with the experience and vision necessary to change society, to achieve economic development, and eliminate poverty. I will run for president in the May 2004 elections.

In the same way that I made a decision last December 30 by myself. Today, I make known that I reached this decision also on my own discernment. In making this decision, I could have invoked the prodding of my party, the clamor of the people, the support of many. These, you know, are true and already made known by the media. But I am not motivated to run because I was thrust, shoved, urged or pressed. Nakikita ko ang pangangailangan nang mas higit pang sakripisyo at gagampanan ko ito.

We need to ensure our political stability while striving to provide food on every table, home, and job.

As I said, I have gained the experience. I have gained the experience necessary to understand what we need to do to change society in a way that leads to a future that we Filipinos dream of and rightly deserve. A future marked by a prosperous economy, a future where we would have defeated poverty, a future where our people enjoy true social equity and equal opportunity, a future where we can once again stand proud among the community of nations confident of what we have accomplished for ourselves and for our nations. I long for a strong republic steep in justice, unity and peace.

This means we will balance the needs of social welfare: defense and security, and economic progress.

The economy was attacked by local and global events that demanded clean, professional, and skilled management of our fiscal and macroeconomic direction.

We must forge the continuation of honest governance. Corruption must be suppressed. And so, anyone from my family who is proven guilty must suffer. No one in my family, personal or official, is exempt from the law.

We are now in Pampanga, celebrating Senior Citizens’ Week, but in Mindanao, they are yearning for peace and development. We must heed the call and challenge of the victims of conflict.

Our fight is towards a democratic nation because it is a relentless fight against poverty. We need to overcome both if we want a good future for the youth, for the grandchildren of our Senior Citizens.

The administration’s alliance will launch a campaign based on a platform of reform and reconciliation.

I run because I’m confident that the experience I have gained will enable me to make a difference. That the experience I have gained will enable the people to pin their hopes and aspirations with me. I am confident that the Filipino people are behind me and our just cause will triumph. We will firmly implement changes. I am confident that together we will win our future. We will attain for this nation the lasting blessings of democracy, justice, freedom, and prosperity.

Some ask why I changed my mind. What matters more is that I changed my mind because there is a higher cause — to change society. To change society in a way that flourishes our future. It would have been easier to take the road to retirement. Taking up the call laid before me exacts more courage, more sacrifice, more obedience to god and our people.

I will serve the people even if I am vilified for it. And humbly, I accept this sacred vocation. I shall stay married to my country.

Though I’m sad to say it, I can no longer stave the dam of politics. The political season is here. I do not think that politics will stop after this, it will likely worsen.

But even as I announce my decision today, I also wish to give greater certainty to business and our investors. Our programs are devoted to strengthening the economy, creating more jobs, and encouraging business activity that is unhampered by corruption and red tape. I instruct the bureaucracy to stay on track in the task of governance, and I shall keep a steady hand over the concerns of the state. I ask our people to keep your eyes focused on the challenges we face daily. Let us not allow ruthless politics to distract us from the all important charge of nation-building. Politicians come and go but our challenges are here to stay and to be met. My only desire is that the fight now will be a fight for the ballot and not a fight to overthrow the government through violence.

We must go to the sacred table of electoral decision in 2004, keeping in mind that reform and reconciliation, in the final analysis, will be what will heal the wounds of our divisiveness. And as we do, let us move on to flourish our future.

My dear countrymen, let us unite in hoping for God, hoping for each other, and hoping for our government that we will face a good tomorrow and the Filipino will once again raise their heads in the world.

Finally, I pray to God to grant me the grace to heal our divided land; the fortitude to unite our people; and the courage to be truly a president of reconciliation. A president of reform and reconciliation bringing peace and unity and the Lord’s bounty to all our people under God’s Divine Providence.

May God guide the Philippines.

Maraming salamat.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Pampanga Senior Citizens Congress/Multisectoral Program and Formal Declaration to Run in the May 2004 Elections. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412174907/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7404&Itemid=38