Thank you very much Secretary Reyes.

General Villanueva; General Defensor and the other officers of the Philippine Air Force, General Calimlim, the AFP major service commanders; the members of the diplomatic community; the former Air Force commanders and their ladies; the ladies of the Defense and of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.

I am happy to be back here at Villamor Air Base, the seat of our country’s air power and home of our finest airmen and airwomen. Actually, I in this grounds, this very grounds almost every week of my presidency because this is where I take-off to wherever I must go, whenever it will take a flight either a fixed-wing flight or a helicopter flight.

And so, I am happy to be here again for the umpteenth time, countless times. I greet you all a very happy and meaningful 54th anniversary.

I also warmly congratulate the individual and unit recipients of this year’s PAF awards headed by General ‘Santi’ Santillan. And I am happy to say, to note that captain Jaji who received a gold cross medal today received his 13th gold cross medal. So this is a record in the Philippine Air Force.

Aside from my almost weekly or even twice weekly trips to this particular airfield where we are having our ceremonies, I visited the Philippine Air Force in Villamor shortly before I became president. And I addressed the men and women of the Air Force then. Hence, I need not recant my gratitude for your role in EDSA Dos.

Since EDSA dos, we experienced new challenges to constituted authority, our freedom, our national direction, our unity as a people, our collective morality and the way we nurture our fragile peace. These have been continuously facing challenges. The failed siege of Malacañang and the revival of the Abu Sayyaf scourge – have especially been gripping concerns that called for PAF heroism.

Our nation saw the power of restraint and resolve during the times surrounding may 1st, the force of freedom was also seen, and, let us not forget, the divine power and the power of prayer. Through all these, we recognize the force of our air power, a force that has delineated the PAF’s role as force multiplier and at the same time as peace-giver.

Last year, the PAF was a key player in five major offensives that led to our victory against the secessionists. Your pilots completed 1,800 missions in enemy-held areas, destroying 70 percent of enemy camps without sustaining damage to our aircraft. I was vice president, then, and I remember being able to greet your pilots in Cagayan de Oro airport just after their first day of their successful operation in Abubakar. Their spirits were so high, and on my part I was so proud of them. And I’m even more proud of you now as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces and the Philippine Air Force.

You also proved your mettle at Mendiola, where four trucks and a fire truck under your 710th special operations wing augmented by other units helped contain the May 1st rioters. Please accept once again the profuse thanks of a grateful president.

When I became president with your valuable support on January 20th with your commanding general, among the generals who were there to watch my oath taking, I said that we must be bold in our national ambition and seek to win the battle against poverty also means that within the decade. Our fight against poverty also means that within the decade we should have no more impoverished soldiers. Towards this end, I have asked Secretary Angelo Reyes to draft a bill for me which I shall submit to congress as an administration measure setting the pay of soldiers as equivalent to that of teachers.

I trust that the bill I signed into law last march granting exceptions, tax exemptions on benefits and allowances of the Armed Forces, I trust that that is now being implemented.

But I am sad that some elements have sensationalized the plight of the families of 224 active military personnel whose homes are within the area of a national shrine, specifically the Libingan ng mga Bayani. I have a special attachment to the Libingan ng mga Bayani. My parents are buried there. My mother rehabilitated it as part of her civic work as first lady when my father was president. But even then, even when my father was president, he already set aside a part of Libingan ng mga Bayani to serve as home lots for soldiers’ families. His proclamation was set aside by his successor. And therefore, I have re-issued the proclamation, and I thank Secretary Reyes for volunteering to withdraw a notice of eviction issued earlier in order to give way for the proclamation. So indeed, we can carve out a portion of the Libingan ng mga Bayani as not being part of the national shrine. Because what is more important is the well-being of our living soldiers even as we pay homage to those who have died, the soldiers who have died, including the departed Commanders-in-Chief like my father who is buried in Libingan ng mga Bayani. I know that my father in his grave will be honored to have soldiers being his next doors neighbors, living soldiers not only the dead soldiers.

This proclamation will give the chance for our landless soldiers living in the designated area to buy the land and therefore, be squatters no more.

I am also taking this opportunity to renew my commitment to the modernization of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. The first year of modernization implementation requires a budget of 10 billion pesos. Last year a SARO was released amounting to 5.4 billion pesos. Earlier when I spoke before the Armed Forces, I said that when you have spent one-third of this 5.4 billion, I would replenish it. But now I realize that this 5.4 billion cannot be spent until the end of the year because it is only the end of the year when the bidding process will be over.

And therefore, I have to revise my commitment. Now, I have given instructions to make the whole 10 billion pesos available this year. I instructed the department of budget and management that it should convert the 5.4 billion pesos SARO into an actual release to the modernization trust fund. I also instructed the Secretary of Finance to help the Department of National Defense find the balance of 4.6 billion pesos to make a total of 10 billion pesos for the year 2001 as available for modernization. Secretary Camacho is now working with Secretary Reyes regarding this and probably the means of making this available will be primarily through a lease package. Indeed, I welcome innovative approaches to get the AFP and the PAF modernization program going.

I am aware that the Philippine Air Force direly needs more aircrafts. I wanted to transfer one of my helicopters to the Philippine Air Force for your use, but given that, we haven’t still identified who can afford to pay for the maintenance and given that, I have my weekly travel needs, what we now have is a time-sharing arrangement between the presidential wing and the rest of the Air Force.

Right now we have only one operational c-130. This has been your workhorse to meet your multifarious airlift missions. It carries troops and supplies to and from various battlefronts. And now, the only c-130 we have must also deliver relief goods to the victims of the Mayon eruption.

With only one c-130 in operation, still the Philippine Air Force has proudly achieved so much, way beyond the endurance of men and machines. What more if you have more C-130’s?

Seeing the acute shortage of our airlift capacity, our government has made representations with our friends in the United States. And the U.S., too, our friends in the U.S. too, are aware of this need and how much you have done with so little.

I am happy therefore, to announce that our U.S. friends have responded favorably. The transfer on a grant basis of one more c-130 is now going through final processing by the U.S. congress and we are assured of approval and you can expect to have another C-130 soon, courtesy of our friends in the United States.

I am also happy to announce that we appealed to the United States to accelerate the delivery also on a grant basis of refurbished Huey helicopters that you requested from them last year. Again, they have favorably responded and promised to deliver 5 helicopters in the next few months.

I have also agreed in principle to the acquisition of air sensor surveillance capacity. The unfortunate hostage taking at Dos Palmas highlighted the need for sensor capability. Just like the officers and men of the PAF, I would like to see our aerial surveillance capability in place to ward off not just hostage-takers but also illegal fishers, smugglers and foreign poachers.

I know these needs are urgent, and I know we have to balance them with other similarly urgent concerns that demand attention and expenditure of our scarce resources. For instance, just as the law says that the first year of Armed Forces modernization should allocate 10 billion pesos for that. The law also says, that the first year of agricultural modernization should allocate 20 billion pesos for that. And so therefore, there indeed are competing uses for our scarce budgetary resources. To contribute further to the PAF modernization program, I have also instructed the Secretary of Defense to sell my presidential plane and use the proceeds for Philippine Air Force modernization.

On this therefore, your anniversary, I ask you once again to carry on with your dedication, professionalism and inspiring courage. And be assured that you have the full support of the second Macapagal who is Commander-in-chief of the Republic of the Philippines.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the 54th Anniversary of the Philippine Air Force (PAF). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409213454/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8672&Itemid=38