Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, during the overnight celebration of the 22nd anniversary of El Shaddai – DWXI Prayer Partnerships Foundation International, Inc. and the birthday celebration of Brother Mike Velarde

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Brother Mike Velarde and to the many guests who came tonight to greet Brother Mike. I will not mention everyone or time will run out, given the time Brother Mike allotted for greetings. But to all of us, Happy 22nd Anniversary. and of course, besides that, to our servant leader, Brother Mike — happy, happy birthday!

Brothers and sisters, as Brother Mike always says, whenever I am here, this is my 15th year with El Shaddai out of its 22 years. So I thank everyone for the blessings and graces given to me by the Lord, just as He gives to all of you, to all the children of Yahweh El Shaddai.

And many ask when they see the large number of people always present. What is the staying power of El Shaddai? What is the staying power of Brother Mike? In the fifteen years that I have been with you in these activities, perhaps I can say, I understand that because of the inspirations that come to all of us when we pray. As Brother Mike said before, when I was not yet President, I was often in the front rather than the back because I saw Brother Mike’s face when he spoke.

And sometimes, I think about ten years ago, I was in the front, 1996, with my classmates in school praying, those who loved to pray. And one of my devout classmates, when Brother Mike was speaking, whispered to me, she said, “Brother Mike is truly annointed.” That, I think, is the reason for the staying power of the prayer partners of Yahweh El Shaddai. In other words, the blessing to the prayer partners of Yahweh El Shaddai comes from the Lord.

But those who are annointed, the anointment lasts only as long as they have a covenant with the Lord. And tonight, Brother Mike said, the symbol, the logo of our celebration is the rainbow. And the rainbow first appeared in our stories in the bible after the great flood as a symbol of the Lord’s covenant with those who follow Him. So our rainbow — it’s there behind us tonight — is the reason for the staying power of the El Shaddai prayer partners because they remain in covenant with the Lord.

Sister Belen told me earlier that when the activities moved from the PICC to Parañaque, there was also a rainbow at the first activity. It was truly a sign that the covenant, the anointment, the praying of the children of Yahweh El Shaddai continues.

That is why your servant often asks for advice from Brother Mike because it is good to ask for advice from those who are annointed and Brother Mike always advises me, whatever else he may say, there is always advice for reconciliation.

So tonight, when Brother Mike said to raise both hands and ask the Lord for what you want, what I asked for — reconciliation. So that our anniversary will always be blessed by the Lord and all of Brother Mike’s birthdays will always be blessed by the Lord.

Again, to all of us, Happy 22nd Anniversary and happy, happy birthday! To our servant leader Brother Mike.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 22nd Anniversary Overnight Celebration of El Shaddai – DWXI Prayer Partnerships Foundation International, Inc. and Birthday Celebration of Brother Mike Velarde. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212148/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2881&Itemid=38