Thank you very much, Chairperson Myrna Yao, our leader in the Philippine Women's Council.

Mrs. Leonarda Camacho, the moving spirit of Balikatan; all of you, friends; our friends, you may sit down.

Happy 20th anniversary of your movement! As Narda said, you are here every year but this is special, a 20th Anniversary Jubilee. Congratulations!

Earlier, Narda introduced the one who buys the garbage and you are really known for your leadership in garbage segregation so it can be sold. And Narda said, from house to house, 1.8 million was sold last year. Congratulations!

But this year, because it’s 20 years, we can review what you have been doing over many years. You were also among the first, as I understand it, to act to take care of our environment. So this buying of garbage and recycling is just one of your many accomplishments over the past twenty years and more.

In 1980, the issue about the environment wasn't yet hot, you already started the campaign of planting trees, right Narda? And in organizing your women's cooperatives from Cagayan Valley, all the way to Mindanao, many have been helped to have a livelihood.

And now, as I understand it, your focus is on starting cooperatives and teaching livelihood skills and proper nutrition to women. So congratulations to Women’s Balikatan.

And since you started your movement 20 years ago, many things have changed since then for women here in the Philippines. We are proud of the gains in gender equality in the Philippines. This is one of the most important achievements we have under the United Nations Millennium Development Goals. I think I already told you this before, we are among the top six in the world and the top in Asia in terms of gender parity. We are number one in the world in terms of gender parity in literacy and in health. In fact, Filipinas exceed men in the field of simple and functional literacy.

We’re also number one in gender equality in terms of enrollment in primary, secondary and tertiary education. In fact, more females enroll in schools than males, and fewer females drop out.

But as we face the most significant global economic and financial crisis in a generation in the world, women take a harder hit. A disproportionate number of women are single heads of households living in poverty and receive low-quality maternal care.

Thankfully, our inflation rate is slowing down. Because with the soaring prices of food and oil, the poor women are on the frontlines of managing the strains that these uncertain world economic ties are placing on families and community.

The Women’s Balikatan Movement can be a champion for women during this time of global need. More than ever, now is the time to hear the voice of women to defend the rights and opportunities of women, which is what the Women’s Balikatan Movement shows.

So let us continue the fight for justice, dignity and equality for women. Let us ensure that the burden of the tightening global economy does not cause additional suffering to women.

Your Movement has already helped women a lot. And you have also helped a lot, as Narda said, with the programs of our administration, what we call the 3 E’s — Economy, Education and Environment.

We came to office determined to change the strategic paradigm for the Philippine economy. A strong and growing economy is the most important thing we have strived to establish to help achieve peace, order and stability in our country.

We are tirelessly working to address the challenges brought about by the weakening global economy coupled with the increase in the price of oil and food. But the fact is, this is happening all over the world. The events in the United States and the weakening of the world economy are truly making things difficult for the country all over the world. And we are not insulated from them.

But our economy is more stable now than ever before. The economic and fiscal reforms – let's not forget our economic and fiscal reforms under our administration were started by Narda's son, former Secretary of Finance Lito Camacho – and we are implementing them even now in these last years in cooperation with Congress. This has strengthened our macroeconomic fundamentals and our banking or financial system. Our economy is strong enough to withstand the external turmoil.

We have created almost seven million jobs in seven years. Investments continue to come in despite continued volatility in global markets. Narda’s son, Boy, is bringing investors now. Congratulations! Welcome, our investors!

As a result of our economic turnaround, we were also able to invest in the most important sectors to alleviate the harsh impact on our poor of the increase in the price of food and oil that hit this year. In addition, we are investing in the most extensive in history modernization of infrastructure such as roads and bridges. Isn't it that those coming from Isabela, our North Expressway and other roads passed through there are already beautiful.

We are fixing the area around… I have… when I drove to Quirino, there was a part there in Nueva Vizcaya, right? It was bumpy so we are having it fixed. I don't know if the… I don't know if the bulldozers are there now. Are they there already? Very good. See. At least when we give orders, they are carried out because we have funds for it.

We are also investing in expanded education, health care and other social services. Meanwhile, we are balancing these necessary investments with a commitment to meet our fiscal obligations. That is why our country's debt is also decreasing.

We have been working hard on all fronts to manage inflationary pressures. So as I said earlier, thank goodness yesterday we had good news, inflation is leveling off. Inflation this past month was lower than the month before. We have also been working hard to provide a safety net to those hit hardest by these global events. Most notably, we are working hard to ensure a stable supply of food and to have food on every table.

Regarding the Millennium Development Goals, the goal, to cut down hunger by one-half by 2015, according to U.N. measurements, we can definitely do it. We have also introduced programs to lift the burden of high fuel prices off our people.

And though we are hoping that the U.S. will not slide into recession, I have directed our economic team to draw up a contingency plan to cushion the impact of such a possible recession on the ordinary people of the Philippines.

There is still much to be done. We are striving to achieve our Philippine Reform Agenda. We will continue to defend the economy, education, environment, as I said earlier. And we will work to fix the corruption that has unfortunately long plagued our nation.

Therefore, despite the storms in the global economy, we have great faith in our country. We are strongly hopeful that we will reach a bright future. We are deeply committed to being a force for good. That is why for the past few years, you have celebrated your anniversary here every year. This is because I love the Women’s Balikatan Movement. And at all times, I am grateful that we are working together to serve our country, the Philippines.

Happy Anniversary!

Congratulations to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 20th Anniversary of the Metro Manila Council of the Women Balikatan Movement. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135140/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1759&Itemid=38