Thank you very much Secretary Reyes for your introduction of me. It was good that you were chosen to introduce me because I was also planning to introduce you to our fellow Filipinos as one of the heroes of Edsa Dos, Secretary Angelo Reyes.

I also said that, I will first break protocol so that another hero of Edsa Dos, Former Governor Chavit Singson of Ilocos Sur, will also be recognized.

Now, I will return to greetings and re-introduce, if I have already introduced them earlier, our various companions, the government officials who visited here on our official visit. First of all, Senator John Osmena, Senator from Cebu and Chairman of the Committee on Finance of the Senate.

You know, last night, I was telling Prime Minister Thaksin about the history of our country, of both our countries. I gave him a jar, a 16th century jar made in Thailand and found in a wreck off the coast of Zambales, and I told him that in 1521, Pigapetta — the one who wrote the diary of Magellan's voyage — said that there were Siamese boats going to Cebu. So it's good that our Senator from Cebu is with me because he is a symbol of the relationship between Thailand and the Philippines for the last many, many centuries.

I would also like to introduce Congresswoman from Quezon City Nanette Castelo-Daza, one of the youngest Congresswomen in our country — a symbol of our new generation, the 21st century governance of our country. Also here is the congressman from my province, Congressman Oca Rodriguez. Congressman also from the province of my husband Mike Arroyo, Congressman Monico Fuentabella of Negros Occidental. Also here from Mindanao and he is inviting attendees to the Mindanao Business Conference in his province, Governor of Surigao, Governor Lyndon Barbers. And also a Mayor from Cebu, Thailand has a lot of sugar, his place also has a lot of sugar in Bogo, Cebu, Mayor Celestino Martinez III.

Of course, I would like to congratulate Sonia Brady, your new Ambassador; and though you’ve only known her for 10 days which means you haven’t really known her at all, I would like to let you know that if you have five star generals in the military, you have five star ambassadors in the foreign service and she is one of them.

Earlier you probably met Secretary Dick Gordon of Tourism; Secretary Cito Lorenzo who is helping me find a million jobs in agriculture; Secretary Lito Sarmiento who is helping me modernize our agriculture; Secretary Yongyong Afable, he holds many positions in my government — Press Secretary, Spokesman, Head of the PMS, … And our Senior Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs, Larry Baja. And I also want to greet those from the Philippine Embassy because you have done a lot of work preparing for this trip.

And I also want to greet the various Filipinos here, if I may mention the names of the various leaders who organized this affair — Mr. Alvin Nadal, the president of the Association of Filipinos in Thailand. He is very young, I remember your predecessors here, the Filipino community leaders before, they were there before, is Roy Navarro here? Roy Navarro, Ramon del Rosario, those were the ones here before, during my generation and afterwards. Now another young man here; Ms. Victoria …, the president of the Association of Changmai — Changmai is the town of Prime Minister Thaksin; Art Nieva in Pataya; Neil Batea in Phuket; Bernadette Reyes …, the president of the Ladies Group; Jess Ballesteros of the Filipino Golfers Club, Aureo Dacanay of the Bowlers League; Camila Jose-Lim of the Tennis Association; Roy Velario of the Filipino Association of the Asian Institute of Technology, where the father of our speaker earlier was also, right? Ka Dante, your father is also from AIT? Yes. So, I would like to greet also our young man ka Dante who has not forgotten the Philippine root; Lolita Pamaran from the teachers group; Father Allan from the religious sector — included in the religious sector are the nuns of Assumption, they are here, Sister Stella, how nice to see you; Lita Tuason, the musicians group — they are the pioneer overseas Filipinos in the whole world, 1950s, 1960s, they are already here. And the Filipino staff of the various organs of the United Nations based here in Bangkok, I also greet you all.

Therefore, to all of you, good morning.

And I am very happy to have the opportunity to be with you today, here on my first visit to Thailand as President of the Philippines.

And as we have been told earlier by Ambassador Brady, we have more than 5,000 Filipinos all over the Kingdom of Thailand. And many of you consider Thailand your second home and you make significant contributions to the Thai society but you also make significant contributions to the Philippine economy. Filipino educators — that’s why we have an education association here — Filipino educators abound in many Thai schools and institutions of higher learning. The father of Dante is there at AIT. On this trip of mine, the Secretary of Health grew up with Filipino teachers in his school at St. Joseph.

And Filipino musicians have been proud to work with Thai entertainers. I told Prime Minister Thaksin last night that we have many Filipino musicians here. He said, “yes”. He said that in all the good hotels and clubs, there are Filipinos. I said they are our original OFWs. I said, yes, and he said, “yes, and many of them have in fact already decided to live here.” He mentioned another one, Tony Aguilar, he said that he is here and his son is also a very well-known musician.

Our own business executives are well positioned in prestigious companies. I mentioned those I know from the past, Roy Navarro and Ramon del Rosario, but I know that there are many Roy Navarros and Ramon del Rosarios in this generation of Filipinos in Thailand. Filipino experts help man the organs of the United Nations and other international organizations. Filipino religious missionaries run charity homes for the underprivileged and also teach the young.

Our own technical people and social development workers are respected in your own fields of specialization.

So, we may not be the largest expatriate community in Thailand, but we certainly have one of the most productive foreign groups in the kingdom. So, Congratulations to all of you.

As professionals, you probably don’t have too many problems as OFWs, so to speak. But nonetheless, I am aware that there are still certain difficulties experienced by some of our people here.

And I am counting on our embassy, especially our new ambassador to Thailand, Sonia Brady, who was, I said, is one of the best ambassadors in our foreign service today, to provide you with the appropriate assistance so that our Filipino workers, particularly our world-class musicians, will be accorded sympathy and understanding, the sympathy and understanding that you deserve by the Thai government.

At the same time, I am glad to learn that the various Filipino associations who organized this affair have done a great deal to build the Filipino community spirit in Thailand. I think, the fact that a young man who came to Thailand when he was about three years old still feels Filipino today can be attributed to the fact that the Filipino community remains a community.

And as your president, on behalf of all your countrymen in the Philippines, I commend you because through your excellence in work, you elevate the dignity of the Filipino people. You have shown the world that a Filipino should be a source of pride and admiration.

Throughout the world, countries, investors and parents feel the great help of Filipinos, of great Filipino workers whether your job is in a hotel, in a factory or in an office. That’s why foreigners all over the world think that the Philippines is the home of the great Filipino worker.

The Philippine government and the Filipino people in the Philippines recognize the contribution of overseas Filipinos to the economy and national livelihood.

Through your great help, you invigorate the economy and contribute to the development of the country.

On top of the good reputation you give to our country as a home to great Filipino workers, millions of young people are able to study or finish their education with your help.

As Ka Dante said, hopefully every Filipino is studying. And that’s true, we are striving for that, because grade school and high school are free, but there are miscellaneous fees, we are trying to remove those miscellaneous fees; and there are 1,600 barangays that don't have schools yet, so even if it's free, there are no schools, it's difficult to study if there are no schools. We are building schools there.

But in the meantime when we’re trying to do all this, the Filipinos are grateful because with the help of overseas Filipinos, many are able to study.

And thousands of new houses are being built and new lives are being started by those building new houses because much of what you send is also used to build houses.

Because of your help, we have been able to launch many businesses – even small businesses throughout the country – because much of the money you send home is used as capital by your relatives. And the successful businesses that are being established in our country because of your remittances are a major pillar of our economy.

You know, for example, we have what is called a human development index. That is a measure not only of economic development but also of human development – it includes literacy rate, per capita income and longevity rate. We rank the provinces of the Philippines in terms of human development. And well, not surprisingly, the provinces of Central Luzon like Pampanga and Bulacan are there, of course there are many industries; the provinces of Calabarzon are there, of course there are many industries – Cavite, Laguna, Batangas. But surprisingly, Ilocos Norte, Abra are also included. And they asked why? Because the source of those who are able to study, are healthy because of sufficient food and high income are the overseas Filipinos. So when a place has many overseas Filipinos from there, their human development index is high.

Many barangays, towns, cities, and provinces have flourished thanks to the contributions of overseas Filipinos. And many of them have already established businesses, resulting in good economic activity. In Laoag, for example, there are 29 banks due to the large amount of remittances from Ilocano overseas workers. That's why Laoag is a net lender – a lot of deposits come in, and a lot is lent out to other places.

Therefore, this is the result of the work of the great Filipino worker who sends six billion dollars to the Philippines every year. Imagine, the largest investments in the Philippines, foreign investment, are five billion dollars – Shell in Malampaya. But Filipinos send six billion, so every year, you give, you send to the Philippines, you invest in the Philippines more than the biggest single foreign investor in our country. Therefore, you are major economic investors in our country.

Usually, Filipinos abroad are called overseas workers. I think, based on the stories I've shared, it would be more fitting to call overseas Filipinos not overseas Filipino workers but overseas Filipino investors because you don't forget to invest in our country.

You are overseas investors who invest in the development of our country every day. You invest your “productive years” for the sake of our nation. That's why I salute you, and your fellow Filipinos salute you.

And it is only right that the country reciprocate your help.

In my State of the Nation Address last year, July, I said that passing the absentee voting bill is a major priority of our government so that overseas Filipinos can be empowered to vote and choose the leaders of our government. I just signed the certification as urgent for this bill. I signed it as urgent because it has already passed the second reading in the House of Representatives. So, the time has come to sign it as urgent, so join me in praying that it passes and becomes a law.

The Philippine economy will, for the foreseeable future, continue to be heavily dependent on overseas-worker remittances. A country as developed as one that progressed ahead of us in the 1970s, they also had many overseas Thai workers.

As Ka Dante said, seven million Filipinos are working abroad. And so, on the basis of this and of the nation’s humanitarian responsibilities to its people wherever you are, our government is working doubly hard to strengthen overseas Filipino workers’ protection.

For instance, the Department of Foreign Affairs is floating “Bagong Bayani Bonds.” Have you done that already, Larry? To support a new package of high socio-economic benefits to OFWs. And the “Bagong Bayani Bonds” will raise funds to enable you, the overseas Filipinos, to mobilize your savings to be invested in various projects like housing programs back home. This is one reason why I accepted the proposal of Vice President Tito Guingona to appoint Sixto Roxas as Undersecretary for Economic Affairs of the DFA — you many financial executives here know Sixto Roxas, the one who established investment banking in our country. Later on in his retirement from government, he did many bond floatations for local government units. So, perhaps he can implement this bond for OFWs.

We also have a housing program for overseas Filipinos under the Housing and Urban Developing Coordinating Douncil. This is part of our goal to provide 100,000 housing units a year for workers, and these workers need not be workers working in the Philippines but workers working abroad because you send houses, money for houses for your folks back home.

We have also scrapped the requirement for overseas Filipinos to file an income tax information sheet, and with that we have lifted the penalty for non-filing.

We strengthen bilateral relationships with countries hosting large numbers of Filipinos. This includes Thailand.

Tonight, in fact, I will have an audience with his Majesty the King of Thailand. The first time I met His Majesty was when I was still a teenager, when my late father, President Diosdado Macapagal, hosted the King and Queen during their Majesty’s State Visit to Manila in 1963.

In my State of the Nation Address last year, I cited the serious challenges facing the Philippines.

The economy I inherited was very well described by our young man ka Dante — stark and daunting. At that time, when I became president I inherited four million jobless Filipinos. And this four million meant a rise in poverty incidence to 40 percent of the population. The budget I inherited was a budget that threatened to balloon to 225 billion pesos. And so I thought, how daunting. We need to have common sense to address this.

Work. Education. Own home. Food on every table. This was, and is, in common sense and plain talk, the core of my vision.

I also urged everyone listening to my State of the Nation Address to set aside bickering and politicking for at least one year. Instead of conflict, I asked that we work together for one year for the good of the people. Because if every day, no matter what, it’s just talk and talk that’s written in the newspaper, and the newspapers in the Philippines are in English, well of course it reaches international television.

To succeed, our national agenda must revolve around four components — four elements of the struggle against poverty.

The first is an economic philosophy of free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century. Doing business to create more jobs.

The second is a modernized agricultural sector founded on social equity. And for that, I have a presidential adviser who oversees the various agencies involved in agricultural modernization, and that is Lito Sarmiento. We will increase the income and harvest of poor farmers.

The third component is a social bias toward the disadvantaged to balance our economic development plan. Caring for the parts of society left behind by progress.

And the fourth component is to raise the moral standards of government and society. Morality in government and society as the foundation of true development.

Difficult and daunting as was the economy I inherited. The New York incident further changed the global mood. World business conditions became more uncertain.

But despite the stark economy that I inherited, and the uncertain world business conditions, in 2001, the first year of my administration, we made progress.

After more than a year, our efforts have not yet paid off but they are starting to pay off: growth is respectable — 3.7 percent GNP growth rate in a sea of economies with negative growth; inflation is at its lowest in the last 15 years; the price of rice has not changed; the price of fares has not changed; the price of mackerel has not changed. That is why we are looking at the prices of the most important commodities for the common people. And watching all of that has helped bring the inflation to 3.6 percent, lowest in 15 years.

Unemployment, well I inherited four million unemployed. In the past year, we are able to give to job 1.5 million additional Filipinos. So, that our unemployment rate went down from 11.3 percent to 10.3 percent — still at daunting number as far as I’m concern. That’s why I said, it starting to pay-off, I hasn’t paid-off because if you still have 10.3 percent unemployment that’s still very big.

Interest rates are at their lowest in history; the peso is stable. Usually a struggling economy must choose between a stable currency and low interest rates. Like if it wants to stabilize its currency like for instance in the previous administration 56 pesos to the dollars and yet interest rates are going, what, 36%? That the administration tried to fight one or the other last year, they decided that they would work on stabilizing the peso, so they raised the interest rates sky high, they still couldn’t stabilize the peso. On the other hand, there are administrations where you seek to reduce interest rates, but that means you need to let the exchange rate run away. But not in the Philippines today. We have a stable exchange rate and low interest rates. This combination is bedrock evidence of sound economic fundamentals and a correct economic policy.

We achieved this, among other things, by putting our fiscal house in order. And as a result, our credit ratings are improving.

NEXI, JBIC, the World Bank, the IMF, the ADB, J.P. Morgan, Goldman Sachs, Fitch, Moodys, and Standard and Poors have all endorsed our economic fundamentals, and our international credit rating has been upgraded from negative to stable. This is being reflected in the international capital market, where the spreads in the market for our issues are growing narrower and narrower by the day. But of course there are still many daunting challenges ahead.

What are our growth sectors for the future? I have identified tourism as one of the industries that can create tremendous opportunities for our economic recovery. You have seen that here in Thailand. In 1997 when Thailand was afflicted in a crisis that spread throughout the other parts of the region, how did Thailand strategize its recovery? By pushing tourism and it succeeded. We are determined to get a share of Thailand’s tourist arrivals that peaked at almost 10 million last year. The challenge is how to convince these visitors coming to Thailand to fly another three hours eastward to gain an experience of Filipino hospitality.

We have already started the work in this direction. Dick has been talking about it: we have engaged Thailand in a “twinning program,” in which the two countries will be promoted as a single tourist destination to markets in Europe, the Americas, and Oceania. The Philippine Department of Tourism and the Tourism Authority of Thailand have produced posters and brochures that jointly promote the two countries. Philippine and Thai travel agents and tour operators have also agreed — and they will be signing today — on marketing strategies that will maximize the potential benefits from the program.

I also call on all of you to join and participate in the tourism “Volunteer 12” program where Filipinos abroad are encouraged to bring one tourist to the Philippines.

I encourage all of you to be our ambassadors of goodwill and to maintain our friendly relations with the Thai government and the Thai people.

The days and months ahead will still be filled with daunting challenges. All these beautiful things that the international credit rating agencies have been saying about us, all of this lowering of the interest rate, lowering of the inflation rate, decent growth rate, stable peso, all of this must be translated into more jobs, more food, more schooling for our people. But I do not fear as long as I have your support.

So once again, thank you for making the Philippines proud with the contributions you make to Thai society. Thank you also for continuing to boost the economy of our country, the Philippines, while you contribute to Thai society. Please continue to do this because I need you.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during a Meeting with the Filipino Community. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225639/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8299&Itemid=38