Thank you. Maraming salamat.

Maraming salamat, Ambassador Del Rosario. I’d like to greet also Consul General Delia Meñez-Rosal; and I’d like to greet the Governor of the State of California, Governor Gray Davis. Thank you for providing veterans benefits ahead of the federal government; I’d like to thank San Francisco Mayor Willy Brown for his key to the city. Actually, this is the second key to the city. You gave me one when I was Vice President. But this is an upgraded one; maraming salamat kay Mrs. Loida Nicolas-Lewis, the National Chairperson of the National Federation of Filipino-American Association. Thank you for being here, part of the leadership that you display even if you are based in New York; and to Rodel Rodis, who was a very important and brilliant student leader in his time in the Philippines. Now a very important lawyer here. Thank you for your work as Northern California regional care of NAFFAA, and for helping put together… Being one of the leaders of that wonderful global reunion of Filipinos here in San Francisco, held here in San Francisco.

I’d like to introduce the members of my party. First of all, there is my husband Mike Arroyo; my Press Secretary Toting Bunye; I have another Cabinet member here, Secretary for Political Affairs Joey Rufino; and if you have any complaints whenever you arrive in Manila, we have the manager of the NAIA International Airport, Ed Manda.

So, I wanted to introduce the head of my Presidential Management Staff, but he’s gone. He left already earlier. And so, I thank Ambassador Del Rosario and Consul General Delia Rosal for being part now of my delegation. And to all of you, good afternoon.

Malugud kung Cabalen Capangpangan, pasalamatan cu pung lubus ing pamanyatang yu ngening bengi.

Every time I remember my mother's side who are Ilocano from Pangasinan, I thank you all, and I thank you now, tonight. No, it's still early, it's still early.

To my companions from Mindanao where I grew up, thank you very much for coming tonight.

And to the youth of my husband who is Ilonggo, thank you very much for attending our program today.

And to all of you — because all Filipinos know Tagalog, even those in San Francisco — thank you very much for your tireless help to those in need in our country.

As I said, I am with my spouse, Attorney Jose Miguel Arroyo, tonight. Because even when they were young, their family always came here. They spent their vacations here. It is my mother-in-law’s favorite city. So, I think it would be accurate always to say that we always leave our hearts in San Francisco.

When my itinerary for APEC was first made, they only planned a technical stopover from Silicon Valley, because I had already been here last year. And they said that most likely those from San Francisco would go to Silicon Valley. It turned out many of you were there yesterday. But I said, I want to talk again with our many friends in San Francisco. They have a lot they want to tell me. So one more day, we will be in San Francisco. That’s why I am here with you now. And to those who are here now, even if you were here last year, and to those who are here now, even if you were there yesterday, thank you very much.

I would like to greet, aside from Mayor Willy Vrown, two other City Mayors, both Filipino City Mayors and we are very proud of them. There’s Henry Manayan from Melphitas. You know Henry Manayan is on his last term like Mayor Brown. And well, he’s been such a good Filipino here in Silicon Valley. He wants to be a good Filipino representing Philippine interest in the state assembly next time around. I’d like to greet the other city mayor, Filipino city mayor in the Filipino city of California bay area and that is Mayor Mike Guingona of Daly City.

I remember Mike Guingona was there in one of my meetings with the Filipino community in Daly City when I was a senator. And I was telling some of you, some of the San Francisco community about the bill that U had filed then on overseas voting. Well, Loida is right, I prefer to call it overseas voting than absentee voting. But like many other overseas voting bills or absentee voting bills — whatever you call them — before I filed mine and after I filed mine, my bill at that time didn’t even progress beyond the committee level.

So when I became president, I certified as one of my five most urgent bills, the Overseas Voting Bill.

And so now I am glad that for the first time, after so many attempts in so many administrations, the overseas voting bill passed both Houses of Congress just a few days ago. Now, let us pray that the Senate and the House can iron out their conflicting provisions soon. And when I go back to Manila, I will convey to them your own recommendations about what the final version should be. And as soon as they reconcile their conflicting versions, I will sign it into law within 24 hours.

The other bill that is so important for you, especially for those who have been here for a long time and have become citizens is the Dual Citizenship Bill. And this is another one of my five most urgent bills that I told Congress about. It has also passed third and final reading in the Senate.

And here in the United States, we continue to work for the benefit of Filipino veterans of World war II. Loida told you that when I saw President Bush, my last parting words to him was “don’t forget the Filipino Veterans.” Last year, in my first shot when I met him, my first words were, “we’ve been your partner for so long, don’t forget our Filipino Veterans.” And at that time, President Bush told me, “yes.” His administration would review the services and benefits for Filipino Veterans. And I’m so happy that for the first time, after so many attempts, the Veterans Bill, the Veterans Health Bill was passed in the U.S. Congress. It was passed last July to provide health care for U.S. Filipino veterans worth 65 million u.s. dollars. The appropriation measure is now in the U.S. Senate committee, in the Committee on Veterans Affairs. Upon my request, President Bush has indicated his support for the Veterans Health Bill. Therefore, I ask the Filipino-American community to contact your Senators and ask them to urge the Committee on Veterans Affairs to put the bill to a vote. That should be your job now as Filipino-Americans voting for them.

Meanwhile… Thank you. Thank you for representing the five percent of the Filipino people who don’t like Americans. But 95 percent of the people do and I represent them.

Meanwhile, while we’re waiting for the Veterans Health Bill to get passed by the U.S. Senate Committee, the Bush administration on the executive side is giving veterans assistance for the Philippines in the amount of 500,000 dollars per year. Again, for the first time, after so many attempts in so many administrations. Furthermore, the first 500,000 dollars will be given to the Philippine government this month of October.

I think we could not have gotten this far, passing it in the house and getting it into the Senate Committee if not for the good work of the Filipino-American community. So, we laud you and congratulate you for your work in bringing the Filipino Veterans Bill this far at last.

We also laud the initiative of the National Federation of Filipino-American Associations headed by Loida and the American Civil Liberties Union in filing a petition for injunction to stop the enforcement of the U.S. citizen requirement for the federalized job of airport screeners. We agree that experience matters in securing U.S. airports and planes. Though this may be an internal issue to the U.S., I have asked Ambassador Del Rosario to make known our sentiments on the matter before the appropriate U.S. officials.

I am here in California for the same reason I was in Mexico at the APEC leaders meeting: to focus on the security and economy of the Philippines. In this interconnected world, opening a door in Silicon Valley can help open an opportunity for job creation in the Philippines.

Whether it’s a fight against global terrorism or improving education, at the end of the day, it is always about the economy and improving the lives of our Philippine citizens.

If you remember, when I became president 21 months ago, I inherited an economy with 4 million jobless Filipinos and a 40 percent poverty incidence.

Today, despite the global slowdown, despite the slowdown in Silicon Valley which is our number one single export market, we had a healthy economy that has delivered one of the highest growth rates in the world for the first half of 2002. We are also taking steps to further strengthen our macro-economic fundamentals. We will continue to be vigilant in our efforts to reduce our deficit. And in this regard, we believe that the revenue enhancement measures being implemented by the bureau of internal revenue, as well as the strict controls on government spending that have been instituted will support our success on this front.

As we do this, we will focus on the positive indicators of strength of our domestic driven economy, such things as:

Growth in the Philippines has been fueled this past year by among others continued strength of services and a strong recovery in our industrial sector. The growth in the services sector has been supported by continued expansion in telecoms, trade and private success. May I say that our rebound in manufacturing — which is negative last year — was a result of our rebounding exports, and services has grown and has fueled also our ICT industry. Another one of the services that has grown very fast is tourism. And I thank you, the Filipino-Americans for continuing to be our balikbayan tourists. Another source of growth this past year has been the non-bank and insurance industries. They have pushed the finance sector to post the highest growth in the last four years. The growth in industrial sector has been led by manufacturing particularly manufactured exports. Private construction is on the rebound. In the agriculture sector, fisheries and forestry have been particularly strong. Inflation is at a 15-year low, so with interest rates. And we have increasing levels of remittances from overseas Filipinos, from you — up 39 percent in the last six months. What you have sent your relatives has boosted personal consumption and fueled our domestic economy. Last year, you remitted a total of 6 billion U.S. dollars. This year — yes, thank you. This year, for the first six months alone you already remitted 4 billion U.S. dollars. Filipino-Americans make up one-third of our overseas Filipinos, but you bring two-thirds of our overseas remittances to the Philippines. Thank you so much for your support. On our part, government consumption, it has been flat because we need fiscal discipline, and we are therefore permitting private-sector led growth. Our exports which have fueled our manufacturing increase, are up. They have grown by 20 percent.

When I visited Andy Grove yesterday, and I told him in INTEL that our exports have increased 20 percent fueled by our increase exports to silicon valley, he said, “how surprising because Silicon Valley’s growth has been flat.” But the reason why our exports have grown 20 percent, why our electronic exports have grown is not because the total market has grown but because we have gotten more market share from other producers.

Our main battle is to win against poverty within the decade. But because of the world around us today, the world of the war against terrorism, we must also seek permanent national stability.

Thus, I would like to report to you that because of our aggressive drive against terrorism, despite the desperate resort to hit and run bombings, the domestic terrorists particularly Abu Sayyaf are on the run. We have captured the Zamboanga bombers. We have even captured one of the perpetrators of the bus bombing in Manila.

We have crushed at least five kidnap-for-ransom syndicates, as a result of which the Filipino-Chinese community, which is the favorite victim of these kidnap gangs, tells me now that all is quiet on the Binondo front.

These macro statistics translate also into benefits for the poor. The price of rice for the poor is stable at 14 and 16 pesos depending on where you buy it. Some 200,000 urban families, urban poor families have acquired the right to buy the land that they occupy, so they are no longer squatters.

Schools are being built in barangays where there used to be none, there are 1,000 of these type of barangays. And more than 3 million Filipino, poor Filipino people now have health insurance — something you take for granted here in America. These achievements were attained during the 21 months of my administration.

For the next six months, even as we are resolving the terrorist threats in our country, I am focused on a tightly consolidated eight-point work program:

The first is to strengthen our small and medium enterprises. The Central Bank is relaxing its financial document requirements for loans to them, and the field offices of the DTI (Department of Trade and Industry) are mandated to concentrate their services on assisting these SMEs with their project proposal documents required to access bank money.

You can help this program especially through your Adopt-a-Barangay by providing a million pesos livelihood for the barangays that you have adopted, because that will go along way. Small and medium enterprises are the most efficient users of capital in our economy. So, until exports revive, or until silicon valley recovers, until the world economy recovers, we must build up domestic demand. We must give the power to the SMEs to do their work efficiently as they do with capital.

These goals really are uppermost in my work program for the next six months as we resolve the terrorist threats in our country.

This a tightly consolidated work program. I’m giving my personal attention to this first, which is the small and medium enterprise development:

To strengthen our small and medium enterprises is the first;

The second program is to jumpstart housing. And again, you can help because you buy houses for your folks back home. Housing has the biggest multiplier and there is bank money for housing — the central bank is relaxing the requirements;

The third is to reduce transport costs from Mindanao to Luzon;

The fourth is to begin the infrastructure that will decongest Metro Manila;

The fifth is to mark up the contribution of the PCGG to our fiscal resources;

The sixth is to make Makati a specific urban tourist destination for your safe shopping;

The seventh is to stimulate private investment in agriculture;

The eighth is to begin the complete staff work to make the reclamation area in Roxas Boulevard a tourism complex to be called ‘The Bagong Nayong Pilipino”.

But no president can build a strong republic single handedly. I can do this well only if I can count on the support of the almost 3 million Filipino-Americans especially the extra active Filipino-Americans of California and San Francisco.

And so I ask you, stay with me. Even as you continue to help build this great American nation, help me build a strong Philippine republic.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the “Fil-Am Community Salutes the President” Program. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210643/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8399&Itemid=38