Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Annual Membership Meeting of the Financial Executives Institutes of Philippines (FINEX)

[Delivered at the Grand Ballroom, Intercontinental Hotel, Makati, October 2, 2001]

Thank you very much Secretary Camacho.

I’d also like to greet Secretary Lina who’s in the table together with the other 23 paragons of corporate ethics; Rupert, Dennis, Lita, other members of FINEX and the FINEX Foundation; ladies and gentlemen:

Its very good to be with you once again. As Rupert said earlier, this is the second time this year, the last time you made me your guest was January 17th, if you remember that was the start of the final push that has now become known as EDSA Dos.

Many of you who attended that FINEX luncheon meeting had come straight from the EDSA Shrine where we started a midnight vigil the night before, and many of you went back to EDSA right after the meeting; and three days after, I took my oath as President of the Philippines. Thank you for FINEX’s contribution to EDSA Dos.

During my State of the Nation Address last July, I called for a moratorium on politicking.

Today that moratorium is more urgent than ever.

The New York incident of September 11 has changed the global mood. World business conditions are more uncertain now.

Even before September 11, in the words of EIU’s corporate update, the U.S., The biggest risk factor, was experiencing a hard landing. Concerns about a U.S. Recession had increased. The attacks on the World Trade Center and The Pentagon made matters worse. The likely scenario for the U.S. is a slower recovery.

Japan is in a worse shape. Other global risks include a decline in world tourism, lower foreign investment flows, debt woes of major emerging markets, and a potential cut in foreign aid. For Asia this means a prolonged slump in exports, a rising trade deficit, a decline in revenues from tourism, ambivalent direct foreign investments, less official development assistance and concessional loans, and increasing difficulty for Asian emerging markets to issue global bonds. In addition to this harsh external environment, most of Asia will be facing domestic challenges as well.

The good news is that based on macroeconomic indicators it seems that the Philippines is among the very few resilient countries in Asia in 2001. And therefore, we can and must rely now more than ever on our own efforts, our own domestic economy. We must avoid lapsing into a sense of drift and losing momentum.

The advancement of our national interest was the guiding framework of my visits to Kuala Lumpur, Brunei, Singapore, and Tokyo.

In the course of my state visit to Kuala Lumpur, the Moro National Liberation Front and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front signed an Agreement for Unification, placing them firmly behind our common aspirations of peace, justice, equality, progress — in sum, the advancement of human security among Filipino Muslims under these lofty and shared standards.

While in Kuala Lumpur, our government and the MILF also signed an agreement containing the detailed guidelines for a durable ceasefire. The agreement advanced to a higher level the determination of both sides to stop the fighting on the ground, and enables the substantive issues of rehabilitation and development to take precedence on the negotiating table and, as far as I am concerned, on the ground. I think that that agreement came not a moment too soon because after September 11 we are very happy when we hear the milf distancing itself from Osama Bin Laden.

Our initiative to re-energize the Brunei-Indonesia-Malaysia-Philippines-East ASEAN Growth Area initiative received the warmest reception from the Sultan of Brunei and the Prime Minister of Malaysia.

With Singapore, we reached agreements on almost P2 billion in investments in Information and Communications Technology as well as agreements with Sun Microsystems for certification programs for programmers, which are vital to our human resource development climate for promoting ICT.

The officials of Japan, our biggest source of Official Development Assistance, were gratified that my administration has maximized our capacity to utilize Japanese Oda. They congratulated us for bringing up the rate of disbursements on yen loan projects during the first three months of my administration, to 94 percent of target, the highest ratio in the history of our Oda from Japan, and probably the highest among today among recipients of Japanese Oda.

And we are encouraged by the response of Japan to our efforts because even if Japan is reducing its worldwide Oda by 10 percent in yen terms and 20 percent in dollar terms as a result of its economic difficulties, it seems that the level of its assistance to the Philippines will not be included in that global cut.

Beyond the usual glitter of welcome and departure ceremonies and state banquets, therefore, the results of our official trips reinforced our vision of winning the war against poverty within the decade. We must maintain our focus on that war on realizing that vision despite the uncertainty that besets all humanity. We must maintain and even sharpen that focus precisely because times are uncertain.

Thus, there is a need to renew the call for moratorium on politicking. There is a need to regroup and focus on actually accomplishing things, not distracted by bickering and sensationalizing.

Let us buckle down to work.

There are 16 bills in our legislative agenda to comply with global commitments or to achieve the goals of my State of the Nation Address. Let me take this opportunity to extend my deepest thanks and profound congratulations once again to both houses of congress for a job well done in passing a well-crafted anti-money laundering law in record time.

Last August a newspaper editorial said: “it will be a miracle if Congress can pass such a vital controversial bill in just one month.” Well Congress made that miracle happen just as three months ago. Congress made another miracle happen, it passed the Power Sector Reform Law when we needed it after many administration and many congresses. And I would like to point out that the U.S. Department of Treasury and the head of the task force on money laundering in Japan congratulated the Philippines for the law that we have passed.

So I wish we would not have Filipinos keep pointing out the defects that they see if they see any in the Money Laundering Law because those in other countries the authority think it’s a good law. But if they keep hearing our own Filipinos saying it’s wrong because of this, it’s lacking because of that, they might come to believe us and put the sanctions once again. So I think this is one occasion where once again others see our accomplishments better than we do ourselves. I think at a time like this we should be united and not flagellating our country.

Congress has also agreed to work on the following seven other priority bills in this present session: the General Appropriations Act, the Revised Investment Company Act, farm land as collateral, Absentee Voting, creation of a Department of Housing and Urban Development, Government Procurement Act, amendments to the Dangerous Drugs Act; and aside from this we have set up a computerized monitoring system to track our actual accomplishments against our goals as highlighted in the state of the nation address. We will periodically report on these accomplishments.

I understand that FINEX is pushing for the Securitization Act. Speaker de Venecia has already filed this bill in the House of Representatives. I support this bill, because it is one of the 16 measures that I endorsed during my State of the Nation Address.

As for the computerized monitoring system to track our actual accomplishments against our goals that were highlighted in the SONA, because we intend to periodically report on these accomplishments let me share some updates right now:

For agricultural modernization, we committed to channel 20 billion pesos a year. As of August 31st, the Department of Budget and Management has released about P9 billion and the Land Bank more than P6 billion. So that’s already 15 billion all-in-all.

I committed to work for one million new jobs in agriculture within the next three years. Between August and mid-September, agriculture generated over 120,000 jobs.

I committed to distribute 100,000 of private land for agricultural land reform within the next 12 months. And as of August 31st, after one month, the Department of Agrarian Reform had distributed over 12,000 hectares.

I committed to ensure that every barangay will have a school building. Survey and construction planning work is now ongoing for 1,590 barangays identified by the Department of Education as not being served by any school building. I instructed the Metro Manila Chairman during the SONA to address traffic problems. He is adopting a comprehensive approach to accelerate vehicle flow in key thoroughfares to 15 kilometers per hour. And as of September 14, average speed has increased slightly to 13.6 kilometers per hour.

I threatened to assign the Malitubog-Maridagao or Malmar project to the Armed Forces engineers if the contractor would not be able to start its operations by September. And last September 22, after 12 years, many lives, many slippages, and eight ceasefires, we finally inaugurated the project.

I committed to simplify and clarify the system of incentives. The task force on incentive rationalization has prepared a draft of the new Incentives Bill.

I committed to implement e-procurement. Three hundred forty-eight agencies in the government are now participating in the e-procurement service program. Government agencies and suppliers are both using the public tender board, the suppliers’ registry and the electronic catalogue.

I committed to contain the budget deficit to 145 billion pesos this year. The deficit was below ceiling for January to July and exceeded the ceiling by 2.9 percent in august due to increased government spending for countrywide development, a one-time internal revenue catching up with previous obligations to the previous government, and priority projects such as the Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Program. Advanced estimates for September indicate, that we are back to the programmed ceiling.

We will get major domestic business projects going such as those involving the National Steel Corporation, the rehabilitation of the Philippine National Bank, and the housing sector. We will reduce red tape and bottlenecks.

In our one-on-one talks in Kuala Lumpur, I discussed with Prime Minister Mahathir our need to re-open the National Steel Corporation Iligan Plant as soon as possible. Apart from this one-on-one discussion, Secretary Manuel Roxas also met with the Chairman and Managing Director of Danaharta which is their apt, the Malaysian Government entity holding the ownership shares in the NSC. Danaharta shares our objective of finding both near-and long-term solutions to NSC. Accordingly they have agreed to enter and participate in a joint government-Philippine creditor banks-Malaysian owners process to receive proposals for the interim operation of NSC pending a more permanent solution.

The process led by DTI invited prospective investors or operators of NSC to submit their proposals and evaluate, negotiate, and award the best such proposal for an interim operation of National Steel Corporation while the final liquidation or whatever court cases are being settled.

The deadline for the submission of proposals was last September 21. However, Hottick, the Malaysian investor in NSC, who had signed a lease contract with a firm called Allengoal after the SEC had taken control of NSC, surprised everyone by pulling out of the process. Thus some prospective bidders also backed out.

But Danaharta has written us officially conveying their support for the process agreed upon during our meeting with them. Secretary Roxas will now take the following steps: convene a meeting with the Philippine banks creditors to inform them that there is once again stability in the process, that they should not back out; advice the Securities and Exchange Commission liquidator to again solicit any and all offers from interested parties, including Allengoal and those who backed out because of the uncertainty arising from Hotticks’ earlier pullout; invite Danaharta to come and observe and participate in the decision-making; and, develop a timetable with all of the participants, mindful that our goal is the reopening of the plant at the soonest possible time.

On the formal housing sector, the program consists of the following schemes: end user financing; developmental loans; and the guarantee given out by the Home Guarantee Corporation.

I committed to provide funds for 100,000 economic mass housing and 50,000 socialized mass housing during the Sona. Pag-ibig has allocated 10 billion pesos per year. The DBP, Land Bank, and GSIS committed six billion pesos. While SSS, before Cora dela Paz got in — I hope she’ll continue the commitment — committed nine billion pesos.

The General Appropriations Bill for 2002 provides another 3.7 billion pesos. All these amounts should be enough to build the committed number of units.

The problem is utilization. At present of the 10 billion pesos allocated by Pag-IBIG, it has spent 2.6 billion with another 1.3 billion to be released upon compliance with documentary requirements. — that’s not so bad. But monitoring reports reveal minimal participation of the GSIS. From January last year to august this year DBP released 1.81 billion, GSIS 128 million, Land Bank 189 million and SSS 129 million — a very far cry from the billions that were committed. The GSIS blame the low figure on the conservativeness of the conduit banks. Thus, I appeal to the banking sector and the financial executives who are here to be more aggressive in the housing sector.

A large part of the blame also goes to the 188 signatures and two years required for housing permits. We are now finalizing an Executive Order proposed by HUDCC which provides for one-stop centers in each department to act on all applications for housing-related permits. This will cut the processing time from 12 months to three months.

The longest bottleneck here seems to lie in the environmental clearance certificate. Secretary of Environment Sonny Alvarez, who was supposed to be here, is reducing the number of signatures and aiming to cut down the ECC time to 30 days, but the housing sector tells me that the geological study alone takes 60 days. This is because of the Cherry Hills syndrome. So I am authorizing Sonny Alvarez to hire more Geodetic engineers to speed up this part of the paper chase.

Recently we have revived the Pag-IBIG city program which is basically a turnkey program compared to the take out mechanism we have done in the past. Last week in the Pag-IBIG board meeting in Cebu the board approved the medium rise housing program which is a more liberal program than Pag-IBIG city having a turnkey payment of 90 percent while Pag-IBIG city is only 70 percent upon completion.

I have also instructed the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes to allocate 100 million pesos out of the almost 200 million pesos which it still owes the comprehensive and integrated shelter financing act so that HUDCC can build an additional 1,000 houses for indigent families.

The passage of the Securitization Act will enable the setting up of an efficient secondary housing mortgage market. It will generate potential additional liquidity of between 10 to 20 pesos billion annually, which would redound to more funds for housing. So I hope that all of the financial executives involved in housing will welcome this. But on the other hand why wait for that when you have all those billions already waiting for you to conduit for our people who need their houses?

We will get specific big ticket infrastructure projects going, such as the Batangas port and the LRT-3 extension. Again, we will eliminate bottlenecks.

The primary scope of the work for the Batangas project consists of dredging and reclamation, construction of two container cargo berths, reconstruction of the general cargo berth at the earlier area, and other port amenities and support. It consists of three packages: package 1 worth three billion pesos covers civil and marine works; package 2 worth 126 million covers the supply and installation of passenger boarding bridges; package 3 worth 145 million covers the construction of the port access road and flyover.

Package 1 was bidded out as early as early last year, however, the final award and implementation of the project was delayed due to a right of way issue and a contract issue. The right of way issue has finally been settled in the court and upon my instructions, even as we speak right now the Philippine Ports Authority is expropriating the land needed for the right of way. Tomorrow the PPA board will meet to take up the award issue, and construction should commence not later than October 15.

Not a moment too soon this project was started when I was still Undersecretary of Tade and Industry. Since then I’ve become Senator twice, Vice President and President — it’s about time the project starts. Well, its the same case with Malmar it also started when I was in DTI, finally the water is flowing.

Package 2 is scheduled to be completed and turned over to PPA this week.

And the construction of package 3 — the access road and flyover — has not yet started even it’s been awarded a long time ago pending the resolution of the right-of-way issue. So I have instructed DPWH to complete payment for the right-of-way this week so that construction can begin next week.

On the MRT line 3 extension, which will complete the MRT loop by connecting North Avenue to Monumento, the MRT Corporation has been given up to October 15th to exercise its pre-emptive option by submitting an acceptable proposal. Otherwise the Department of Transportation and Communications will implement the project with Official Development Assistance.

So you see we have collected the major bottlenecks in the major projects because we’ve got to get them going that is the way that we can show the world that even in the midst of uncertainty we can move forward.

And of course, we will not fail to address graft and corruption in key agencies and sectors, and I’m glad that your book Crip Yuson’s book is being launched today because it’s good that we are celebrating corporate governance as we are trying to do good governance also in the bureaucracy. And as I said in my State of the Nation Address: our models are the Bureau of Internal Revenue and the Bureau of Customs to be showcases in the fight against graft; and I am adding the National Food Authority imports, we indeed have to conserve our fiscal resources.

I’d like to congratulate Crip, by the way, for this book. And I was telling Rupert, “how long did it take Crip to do this work?” He said, two years in the making, and in between Crip was doing our P.R. Work when we were in the opposition during the impeachment trial. So congratulations Crip for doing work for the country and doing work for the business sector as well. In the BIR, aside from a high profile revamp, it is intensifying tax collection by introducing the following reforms: computerized selection of audit candidates; non-filer detection program; printing of water-marked invoices and official receipts with uniform format; documentary stamp tax on-line; expansion of creditable withholding tax; computer linkages with the top 20 excise taxpayers; and finally, issuance of implementing rules and regulations for the 1997 tax code; reduced number of signatories under the documentation decentralization program; pilot testing the electronic filing system and e-payment through banks; e-bidding of services; public service awareness seminars and programs to enhance voluntary tax payments.

For its part, Customs has started implementation of over-the-counter transaction, ridding the transaction area of non-organic personnel, and strict implementation of I.D. and uniforms. It is intensifying its collections by: monitoring of frequently imported goods; resolution of cases within 15 days from reporting of findings; narrower ranges for import valuation tables; provision of updated reference values; strict collection of warehousing charges; post-entry audit system; auction sales are 122 percent higher than last year; installation of x-ray machines in the ports.

As far as the National Food Authority is concerned, imports can no longer be done through private warehouses. Moreover, these imports are subject to the scrutiny of the new anti-smuggling task force headed by former Commissioner Luciano Millan, Jr. who was recommended by former Commissioner Guillermo Parayno.

These are the things that we are doing: specific high profile in the sense that they were not moving for a very long time making the move once again because we need to show the world that the Philippines can move forward.

I am grateful that during the slow-down of the first part of the year, the Philippines still grew at 3.4 percent in GNP. I’m grateful that our peso has stabilized, I’m grateful that our employment figures have increased. The 70,000 decrease that they headlined in one newspaper, first of all, was inflated and doesn’t cover what the employment that was increased. And so we’ve done well in the first semester of the year and I hope that whatever we did right in the first semester of the year. Whatever we did together in the first semester of the year we should do even with greater vigor and greater aggressiveness in the second part of the year.

If we were united in EDSA — FINEX, myself and many of those in the platform — we can be even more united now because the danger is not just danger coming from a lack or a loss of moral accendancy within our country, the danger is coming from real threats to our way of life in the whole world. And therefore I urge the financial executives to make the priorities I mentioned as your own priorities as individuals and collectively as FINEX.

As aptly described in the timely and lofty theme of your conference you are catalysts for responsible leadership. I need you in the difficult task of national survival. I need you to promote unity. I need you to promote making things happen even the things that were not happening for a long time.

Thank you for this opportunity and let’s move our country forward in the midst of the global uncertainty.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the Annual Membership Meeting of the Financial Executives Institutes of Philippines (FINEX). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212737/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8754&Itemid=38