Thank you very much Secretary Romulo for your introduction of me.

Thank you very much to our fair-skinned Ambassador because she also speaks Tagalog, with your invitation to our Filipino community, and thank you all for coming here even though it's not your day off. Good afternoon to all of you, our countrymen.

Greetings, and to all my Ilocano friends here, good evening to all relatives on my mother's side. Good afternoon to you all, Bikolano friends. If there are any Bisaya here, good afternoon to all of you. And of course, to my fellow Capampangans here, good afternoon to you all. To all our countrymen, may peace be with you all.

Oh, I am happy that we are here and together with me not only Secretary Romulo, we have our Secretary of Trade and Industry Secretary Jesli Lapus, from Concepcion. I think I met somebody here from Concepcion, Tarlac if you remember Secretary Lapus used to be your congressman in Concepcion, Tarlac. And then we have… when I see them I will introduce them but right now they’re mingling around.

But I just want to say to all of you, thank you for giving us this opportunity to visit you again. I remember in 2007 we were together, so now is another opportunity to thank all of you.

First of all, thank you for your hard work and dedication to our country. Everywhere I go, especially here in Spain, we met in 2007. As president, this is my third time to visit. I went in 2006, official visit; 2007, state visit; and now again to receive the Don Quijote Award. Thank you for being here. And during all my visits, whenever I talk to the Spanish, private citizens and government leaders, they compliment our Filipino workers for being diligent, trustworthy, efficient, unparalleled skills. Congratulations to all of you!

We applaud you for the good track record that you have created for our country. Because your track record is so good, we are in a strong position to continue capturing job opportunities, especially where Europe is recovering from their problem with the global economic crisis.

But, as I said even in the past, while we honor our OFWs for your sacrifice for our nation and your families, my vision has been to help launch an economic revolution towards being first world in 20 years to break this offshore cycle by creating more jobs in the Philippines so that working abroad will become only a career choice not the only option for our hardworking men and women. That is what I aspire to.

Earlier, when I came here, I met someone who asked me how the Philippines is doing now. I said, that's what I'll be talking about later. So, how is the Philippines doing now? Well, I can say that the Philippines has come a long way since January 2001 when I first assumed the presidency. Perhaps many have forgotten what was happening during that time. During that time, in 2001, it was a very chaotic period. That was less than ten years ago. Time has gracefully erased many memories of that time. During that time, our country, the nation was teetering, political turmoil, extreme political turmoil and the bankruptcy of the national treasury.

Our economy was stuck in decline, there were no investments happening, only a few jobs were being created. Our country's debt was larger than our GDP during that time. And our foreign reserves were very thin. For the people back then, it was a time of very few jobs, low wages, and high prices. And because of insufficient tax collection, there was also insufficient investment to expand healthcare, improve education, provide clean water and necessary electricity to remote barangays.

And internationally, the Philippines was already left behind, far from the radar screen. It had lost its importance in the world. Its alliances around the world weakened and it was no longer chosen by investors as a place to invest and create jobs. That was the picture in 2001.

And in that very sad scene, we entered. During that time, I did not strive to become president, it happened to me, a gift from heaven. But instead of rejecting the heavy responsibility, I rolled up my sleeves, I rolled up my sleeves, determined to turn the Philippines around.

We focused like a laser beam to deliver real results to improve the lives of the ordinary Filipino. As an economist, I know that to reverse the years of economic decline, we needed to instill discipline, expand the economy, and invest in human and physical infrastructure.

From the first day, these actions shaped the building blocks of the economic turnaround that would now deliver 37 quarters of economic growth. In fact, we know that Europe is in a global economic crisis. But in the Philippines, we never had a negative growth rate even during the global economic crisis. My administration created nine million new jobs, added fifty million Filipinos to healthcare coverage, and stabilized the country's treasury.

And perhaps… I don't know how many of you have vacationed in the Philippines lately? I don't know if you've noticed if you've traveled from Manila to Pampanga, the travel time from Manila to Clark has been halved, do you remember or Subic? Because of the expansion and repair of old roads like NLEX and the construction of new roads like SCTEX. Travel from Manila to the south has also become faster due to new roads going to, for example, Batangas Port now takes only two hours, the travel time has also been halved. And you can even take a bus from Manila to Boracay because you can ride the RORO — yes, the RORO port. These are the things we are doing to improve our infrastructure.

And into the arena of international relations, the Philippines is back. We are no longer left behind. The Philippines has been a steady climber in Asia and the world. In fact, in Asia, you can count the number of countries that are still rising even after the global economic crisis. For example, China, India, Indonesia, Vietnam, Philippines. We are the ones that continue to rise even after the global economic crisis. And we have new relations with the world, for example, Spain. Once again, Spain is a very strong ally of the once-isolated Philippines.

For example, as I said, we met in 2007 during the state visit. Do you know that since my state visit to Spain, Spain is now our biggest European donor? Of course, we are strengthening our relationship with our Motherland. We are reintroducing the Spanish language in selected high schools and in TESDA. Secretary Jing Lapus of Trade and Industry, who was then the Secretary of Education, started… Oh! Here are the two congressmen I was looking for to introduce to you. Because when I said there are many Bicolanos here, my son Dato’s father’s ancestors are from Bicol, so he is the congressman of Bicol, Dato Arroyo. And also for the Waray people, but there seem to be few Waray here, Congressman Martin Romualdez. Ah, here also is a fellow provincial, from Lubao like me, our Press Secretary, Jun Icban.

So, anyway, we talked about Jing Lapus, who is now our Secretary of Trade and Industry, when he was Secretary of Education, that’s when we started the program to bring back Spanish to our high schools. And not only did he start it in some selected high schools, but also in TESDA you can study Spanish. Ah, there is our… our… why? Well, not only is it because we want to reestablish and strengthen our ties with Spain but also because there are many Spanish-speaking jobs. Even here in the Philippines itself, there are many Spanish-speaking jobs because our call center industry is growing.

And our efforts to promote the Spanish language have been well appreciated here. As I mentioned earlier, I came here today to receive the Premio International Don Quixote de la Mancha from His Majesty King Juan Carlos tomorrow and from the Fundacion Santillana.

Muchas gracias, it is a great honor to receive this award and I will give my best efforts to promote Hispanic culture and language in the Philippines and to you as well. Because improved relations with Spain have opened the doors of economic opportunity for those Filipinos who have chosen to go to Spain for work.

I remember when I came here in 2006, during my first visit here, one of the people I greeted was our health workers, just as the doors were opening for health workers. Now, there are more than 200 health workers in Spain. And one of them, Charmaine, who entered as a caregiver, is now a nurse. Congratulations! to Charmaine.

That’s the result of the Memorandum of Understanding on Migration Flow that we signed in 2006. When I came here in 2007, we also greeted a group of engineers doing engineering design.

Therefore, our friendship with Spain will once again provide opportunities for our countrymen. This diplomacy of ours also helps protect the interests of our hardworking Filipinos here in Spain, as in every other part of the globe.

For example, this is important for you, but the problems are not yet finished. If you remember, in 2007 I mentioned that our administration was negotiating with Spain to have an Agreement for Exchange of Driver’s License. Especially now that Europe is having difficulties and many are being laid off, those with driver’s licenses have a greater chance than those without. So this means Filipinos can use their Philippine driver’s license to drive in Spain, which gives them a greater chance of getting a job. But I checked earlier what the status is, the agreement is already there, but there are hitches in the implementation. I said, what is the hitch in the implementation? Because when you get a license, of course you will show your license, of course there is a process where it will be verified in Manila if your license is genuine. That’s the problem because the computer program here is different from the computer program there. So they are fixing it if it can be done by text, so that’s our status now. So when I found out, I called the Secretary of Transportation, Anne Lontoc, and the head of the LTO, Bert Suansing. I said, oh, if I had known that was the problem, I would have brought one of you with me, but now that I know it, one of you go here. You take the next flight here so that while I am still here, we can talk to Tehete so that you can quickly do the system so that our Filipinos will be more competitive because they have a license.

In the meantime, Spain recognizes our Dual Citizenship Act, which was enacted during our administration in 2003, and this Dual Citizenship Act has benefited more than 1,500 former Filipino citizens.

And it's not just that, we don't want a time to come when Filipinos here will have problems with the law, but if, for example, the unexpected happens, we also have an agreement with Spain, the Transfer of Sentenced Persons. If, for example, you have a problem with the law, God forbid, you are convicted, you need to be imprisoned, you can be transferred to the Philippines and you can serve your sentence there and not here. But hopefully that won't happen, but we are talking about Filipino prisoners, that doesn't happen here, but there are Filipinos, for example, in the Middle East because the culture is different—that doesn't happen here because our culture is the same—in the Middle East, the culture is different, many are imprisoned.

But thank you for our friendship with the King of Spain because he is Royalty, many in the Middle East are also Royalty, like his siblings, like his cousins, some of them were supposed to be sentenced to death. Did you know that the King of Spain is talking to the Kings of different places in the Middle East to pardon our Filipinos there? That's another big thing we are grateful for.

I mention this global economic downturn, and here in Europe, this global economic downturn hasn't ended yet, it was about to improve but there was a problem in Greece. It's just one economy so it was like another epidemic. So, I just want to let you know that we have put in place a stimulus package that is geared to helping our workers keep and get new jobs.

This license is important, but that’s not all. We have a program that we call Reciprocity Program. Why reciprocity? Because you give so much to our country. Now is the time, if work is difficult in one country, our country should reciprocate. And this Program of Reciprocity is supposed to help our expatriate workers who might return home from their host countries that have been affected by the global crisis.

This first part of the program is the Filipino Overseas Livelihood Support Fund. When this global economic crisis happened, it started in September of 2008, we allocated one billion pesos from OWWA and government lending institutions for the struggling OFWs. And of the one billion pesos, 200 million pesos have been used to support the OFWs who lost their jobs.

And also, we had a retraining program to help upgrade the skills of Filipino workers to remain competitive and have a better chance of promotion and higher salaries and overall job security. So we are praying that the recession here in Europe will not last long to stop our job insecurity. But in the meantime, there is that facility available to whoever Filipino worker would want to use that because this is reciprocity for you.

You deserve to be rewarded with these programs because of your great help to our country. And that's why I tried to have the opportunity, even if I was here overnight, this is my only chance to meet with you, thank you that you were able to come here even at the last minute. This was supposed to be done in Barcelona, but I canceled the Barcelona side because my wife is sick, she just came out of the hospital and in fact I’m still getting reports about her, she hasn’t fully recovered. But we opened our Consulate in Barcelona because there are more Filipinos in Barcelona than in Madrid and I wasn’t able to…—yes, city to city, yes—and I wasn’t able to go there but thank you to our Consul General and our leaders of the Filipino community in Barcelona for coming here because I wasn’t able to go there, muchas gracias por demir.

And to all of you Filipinos here. Once again, I thank all Filipinos in Spain for your support and the honor you bring to our country.

Long live the Filipinos in Spain!

Thank you very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during a meeting with the Filipino Community. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080149/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27829&Itemid=38