Mrs. Gina de Venecia, the First Lady of the House of Representatives; Governor Agbayani Tan and officials of Pangasinan; Congressman Espino; Mayor Rosario; all of my Cabinet members; Vice Governor Lambino; Vice Mayor Jettie Delos Angeles, all officials of Binmaley; the different Pangasinan mayors who are here today from the municipalities of Binmaley; a beautiful morning, Congressman Tulagan of the next district, please join us here congressman; a beautiful fiesta and thank you all for your help to me in the 2004 election.

A beautiful celebration of the fiesta in Binmaley, little by little the blessings we are experiencing now are being realized. Let's start with the news about the economy now. The peso is strengthening. Millions of dollars are coming in. The Supreme Court said we can mine and all of these other things are helping our economy. Calpers decided to continue investments in the Philippines. The Supreme Court, its decision is final. All of these should seal confidence in the economy.

The average Filipino will soon reap the fruits of confidence in the economy, which will not only bring in more investments and jobs but drive the overall agenda of urgent reforms. These positive developments don’t happen by accident. They are the result of hard nosed assessment by the objective analysis of the great potentials of our country and excellence and hard work of our people. These assessments are not limited to the economy but extend to the gains we’ve made in unifying our political institutions to put our fiscal house in order: in fighting corruption, terrorism and crime; in waging peace; and in delivering our pro-poor agenda.

Philippine stability is dawning upon the whole range of national affairs and cutting across the regions and sectors. We must stay the course, seize the opportunity for reform, and close ranks behind a higher future.

And I can’t think of no better place to make this call than among the wonderful, friendly and supportive people of Binmaley, Pangasinan.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Inauguration of Binmaley People’s Park on the Occasion of the Town’s 415th Foundation Anniversary and Fiesta in Honor of our Lady of Purification. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412082303/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3076&Itemid=38