HAPPY SHOPPING STATE WORKERS!

If American soldiers have PX goods, now government employees can also have PS goods, and this is the PS Mart. PS means procurement service. So this PS Mart is for the smart consumer, for the wise shoppers. Why? Because the items sold here are purchased in bulk by the government through the DBM in large quantities, thus ensuring that prices are all discounted.

The government is the largest buyer of consumer goods in the country and uses this power to get value-for-money for whatever they buy. So the DBM, the government has a 'shoppers’ advantage’ and now we are extending this 'shoppers’ advantage’ to those working in the government so that they and their families can also benefit from the low prices of goods.

The procurement service does not profit from the low prices it buys in bulk because under the law, it cannot earn more than three percent. So if there is a Shoemart outside, there is a PS Mart inside. Of course, there are still more items available at Shoemart but there are also many items available here at the PS Mart next to us.

Let's look at the prices. As Nonoy said, household goods and office supplies are 20 percent lower than outside. So Pat Sto. Tomas said, offices can eliminate accusations of corruption because office equipment can now be purchased here at… Office supplies here at the procurement service. And look: sugar, here P33.50, outside P38.00; rice outside P22.00, here P18.00; cooking oil outside P22.00, here P19.80; sardines outside 10.28, here P9.93; noodles, P13.25 outside, here P12.80; corned beef outside P22.00, here P20.10; coffee outside P4.80, here P4.10.

Let's look at the payroll of the national government, 330 billion pesos per year. And a large part of this is used to buy goods for the family and the home. By opening the doors of the depots and warehouses of the procurement service, it is open to cooperatives, we offer our colleagues to come together, combine their grocery money, get big discounts and let their organization earn which they can then use for mutual aid. This is the spirit of Filipino bayanihan shown in the age of the internet. And this is the first example, Nonoy, right? This is the PX store or PS store or PS Mart of our government employees. There is a depot in every region, Nonoy. Ah, there will be a depot in every… There are 12 now. For example, the depot for Metro Manila is in Paco. So the various cooperatives or even the agency operators, Pat, should contact these depots to have a PS Mart in all offices and departments.

After establishing the stores, we will ensure that consumers have money to bring there and shop. Last month, if you remember, we gave a thousand pesos additional allowance to all employees of the national government. And I followed this up with an urgent memorandum order to Nonoy to speed up the compensation reform, right, Nonoy? That will determine that public sector pay will be more closely linked to merit and performance. This proves that the government cares for the people and also knows how to take care of itself.

So this is what we are doing for government employees and we are opening it as part of the celebration of Labor Day. So I congratulate the officials of the procurement service or PS, they are very good at taking care of the funds entrusted to them. Not only did they save money, they multiplied it through the best way of management and sound investment choices, they invested in these PS Marts.

Nonoy said, it is self-liquidating. Small profits will fund the expansion that will be created by demand from government employees. Nonoy said, no new funds are being taken from the treasury for this project. And soon, when the PS Mart blooms across the country and its signs are part of the landscape, we may remember this day, Labor Day 2006, and say that this chain of commissaries was established without the need for additional appropriation.

So again, to Nonoy at the DBM and to all government workers, Pat and I, the secretary of labor, congratulate you all, Happy Labor Day!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].