Thank you very much, Mark for introducing me. (applause) Thank you very much, Governor Dodo Cagas for your invitation. (applause) We are here for your anniversary.

Our congressmen, Franklin Bautista, thank you very much for the unity here in the province of Davao del Sur. (applause) All officials of Davao del Sur, including Mrs. Cagas; Vice Governor and all the mayors; board members; barangay officials; to all of you, my brothers and sisters, I am also with two cabinet members: Jess Dureza who is from Digos; (applause) and Cerge Remonde who was your guest at the crowning of your Mutya last night, (applause) to all of you, my brothers and sisters, happy anniversary to Davao del Sur! (applause)

As we celebrate the anniversary of the province, this is the best time to thank God for the blessings throughout the year. Let us thank God because sometimes there are typhoons here in Davao del Sur. (applause) Because as Governor Cagas said, I need to go to other places — 45 provinces are suffering now because of typhoon Frank. And because of the ferry, but Davao del Sur was spared from these accidents. (applause)

The terrible tragedy left in the wake of typhoon Frank and the ferry accident was constantly on our mind during our trip to the United States. Overseeing relief efforts was part of our daily agenda. We were in constant contact with our officials. We directed our operation practically on a minute by minute basis until now. We have demanded a full accounting of the ferry accident. The Coast Guard asked for 15 days within which they will submit their findings. We were able to receive extensive assistance to aid in search, recovery and relief.

But now we are happy to be back on Philippine soil and happy to be back here in Davao del Sur. (applause)

Thank you also to God that your province has many resources: farms where plants thrive, good climate, no typhoons, people like the four bar topnotchers from Davao del Sur, (applause) including Governor, (applause) people who are determined to help in the progress not only of the province but of the entire nation. And that is important. Your beautiful soil, your beautiful climate, your brilliant and productive people because there are big issues rocking the world, namely the high price of food and fuel that is affecting everyone around the globe, particularly the poor. At every meeting during our trip to the United States, we worked to help secure additional funding and support for stabilizing prices and discussing ways to help secure additional funding and decrease our reliance on imported rice and imported oil.

Agricultural Secretary Arthur Yap and his counterpart in America, Secretary ____ of the D.A. in America signed an agreement regarding:

Number one, collaboration on sanitary and phytosanitary measures because it takes a long time for our products to enter America and the use of sanitary measures to prevent products from going there. But as Governor Cagas said, you should be proud that mangoes from Davao can enter Australia. (applause) Hopefully, because of this new agreement between Secretary Yap of the Philippines and Secretary ______ of America, the time will come when Davao del Sur mangoes can also enter America itself. (applause)

Secondly, agricultural market, institutional, and rural development;

Thirdly, biotechnology and other new technologies;

And fourth, an improved climate between entrepreneurs of America and the Philippines for agricultural trade and investment.

The trip to the United States affirmed the strong ties between our two nations and advanced important issues we have between us, with the US, our most important strategic ally.

We were able to speak with President Bush, the Speaker of their House, the Senate Majority leader and other officials to press for economic aid, food security and stronger military cooperation.

In this very important presidential year in the US, we were able to conduct far ranging discussions with the Presidential candidates, Senator McCain and Senator Obama. There is a new generation of leadership, like the new generation here, Mark Cagas, who is now in America, that will emerge to lead the United States. It was important for Philippine interests for us to have first hand contact with Senators McCain and Obama to discuss US-Philippine relations. We are comfortable that either of these leaders will continue the strong relation between our two countries.

We met with a number of investors and business leaders in New York. We secured new commitments for job creation and investments in the Philippines.

One of the businessmen we spoke with was Target. Perhaps those of you who visit America are familiar with Target, a store, an important retail outlet, and this Target has already bought a lot from the Philippines, such as natural fibers or dried grass, storage jars, various items or furniture and also accessories, and they want to buy even more of these products, natural fibers, so they want their vendors to be sure of the raw materials. Because the vendors of natural fibers, before, you already know here in the Davao provinces, like Davao del Norte, the products come from natural grass or dried grass. But the problem is, it's wild grass so it depends on availability from nature, but these big stores like Target, they want big orders too. So it's important that our farmers in Davao del Sur plant grass, not wild grass, let's plant it so that it can supply the vendors and the market is assured. So that's what we need to do since my visit to America so that provinces like Davao del Sur can share in the results of our international relations.

And to ensure that development continues, peace and security in Mindanao are necessary. We repeat the primacy of the peace process. But we direct the AFP to be vigilant and take appropriate action to protect citizens from harm by elements who disrupt the peace.

During my previous visit here in Davao City, we had a meeting about peace here in the Davao provinces, in Region 11, with what they call the Eastern Mindanao Command, and a lot still needs to be done for peace here in the Davao provinces, and a lot can be done by our new Chairman of the Regional Peace and Order Council, none other than the Governor of Davao del Sur, Governor Dodo Cagas. (applause)

We also welcome Dodo, we upgraded the provincial hospital earlier, with an expanded Outpatient [department] and you recently saw the Pediatric Center under construction. (applause) This is one example of a partnership between the national government and the provincial government of Davao del Sur. Congressman Mark Cagas constantly follows up with me about this in Manila, (applause) he said his father’s pet project is this upgrade to your hospital, so congratulations on what we inaugurated earlier.

We also built the bridge in Hagonoy. Is it finished? Is it finished? It’s ongoing now.

And we also want to develop Southern Davao del Sur, the JAGS-CT or Jose Abad Santos-Glan-Saranggani Cooperative Triangle. (applause)

Here in Pikas, we built ports in Glan, we want to connect Glan here in Davao del Sur – the Glan Abad Santos Road. (applause) Governor Cagas said the portion in Glan is finished, so now we need to do the Abad Santos portion. (applause) As seen by the new Secretary, of the DA, Undersecretary Momo, where is he? Okay. He’s from Caraga… that’s why Secretary Ebdane chose him to appoint me as undersecretary because the roads in Caraga are very difficult, whenever I give him direction, or on this day, the road needs to be finished, it gets finished by Director Momo, (applause) so now our new direction for him is the Glan Abad Santos Road, earlier, I spoke with Secretary Ebdane, and I saw that 100 million pesos has been released, that should be your inaugural duty as undersecretary for Mindanao, director…. Abad Santos is very far, so Secretary Ebdane said that if it’s difficult for private contractors, even the engineering brigade of the armed forces can construct it to speed up construction and reach (applause) progress here in Abad Santos. Because we want, all of Davao del Sur, to be closer to the market, because the rice production in Davao Del Sur, you should be proud. (applause)

The highest productivity in the entire country Philippines, he said, is here in Davao del Sur. (applause) 5.6 tons per hectare. And if the people here continue to be diligent in productivity, like your tradition, and if others speed up to match the other provinces, our country will reach self-sufficiency.

But in the meantime, even if we reach 10% of the entire… country, we import, it’s a source of pride for Davao del Sur that you, export your production to other provinces. (applause)

I am very happy to visit Davao del Sur to greet all of you and acknowledge your contributions to our nation, and to discuss what the entire nation wants to provide here in Davao del Sur. So to all of you, happy anniversary! Truly, you from Davao del Sur should be proud.

Thank you all very much. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). Speech of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo during the 41st Founding Anniversary of Davao del Sur. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412120235/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1625&Itemid=38