Thank you for the introduction.

Speaker De Venecia, speaker of the House of Representatives of the Philippines and the various congressmen; governors and city mayors who are here with us today; Secretary Romulo and the other members of the Cabinet who are here today; Governor Tetangco of the Central Bank; members of the business delegation; members of the financial community of New York; ladies and gentlemen.

Thank you for inviting me to be here with you today. This is an important opportunity for me to speak with you about some of the important developments in the Philippines and to hear your thoughts as members of the international financial community.

Notwithstanding the political environment that you read about or you watch on TV about our country, the economy remains resilient, growth is respectable, and our fiscal discipline is paying off and remains better than target.

Our strong economic performance, of course, has come at a cost– a political cost to me in terms of public support. But I want to emphasize that I will not waiver in my commitment to ongoing economic reform and fiscal discipline no matter the political cost. I remain committed to pursuing reforms that strengthen our economy and improve the environment for the domestic and foreign investment.

I made tough choices on taxes because it’s the right thing to do, economically and morally. I cannot in good conscience pass on debt to the next generation. I have to invest in my people through better education and training, and improve infrastructure to attract the foreign investment needed to create, to generate sustainable economic growth and create jobs.

I remain optimistic. Let me tell you what I can and will achieve in the months and years ahead.

Much of the economy is working, and working well. There is investor confidence in the key sectors we have targeted for growth, these include: business process outsourcing — I’ve had so many visitors today on current expansion programs and new plans for investing in business process outsourcing in our country — mining, the services and export sector, and the high-tech sector. I’ve built up a new nationwide transport system. Built up the Subic-Clark corridor and opened up the interior of the country to new industries like mining and call centers.

The problem of course is that current economic growth is working for too few people. I have millions of poor people who have rightfully lost patience with their political leaders and their individual circumstances. However, I’m optimistic that with the passage of the value-added tax reform law, and Speaker De Venecia and many of the congressmen and congresswomen who work hard on that are here with us today.

I can finally do more than feed the debt beast. Politically and economically, I must invest in the people as I said, through better education, better health care, and more job creation.

I was happy to read my text messages today that the unemployment in our country has gone down from over eight percent, about 8.5 percent the last time, so it wasn’t that the figure to 7.7 percent. Still, that’s still a lot of people unemployed.

Last August, the Supreme Court strongly affirmed the value-added tax reform law. This legislation is the cornerstone of my economic turnaround plan and is the launch pad for Phase Two of my economic reforms. And with this revenue, I have presented a budget to Congress that will begin the funding or contribute the 2006 phase of the funding which by the end of my term should be able to close the classroom gap, which by the end of my term should be able to develop two million hectares of land for agri-business, which by the end of my term should provide for law enforcement reforms including strong police visibility, and which will provide next year 2.7 billion pesos in funding to boost rice and corn production and which will generate a 150,000 new jobs.

Job creation remains a significant economic and political challenge for the government.

In terms of political stability, the reason why I keep looking at our unemployment figures is that it’s not good enough to record solid export and investment growth — though I’m happy about the 27 points increase in our stock market the other day — but that’s not enough if the people are not feeling the benefits like more jobs.

The 2006 budget contains a range of job initiatives, job creation initiatives including major agricultural, infrastructure and electrification projects.

It’s encouraging to see early signs of the positive results of our sector-specific reforms, such as in the mining sector. Peter Favila of the department of trade and industry reports to me that there are 23 mining projects in the pipeline, of which 7 major projects are worth 5.3 billion dollars.

As I move around the country and talk to people — to local governments some of whom are here today and business groups — it’s clear that there is strong support for Phase Two reforms and the investment in social services and infrastructure that this Phase Two reforms will deliver. Our private research bears this out as well.

I have strong support in Congress, and the local government support is rock-solid, that’s why I have a delegation of the congressmen and congresswomen and local government officials to affirm that before you. I believe I’m politically stronger today than a month ago. I believe this shall translate into working with allies in Congress to pass the legislation needed to implement Phase Two and work with my local government colleagues to ensure that these investments in services and infrastructure are implemented at the grassroots level.

My agenda is the right agenda, and the people recognize that even if they may not like me personally. The problem is that, for every two steps we take forward, we take one back. The gains are too easily obscured by the setbacks or dominated by sensational headlines. I hope by coming here, we help you cut through the headlines.

In other areas, for instance, such as peace in Mindanao, elimination of kidnapping gangs and anti-terrorism initiatives, we have made huge gains. So, overall, I remain positive now that the majority of the political noise is behind us. I also realize the trust I need to gain with our people if we are to move ahead with political and economic reform. I hope you can understand the progress we have made in implementing the first phase of economic reforms which was to put our fiscal house in order and get the economy moving.

As I said earlier, we’re ahead of our target to meet our deficit reduction targets. Maybe my economic managers told you about that already earlier. We are 35 billion pesos below our deficit ceiling and seven billion pesos above our august revenue targets. Exports and investments are up, as I said the other day, 27 points increase in the stock market. We are now moving into the Phase Two of the economic reform agenda.

The reform program will focus on the day-to-day issues that confront our people in their daily lives out in the provinces: clean water, reliable energy, price stability, a good education and job creation. It will also continue to focus on creating the right conditions for foreign investment including ongoing fiscal reforms, a renewed campaign against corruption led by Hong Kong’s former anti-corruption czar, significant investments in infrastructure and public sector reforms to reduce the bureaucratic roadblocks facing foreign investors.

We’ve had good meetings today with new investors, with prospective investors, with old investors who want to expand in the Philippines. They have given us very good feedback on what are the bureaucratic reforms that we need to make. We have a continuing policy — as I told Secretary Peter Favila — of after care for those who are already in the Philippines so that we can continue to make you happy being in the Philippines.

So, to all the members of the financial community, the investment community who are here today, thank you for being with us and I hope you will stay and expand in the Philippines.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Investors’ Forum — Credit Suisse First Boston. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615132650/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5137&Itemid=38