Thank you.

Thank you very much, Chairman Puno.

Secretary Concepcion, the moving spirit behind the TOSP awards; Joey Concepcion, who is helping me to develop our young entrepreneurs; Mr. Ramos, President of National Bookstore; Marissa Concepcion of the RFM Foundation; Joey Lina, the President of Makati Central Rotary Club where I belong as a rotary ann; awardees; finalists; their families; sponsors; guests; ladies and gentlemen.

Young nation builders are our hope for the future. And I congratulate our ten outstanding students, the latest to be recognized as young nation builders. You are bestowed these awards because the judges have found that you have the vision, the will and the energy to make the dreams of the Filipino — our dreams — come true.

Our beloved Philippines is a young nation. The youth comprise the majority of our people. Six out of every ten Filipinos are under thirty years old. We are a young nation. Our democracy is only sixty years old, and the growing pains are still with us.

We are a young nation because we embrace life, song, dance, sports, new ideas and technology as the previous speaker said earlier. We are a young nation because we Filipinos are fully global citizens. This is part of the rapid change in the world. We are at the forefront of the world's workforce. These three that we mentioned earlier. Our nursing graduates, I believe, will be part of the forefront of the workforce around the world.

On this day, on the occasion of honoring our outstanding students, I am calling for a new vision for a young nation. The vigor to implement your aspirations lies with our Filipino youth. It is time to involve the next generation in national life. Speak up, act, and take control of your own destiny. And these ten outstanding students are more than capable of doing so. Strive within institutions and sectors to further improve the world. Use the abilities given to you by the government, family and society to become doctors, lawyers, farmers — thank you, we have an outstanding student from Cabacan who studied agriculture — and health caregivers. And lead in the field of modern and clean technology, and other great professions.

The new vision must include creating high-paying jobs right here at home, not just abroad. We cherish and value our OFWs, and we honor their efforts and sacrifices. However, we must strive for the day when a job abroad is a choice and not the only option available to a hard working Filipino. Aside from good jobs in our own country, we must also strive to take care of our beautiful and pristine environment, like the beauty and vitality of the nation. I call on the next generation to share the burden in our campaign for a New Green Philippines.

We need to expand our forests, plant new trees where trees have been cut, and try to protect them – these forests will grow for our citizens and our land. Let us restore the beauty that everyone cherishes and desires. And I want to bring to the enthusiasm of the Filipino, of any age, the purification of the environment. We must beautify the barangays and cities surrounded by garbage, build pleasant parks, and clean the water and land stained by industrial pollution.

As part of our Green Philippines, I desire a country that is thrifty in its use of energy, no longer relying on wasteful and smoky vehicles and plants. We will use our abundant sun, wind and geothermal resources, and create our own gasoline for vehicles from sugarcane and coconut instead of relying solely on foreign oil.

We need the unity and full commitment of the people to promote the leaders of the nation to embrace and enrich the new Green Philippines.

And as I have said before in the center of our tourism in Central Philippines, I want to turn our coral reefs and beaches, the wonder of the world, into national parks and international sanctuaries for eco-tourism and scientific research. We have the opportunity to develop our country from the beginning – clean, healthy, productive and beautiful. I hope that our youth today will be part of the new Green Philippines. And I call for action to make this happen within five years.

That is just some ideas. And through our outstanding students, I call on our youth to respond to this call of action to bring new innovative thinking to land management, care for our environment and ways to create jobs and have a clean, socially responsible environment policy. We need to get beyond the era of “either/or” thinking on our environment. We must embrace change and be bold in creating a Green Philippines that is both green and economically successful. And that is the very, very mission that Joey Concepcion has given for himself and which we have very, very heartily embraced. I truly believe the Philippines can become a model of environmental stewardship within ten years. But I need your help, the young people of today, the leaders of tomorrow, to create that vision.

And as you receive your awards, as you celebrate today and tonight with your parents and loved ones and friends, and as you go out into the world now that you have graduated from college, continue to stand as role models of hard work, excellence and service.

And in closing, I wish to commend the RFM Foundation, the Rotary Club of Makati Central and the National Bookstore, for your support in inspiring our young to spread their wings and soar high. I am proud of all of you. I am proud to have Filipinos like you.

Congratulations! Thank you and good day.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). GMA’s Speech during the National Awarding Ceremony for the 2006 Ten Outstanding Students of the Philippines (TOSP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212722/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2831&Itemid=38