Thank you.

Thank you very much. Thank you for your warm applause.

Thank you, Secretary Favila for introducing me.

Ambassador Donald Dee, congratulations! On a fruitful year especially your innovative 20 SME projects that support our goal to develop three million entrepreneurs and two million hectares of land for agri-business. Truly, we are working together. Congratulations, Donald!

Congratulations! George for chairing this very successful conference. I understand you had two full, very fruitful, very constructive days, and I thank you for giving me the results of your conference.

I’d like to greet the other leaders of the chamber, and I’d like to greet and thank Francis Chua for his opening remarks. Thank you Francis for referring to what I said last week, asking the businessmen to be part of the solution rather than part of the problem. What I can say about the PCCI and the FFCCCI, you are part of the solution. Thank you.

Excellencies of the diplomatic corps; our very distinguished awardees who are truly deserving of the awards they have received today; our officials, elective officials, there are many of them here in this hall today aside from the awardees, we have Congresswoman Janette Garin and Congresswoman Matin Petilla, thank you for your interest in the affairs of the business community; ladies and gentlemen.

I am really very gratified to be here with you once again today. The men and women in this room fuel the economic engine that drives this nation forward. You represent the Philippines that works: strong, growing, efficient, providing economic opportunity for yourselves and the nation.

I cannot erase poverty without you and the great economic engine of growth which global engagement brings.

You’ve heard me talk about two Philippines: one that works to create jobs, grows the economy and maintains strong economic fundamentals — that’s you. And of that the Philippines should be proud and supportive.

Yet, it’s the other Philippines that doesn’t work that troubles me deeply, and I am sure it troubles you as well. This is the Philippines whose political system drags down the economic takeoff and makes millions lose hope. This is the Philippines of degenerated politics and a broken system that is setting the nation back rather than moving it ahead.

The theme of your conference couldn’t be more appropriate to underscore the hope and peril of the Philippines today. I have heard PCCI always talk about ‘One Global Filipino’ and now ‘new boundaries,’ ‘crossing boundaries.’ we truly and should be one nation — one global Filipino. And yes, we should cross boundaries that take the nation into bold new arenas in our economic, social and political life.

During my presidency of the past four years, I truly believe I have opened up new horizons for the nation in the international arena; I have carved a place for the Philippines at the table of global players.

The results are seen in many ways: increased investments in the nation by foreign investors. Peter? 52 percent increase this year over last year in direct investments. And in portfolio investments, 13 times more this year than last year; billions in assistance from the United States in development aid, military assistance and anti-terrorism cooperation; remarkable help from Malaysia, the OIC nations and others to negotiate and support a lasting peace in Mindanao; interest from Japan and Daly City. I want to welcome our delegation from Japan and Daly City; and our leadership at the United Nations Security Council — not only our chairmanship during the last summit last September but also our standing chairmanship of the terrorism sanctions subcommittee of the U.N. Security Council.

I’ve been aggressive in restoring the Philippine reputation and presence in the international arena because it’s good for business, good for our security, and good for jobs for our people.

And here at home, despite the naysayers and noise makers, we have made significant progress especially with you. As I said, investments are up; the peso is stable; tax revenue is up and growing; our fiscal plan is way ahead of target, about 30 billion pesos ahead of target; we have created four million jobs in the last four years.

Yet, for every step forward we make in reshaping our nation’s image and in promoting our great Filipino worker abroad and at home, someone in the nation finds a way to undercut those advantages.

I now speak directly to those critics and opposition leaders and destabilizers who would put politics above the people; who would besmirch the reputation of our great nation with our friends and allies abroad to fuel their own political agenda here at home.

To those who oppose me, it’s your right to do so, as long as it’s a matter of fiscalization. But power grab and ouster are another matter. Please, stop opposing the progress of the nation in the meantime in your unquenchable thirst for power. Stop undermining our relations with the United States and other allies through conspiracies to gather foreign intelligence. Stop luring good global Filipinos into taking actions that are an embarrassment to the nation and to Philippine pride.

For me, crossing boundaries suggested in your title means unlimited opportunity of engagement in the world, to help promote the nation and build up our reputation and the reputation of our fine Filipino worker, both here and abroad.

I daresay, however, for my destabilizers, crossing boundaries means… Takes on a new meaning: they cross boundaries when it comes to satisfying their lust for power. Meddling with espionage with a foreign power to undermine our nation is crossing the line. It’s dangerous. More important, it’s besmirching the name of our people and our nation at a time when we are gaining momentum economically.

More important still is the preoccupation of political opponents with power grab rather than just fiscalizing when we have an economy to run, people to feed and a nation to protect.

Let me take this opportunity to thank Senator Manny Villar for sponsoring at last the anti-terrorism bill last night. Would it be a miracle if the senate focused as much time on passing anti-terrorism legislation as promoting one investigation after another based on half-truths and speculation masquerading as facts? And would it be a miracle if their main answer to bolster anti-terrorism is not to lock up our national security adviser. Locking up our national security adviser as a response to anti-terrorism, I’m sure our Abu Sayyaf foes are taking cover with that decisive act.

And we have a national budget to pass to strengthen education, create jobs, provide extended health care coverage and fulfill our promise to the people.

I hope the Senate doesn’t drag its feet.

While I’m trying to unlock the congestion of Metro Manila and open up the nation to easier transportation for people and goods, some senators are trying to create a train wreck.

What signal does that send to the world?

What confidence does that provide to the marketplace?

What help does that bring to the poor?

I’m here today among you who make the ‘One Philippines’ run to affirm my political independence from the ‘other Philippines’ from the politics of degeneration. We must open up our political system; we must bring greater accountability to the people; and we must bring more power to the provinces and to the countryside that feeds the center.

And I thank you the chamber for cooperating and in fact sometimes taking the lead in that effort.

And we must believe we can do the system change and demonstrate confidence along with results. You, the people in this room and the people of the whole nation deserve better than what they’re getting from our politicians today.

And so I ask you, movers and shakers of the business community to continue to join me to chart a new, independent course for the nation, free from pettiness, free from the past, free to open a new chapter in our political, economic and social life.

Mabuhay and PCCI!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the 31st Philippine Business Conference and Exposition. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092350/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5210&Itemid=38