Thank you very much Chairman Emeritus King Aguiluz. Your words about me were very kind. Thank you very much. I would also like to greet his son, President Amable Aguiluz IX and the rest of the AMA family. I would like to greet our foreign guests, of course our graduates this afternoon, their parents and teachers. Here I am again at the AMA graduation. I am a regular of the father because I have been a commencement speaker several times. Why do I keep coming back here to AMA? I have three reasons that I can give. First of all, sentimental family reasons. My father and King Aguiluz’s father were close friends and worked together in government. The late Amable Aguiluz I, held many sensitive positions in the administration of my father, the late president Diosdado Macapagal. He led the COA during my father’s time. The second reason why I always enjoy being a graduation speaker at AMA is because of my admiration for Ambassador King Aguiluz.

King Aguiluz is the pioneer of information technology and information technology education in our country. Before we were in the information age, twenty-four years ago, 1980, King already specialized in computer education. I remember during the time of 1980, I was studying for my PhD in economics. I was preparing my doctoral dissertation, because in economics the computations needed were very difficult. You need to prove your hypotheses through formulas. You fill it with data and statistics to prove it. I was forced to study computer programming. At that time, that was the application of the computer. Solving complex formulas and engineering. What I used to do my programming was keypunch cards, that’s how computers were back then. At that time there weren’t many applications of the computer but King Aguiluz already started in computer science and computer education. Now, twenty-four years later, King is like a prophet. We are now in the information technology age. Perhaps, we can say that King Aguiluz is the Bill Gates of the Philippines. But, King does more than just Bill Gates for me. He has also given a lot of help to my administration in our relations with Saudi Arabia and other countries in the Middle East where more than 1 million Filipinos work. During my last state visit to Bahrain, we even broke ground on an AMA computer college in Bahrain which was built on land donated by the Bahraini family.

Tonight, after the graduation, King will rush to the airport to go to Oman. He will pursue something for me as my ambassador special envoy to the Middle East, which is to lift the ban on Filipinos working there in the Sultanate of Oman. It is no wonder that back here in the Philippines, AMA is the first and only computer school to have been granted university status by the Commissioner on Higher Education. This is the first computer school to receive the ISO Certification of Excellence. And we saw earlier that our graduates are recognized by AMA in the Philippines as graduates also in England, which recognizes their degree throughout Europe. Indeed, AMA has lived by the high standards of prestige and excellence that has come to be known in all Philippine cities and in many cities abroad. The third reason why I like to be a commencement speaker at AMA is because I admire your AMA students. You are the future of our country. You are a symbol of the generation of information technology.

The very beautiful words of our valedictorian earlier, her very beautiful life story. Theresa Varsaga, she is a symbol of the life of the new Filipino, the Filipino of our future. I am proud of her because she is one of the scholars called by King Aguiluz “Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo scholars” offered to me. I am proud of all of you but I am sure your parents, friends, teachers and relatives are even more proud of you. We all hope for a bright future for all of you.

I remember my graduation. I also remember my life in college. Earlier, your valedictorian talked about parents, teachers, friends. I also have many good memories of my college life especially because of the strong friendships that were formed then which are still important today. So, graduates today, as expressed by Ms. Varsaga’s feelings, I know you will remember your classmates. They will be your friends for life, they will remain with you in the challenges of time. And she paid tribute also to your mentors, the teachers or moderators who took time out not only to impart knowledge but values as well. Your teachers, they were the ones who recognized your talents whether in computer, math, writing, singing and they nurtured your talents and skills as well as your values and ethics. I am sure you will remember your parents. Like the story of Theresa Varsaga, they encouraged you to do your best, they struggled with you and hoped for your success. All parents are silent martyrs for their children. Wishing for a better life for us than their own. We talked about parents, King’s parents, my parents, our two fathers. Our two fathers were neighbors in Lubao, Pampanga, both poor. Both aspired to overcome their poverty through education. My father, like Theresa Varsaga, was able to go to college because he found a scholarship. Theresa became valedictorian, my father became the topnotcher in the bar, doctor of laws, doctor of economics and because of this, he became a congressman, vice-president, and then president. The president of your alumni association, we saw, loves his business suit, because he is a high official of Hewlett Packard. Education is really the key to a good future. My father, my inspiration regarding studying, teaching and serving the people. Because he came from a poor family as I said, if he hadn’t finished school, he wouldn’t have had a good job that reached the presidency if he hadn’t studied. So, education is really the key to the future, the key to a job. Usually, in a typical graduation, the typical graduates think, thank you parents, teachers, and friends. But they also think. Where will I find a job? Typical graduating students, most of their thinking is to get a job. But you, you can already think about your graduation party. Because, surely you already have a job from Convergys. And I want to say as the Philippine CEO of Convergys said. Convergys was established in the Philippines last year, 2003, also because of my offer to invest here in call centers and other foreign investments.

Because in the short period of my presidency, I focused on creating many jobs. It is sad to say that part of the chaos I inherited was that during President Estrada’s time, only 150,000 jobs a year were created. In my short presidency, for the first time in history, we create more than 1 million jobs annually. Where are these jobs? As King Aguiluz said, many are in information technology especially the call centers which are part of what we call the “business process outsourcing” industry which is also a specialty of AMA. Before I became president, the call centers as King said, was just an I.T part in the Philippines. There were less than 2,000 working in call centers. Now, in my short presidency, there will be 60,000 working in call centers this year 2004, call centers and other business process outsourcing. This includes the 6,000 coming from the AMA Computer University System. Imagine, out of 60,000 jobs this year, 10% will come from the computer university system, that’s how good the computer university system is, that’s how lucky you graduates are here in 2004. Convergys is among the foreign investments that entered last year which increased by 26% because countries believe in our excellent graduates, like the graduates today at AMA. And because of our correct foreign policy in which King Aguiluz also helped me a lot. So, even if I am elected for the next six years, if King wants, I will be a commencement speaker every year, I will come here. Because, as I said in 2001, the future of our country is information technology and if we want many jobs, we need a correct foreign policy for many foreign investments. In the two things I said, in information technology education, in foreign policy, King Aguiluz is my partner. So, I thank him, let us all thank him, thank you graduating students for the good education and the good job waiting for you when you leave your graduation exercises.

Once more, my congratulations to all of you. Long live the Batch 2004 of AMA Computer University System. Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech at the 18th Commencement Exercises of AMA Education System. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133544/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5675&Itemid=38