Thank you very much Secretary Raul Roco for your invitation and for expressing the Department of Education's continued support for the Boy Scouts of the Philippines. Because we know that the boy scouts had problems when Raul implemented the policy that there should be no collections. So we discussed it here at the table earlier and perhaps the loss to the boy scouts due to the cessation of collections during enrollment can come from the special education fund. That is what we will do so that the boy scouts do not suffer losses.

Mayor Jojo Binay, the National President of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines. And he reminded me of my pledge as president, which is one million pesos for the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, that will also be an addition; Congressman Butch Aquino; Congressman Teddy ‘Boy’ Locsin; Vice Mayor Mercado, the Conference Chairman of this meeting; Mr. Kim Kyu Young, Cam Saha Meda, and we thank you and we congratulate you for being here. And congratulations as you end your tour as Regional Director of the World Scout Bureau; Jun Aniag, the Senior VP of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, former Congressman, I also greet him; Vice Governor De Jesus of Misamis Oriental, Chief National Commissioner of the Boy Scouts; Dr. Pedro San Vicente, the member Emeritus of the Boy Scouts; Frankie Roman who is also a member Emeritus of the boy scouts — where is Frankie? There he is; Secretary General Escudero, our Master of Ceremonies and also Secretary General. Monsignor Laban, member of the Executive Board of the Boy Scouts but he is the Malacanang Chaplain so when I go to church every day, he is the one who preaches to me; Obet Pagdanganan, BSP past National President and now, because the one year is over, Presidential Adviser on Cooperative Development; Congressman Del de Guzman; and Dr. Destura, the Vice President for the Visayas; and my fellow provincial from Iligan, Jimmy Semana, the Vice President for Mindanao.

I also greet the members of the executive board, officers and members of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines. May I also greet Mr. Nazmul Haque Nazu from Bangladesh; Commander Aftab Qureshi from Pakistan; Congressman Cho Roco and Congressman Harry Angpin are also here; Governor Petilla of Leyte whom I inducted as a Boy Scout also there in Leyte; oh, I was glad I saw Governor Aurora Cerilles because she is not on the list, Governor Cerilles; and your counterpart in the women's sector, Cynthia Sagala, President of the Girl Scouts — oh no, she already knows that I am here so I will be forced to go to the Girl Scouts Conference as well; other Government Officials; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen:

Greetings, my fellow scouters. I come to this council with best wishes for your safety, security and happiness.

I am happy that, as your president, I am now the Chief Scout of the Philippines. Truly this is a great honor, because we all know that you are an organization of exemplary youth known for deeds and not just words. Isn't our motto in the boy scouts, for the scouts, “always prepared”, always ready. Always ready to help in our clean-up drives, in traffic assistance — isn't the image of a boy scout always helping an old lady cross the street? — in the anti-drug campaign, in community service.

I have high respect for scouting. My children were also boy scouts during their time. And since the establishment of the Boy Scout of the Philippines in 1936, millions of Filipino youth have benefited from it and avoided bad vices.

In fact, I am very happy to learn that the boy scouts is number three in the world. But that is in terms of absolute numbers. As Jojo said, if you talk about the percentage of the population who are boy scouts, it is even higher — perhaps it is the highest — and one reason is that the boy scouts' customs are diverse, integrated into the activities of schools. And so it is truly important that we continue this tradition because it leads our youth into the good path away from the bad path.

The practice of self-reliance, the attitude of taking the initiative to achieve goals and the skills of emergency preparedness have inculcated in countless young Filipinos the values of discipline, diligence and perseverance. Through the path of scouting, many respectable and responsible Filipinos of today have acquired the sturdy character and firm conviction to selflessly serve god, country, and fellowmen. It is largely because of scouting that many of them, many of you have become good citizens and outstanding leaders.

And that is that, hopefully we, because many of the leaders here in the boy scouts are also political leaders in various places in our country, hopefully the political leaders who are also leaders of the boy scouts will lead the way in not fighting too much in politics for now, and do the work for our community.

And because of my high respect for scouting, in 1997, when I was still a senator, I helped in the construction of a training center in Nueva Ecija because Jojo requested it. Now it is also used as a training ground for boy scouts. I also had some funded Girl Scouts Centers — Mrs. Sagala knows that — when I was a senator. So Jojo said, but the contribution as president is different. So, “okay, Jojo,” I said. So Jojo, when he gives orders, it is difficult to refuse.

As I said earlier, the boy scouts are an organization of exemplary youth. Known for deeds and not just words. Scouts are not faultfinders, empty critics or complainers. That is what I ask of politicians who are scouts. Scouts have an active concern for and a determination to resolve problems affecting the community.

Scouting in the Philippines is also a symbol of hope, because it springs from the youth. From this hope flows the strength to confront and overcome challenges, the tenacity of spirit to reach out for the best, the noblest, the most sublime of human aspirations.

But hope alone, without substance, cannot meaningfully alter or improve the human condition. Hope must be transformed into decisive action and resolute initiative. This is true in confronting two great challenges today — terrorism and poverty.

The fight against poverty and the fight against terrorism are not far apart, they are twins. Poverty and the sense of powerlessness that it brings are the spawning grounds where terrorism can easily spread its evil ideology.

That is why our fight against poverty is composed of four parts:

First, in establishing a 21st-century economic system, it is necessary to have a good macroeconomic environment so that every Filipino citizen can have a job.

Second, because most of our poor are in the countryside, agricultural modernization founded on social equity is necessary.

Third, programs that directly help the poor, such as housing and Medicare.

Fourth, the upliftment of morality in our government and in our society.

What does this mean to our youth? Education. We must give our youth knowledge and skills so that when they grow up, they will become responsible citizens who can support themselves.

Our national hero, Dr. Jose Rizal, once said that an uneducated people cannot be a free people. We have seen places in the world where innocent children are tutored in hatred and utter disregard for human values. They are programmed like robots along a single path of behavior, to obey authority without question. And worse sometimes, the authority is an authority that foments hatred.

We are all witness to how an uneducated citizenry can be controlled by extreme ideologies, by contrived fears, by irrational causes. They become vulnerable to dictators, to rabble-rousers, to unscrupulous leaders.

The education and enlightenment we need to propagate is the responsibility of all and everyone in our society.

This annual meeting of the national council sets the direction and the pace of the BSP. The BSP is the largest youth organization in the country. The deliberations and decisions made in this council have far-reaching effects on the Filipino youth.

As your chief scout, allow me to pose three questions in guiding your deliberations:

First, are we doing the right thing? Second, are we doing enough of the right thing? Third, are we doing enough of the right thing with the required urgency?

The country and each of your communities wait upon your leadership and participation to make life better for our people.

The world we are living in today needs more peace, but it is filled with strife. The global community needs more cooperation, but it is surrounded by conflict. Humanity needs more solidarity, but we hear the voices of hate and belligerence all around.

There is an urgent need for our children to be in the company of good, decent and sincere people. Without doubt, they should be in the company of the boy scouts.

Scouting is a symbol of unity. It brings together Muslims and Christians, Tagalogs, Visayans, Chinese, Spaniards, the rich, the poor, leaders, and followers. In the Boy Scouts, I believe, everyone is equal.

Indeed, let scouting be a shining example of what a common vision plus strong unity can achieve. Let scouting pave the way towards team spirit, self-reliance and the excellence of youth.

In our desire to eradicate poverty and restore the dignity of our country this twenty-first century, we need the resilience and dignity of the Boy Scouts.

We need the courage of the Boy Scouts. Above all, we need to demonstrate the good things learned in scouting.

I hope our fellow scouts will not disappoint me. I have full confidence in your ability to help our country eradicate poverty in the current decade.

And because the national president of the Boy Scouts is also the mayor of the richest city in our country, that boys world’s scout headquarters should, with Jojo Binay’s diligence, be built here in Makati City.

Thank you very much and long live scouting in the Philippines.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 46th National Council Meeting of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225512/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8283&Itemid=38