To my beloved countrymen here, let me greet, first of all, Nerissa Saito of PCCC, the chairperson of the Philippine Community Coordinating Council. Thank you. Where is Nerissa? Let me also greet Amelia Kono of Kyoto Pag-asa Filipino Community and saka mother earth connection; let me also greet Delia Nakashima and the Shiga Christian Filipino community; as well as Sally Takashima and saka the Takasuki Filipiniana community; as well as Virginia Yamaguchi and saka the Toyota Filipino Community; and saka Rey Mesa and saka the Filipino community in Kobe; Doctor Melvin Garcia we were together earlier; and I greet again the Japan Association of Novo Ecija; Mayang Nihei and Teatro Canto. How are you Mayang? You look so beautiful again tonight; Fernando Pavio, Jr. and the Philippine Association for Common Cause; Eleanor Fukuda and the Organization for the Development and Advancement of Negros in Japan; Lulu Ojo Prague, the Philippine Ladies Association in Japan, where is Lulu Ojo?; Benigno Totor, my student; long live the Philippines today! and saka the Ibaraki Christian Center; Dory Yoda and the Association of Filipinos in Tokyo; Anita Sasaki and saka all of the castle group; Rosemarie Nehal and the Filipino organization in Tokyo; Eric Paringit, where is Eric? Oh!!!; as well as the entire Science and Technology Advisory Council of Japan; Vangie Yamamoto and saka the Unified Filipino group of Yokohama; and you too, thank you, that you are also the Philippine Assistance Group Chairperson.

I also want to greet the United Filipinos in Chiba under the leadership of Vicky Furuta and saka Pepito Vergara. Thank you, Pepito ha. Thank you for your organized… The organization of Kobe to GMA. Thank you very much.

I also greet Jing Langomez and all the parade participants; Karen Paredes and saka those from AFSJ; Fr. Garcia and saka those from UPJA; Marilyn Reyes and saka those from FHM; and saka those from Taga-alay sa iyo lamang Education Foundation under the leadership of Marie Watanabe; Olivia Akatsu and the friends of Lilia Estolas, ken dagidiay naduma-duma pay nga Ilokano; Elmer Atienzar and saka those from Pegaso; Rosela Makita, FWJA Yokohama.

And I would like to introduce to you my companions now, this time: from Mindanao, our congressman from Davao City, Congressman Boy Nograles; our Congresswoman from Davao Oriental, Congresswoman Cora Malanyaon. We all welcome our colleagues from Mindanao, where I also come from.

From Mindanao, on the Ilonggo side, our governor of North Cotabato, Governor Manny Piñol. Our welcome to the Ilonggos of Mindanao and Negros, where my husband also comes from.

Thank you to Ambassador Siazon for organizing this. Thank you also to Consul General Tony Villamayor because ten hours you traveled, constituents of Tony, thank you for your love.

We are also with today the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process, Ging Deles, because as part of what we are doing today, we spoke with Prime Minister Badawi of Malaysia about our peace process in Mindanao.

I am also with Undersecretary Gregory Domingo, who heads the Board of Investments. Oh, where is Gregory? And our Undersecretary of Labor, actually acting secretary, Manny Imson. You will also be with him tomorrow in the various activities for our overseas Filipinos. He is also with the administrator of OWWA, Ver Angelo. and my spokesman, Toting Bunye. Wow! Our photo looks great, very nice.

Leaders of the Filipino Community of Tokyo and Osaka and all of Japan whom I greeted earlier, my beloved countrymen here in Japan.

Good evening again because we have met so many times and Merry Christmas again because this is the second time we are having a Christmas party. Karing cabalen kung kapampangan, mayap a bengi que congan. I have already greeted my relatives from my mother’s side, good evening to all of you.

And also to those from Mindanao, good evening to all of you. And to the relatives of my husband, again, good evening to all of you.

And again, I thank the various individuals and organizations that continue to help unite our countrymen here.

I mentioned those various organizations that are part of the Philippine Assistance Group or P.A.G. They say that when there is P.A.G. there is hope. I don’t think I greeted the circle of friends earlier, but I have already greeted the Philippine Association for Common Cause. I haven’t greeted the Overseas Workers Association yet, the Philippine Development Society, the Kabayan-yamato but I have already greeted the castle.

I also greet the various workers groups. I greeted the Filipino organization earlier. I haven’t greeted the Philippine Men’s League yet, the engineers and workers from various Japanese companies. Special mention should be given to we-serve and Japan gas corporation, because this is one of our Presidential Employers Awardees.

And of course the various regional and Japan area-based organizations. The Association of Nueva Ecija, well, we are already close. The Abranian, we are also close. I want to greet the Batangueño Association, it’s good you are here. That’s it, then the negros, right? I have already greeted the Organization for the Development and Advancement of Negros in Japan. I have also greeted the Filipino Group in Yokohama. I also greeted the United Philippine-Japan Association.

I greet the women’s groups who are with us: the Filipina Circle for Advancement and Progress; the Filipina Wives of Japanese Association in Chiba and Yokohama, I already greeted you earlier. Her Imperial Majesty Empress Michiko also sends her greetings, she truly loves the Filipino women who became Japanese wives here; the Association of Filipinos in Tokyo; the Philippine Ladies Association of Japan; the Organizational Representatives also from the Osaka-Kansai area who traveled for 10 hours led by Consul General Antonio Villamayor.

The religious groups such as El-shaddai-Japan; Toyoshiki Catholic Community; Hawak kamay ng Mahal na Ina; Filipino Missionaries Group; Catholic Tokyo International Center; Tokyo Baptist; I already mentioned the Ibaraki Christian Center earlier; Pilgrims- Madonna.

Thank you also to our proud students and professionals who are part of the Association of Filipino Students in Japan. Earlier, I acknowledged the many members of the Science and Technology Advisory Council, they stood up. Special thanks to you because aside from your scholarship programs, you also help us with the development-nation and continuing education programs. Thank you for your programs.

And congratulations also to those who graduated from the Entrepreneurial Development Seminar of the labor office of the Philippine Embassy and Filipino organizations.

As Ambassador Siazon said, we meet every six months. This time I am here to attend the Asean-Japan Summit.

Back in the Philippines, the campaign heated up very early. That’s why I’m happier here with you. I leave to the opposition the task of threshing out their problems. Meanwhile, with your support, I shall forge ahead with reforms and changes in the system, and with unity and reconciliation in all aspects of our national life.

I had a very productive meeting with Prime Minister Koizumi yesterday. And as I mentioned earlier, I met Prime Minister Badawi of Malaysia today, and tonight I am meeting you, our overseas Filipinos in Japan. First and foremost, to thank you once again for the sacrifices you are making for our country.

For me — Koizumi, Badawi and you — are the people who make our country move forward. My meetings yesterday with Koizumi, my meeting today with Badawi, and my meeting with you tonight are the events that are carving forward the path of stability and progress for our nation. And I’m determined to push forward in this path even through the campaigns and elections of 2004. My priority is good governance and I shall keep at it with undeterred focus.

My pledges moving forward are based on the experience of what we have done in the past two and a half years that I have been visiting you as president: bring the deficit under control, clamp down on inflation, increase growth, increase tax revenues and expose government corruption.

Exposing government corruption, the Philippines is congratulated by the World Bank because they say the lifestyle checks being done by my administration are effective. And the new law passed by our congressmen – the Electronic Procurement law — is also reducing corruption in our government purchases.

That increase in growth, this past quarter, our economy recorded a 4.4 percent GDP growth and 5.9 percent GNP growth, the highest since the Asian crisis of 1997 and we are sixth among twenty-one economies of Asia and Pacific. You know 4.4 percent is the GDP, 5.9 percent is the GNP. What’s the difference? The difference is your remittances. Because the 4.4 percent increase, is production within the Philippines. Adding your production, counting your remittances, increased our country’s growth by 1.8 percentage points because of your remittances. This means, our economy is improving also because of the increasing remittances you send, overseas Filipinos, to your families.

That’s why I want to thank you again for the great help to our economy, the money you send to your families can truly be considered you overseas Filipino investors because your remittances serve as your investments in our country.

Your remittances are truly a big help because Japan is the third main destination of our OFWs last year. Number one, Saudi Arabia, one million Filipinos. Number two, Malaysia more than half a million Filipinos. Number three, the number of OFWs in Japan has now increased to almost 300,000 overseas Filipino workers here in Japan. And we expect this to increase in the sectors of health care and information technology because of my discussion with Prime Minister Koizumi. We are making negotiations so that more caregivers and I.T. professionals can enter Japan.

You who are here — you are champions of our country’s socioeconomic development.

The classrooms from Filipinos abroad is a good example. In a short time, hundreds of classrooms will be built in our country because of your help. Here in Japan, there are already forty pledges and donations that had been received for this project of classrooms for our people.

The tourism volunteer program is also a good example. With your help, our tourism volunteers, many Japanese tourists continue to visit our country. We have already welcomed almost 300,000 Japanese visitors this year to the Philippines. And now Japan is our second largest source of tourists. Thank you to all of you volunteer tourism marketers here.

Because of your efforts here in Japan and your spirit of cooperation in helping our progress, I would just like to return the favor by helping through programs that you and your loved ones in the Philippines can benefit from.

So as you know, our congressmen have passed the Overseas Voting law, as well as the Dual Citizenship Law, where even if you are already Japanese, you can still be Filipino, you can buy land and houses and businesses in the Philippines.

Our congressmen also passed the Anti-Money Laundering law so you wouldn't have a hard time. If the Anti-Money Laundering law hadn't passed when you remit money to the Philippines, it would have been terrible, there would have been a lot of red tape in your remittances, so the money laundering law had to pass so that your remittances to our country would be regular. So that's for you too.

We also expanded our housing program for workers to include overseas Filipinos. I hope tomorrow you will buy a house for your loved ones in the Philippines. Because PAG-IBIG is here in Japan now to help you buy a house for your relatives in the Philippines or for your retirement. Ambassador Siazon told me that Paskong Pilipino is a two-day event. We have tonight and tomorrow another party. Tomorrow, there will be a housing fair and exhibit. You will see the houses that are so beautiful and the installments are so affordable that our overseas Filipinos can really afford it. So we are doing this for you.

In the Philippines, our fight against poverty and crime continues. Perhaps you have heard, Commander Robot was arrested. This is a major blow to the Abu Sayyaf bandit group. We want and we shall pursue justice for the Sipadan hostages just like any other kidnapping cases. We are determined to show terrorists and criminals that such heinous crimes will not go unpunished and that there will always be an end of the road in the hands of the criminal justice system. Let the truth come out from all corners so that the public can see who deserves just retribution among the criminals and their cohorts.

Moving forward, what do I want to do for our country? I want to build the infrastructure necessary for a modern nation, from roads — for example, the North Expressway going to Pampanga; the South Expressway going to Batangas — we are fixing them now. I also want to build high-speed internet. I also want to improve health care access so that all your relatives have Philhealth insurance. and I want to be able to raise enough resources and revenues to be able to redouble spending on education. We will spend the additional taxes we collect on the new laws there.

But it is also necessary for the deep divisions in our society to heal. Here in Japan, there are many associations but they are united. In the Philippines, the wounds in our country are very deep. There are NPA, there are soldiers, they are fighting. There is MILF, there are Christians who are afraid of Muslims, they are fighting. And above all, there is EDSA 2, there is EDSA 3. Between the NPA and the soldiers, there is the common citizen, they no longer want fighting, they no longer want war. Between the Muslims and those anti-Muslims, there are also the majority, they just want to continue doing business, making a living. Despite EDSA 2 and EDSA 3, there is also our silent majority, they want reconciliation. And I read their message to me that I should be president not only of EDSA 2, I should also be president of EDSA 3. So despite the reforms needed to fight poverty, fight corruption, fight crime, we also need unity and reconciliation.

You, my friends here in Japan, I hope you will help me in finding reforms and changes in our systems, but also help me talk to your loved ones in the Philippines so that we can achieve the unity you are looking for for our future generations.

To all of you, it is just right that reconciliation is being discussed especially now because it is the season of Christmas, it is time for peace on earth to men of goodwill. To all of you, my dear compatriots in Japan, it is my pleasure to be with you again on yet another Christmas party.

To you all, Merry Christmas! The Philippines loves you.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Gathering with the Filipino Community ‘Paskong Pilipino Kasama ang Pangulo’. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140508/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7540&Itemid=38