Thank you. (applause)

Thank you Secretary Roque.

Secretary Cabral, our other senior government officials, our leaders of the Pharmaceutical and Health Care Industry header by Mr. Aragon and the other officers of PHAP, ladies and gentlemen.

This is a timely meeting. The world is once again on high alert with the emergence of the deadly Influenza AH1N1 virus.

We thank the providence of the Lord Almighty and the cooperation of the government and the people for the continued resilience of the Philippines against the swine flu. Just as we have so far been relatively resilient from the global economic crisis.

According to the WHO there are now more than 8,000 cases in 36 countries, but by the grace of God and the carefulness of all of us, there is still no swine flu case in our country. Nonetheless, on my instruction, the DOH has put up a stock of more than one million capsules of tamiflu as a precautionary measure.

But let’s continue to pray and work hand-in-hand, as we did during the SARS and bird flu outbreaks, in order to keep the Philippines free from swine flu. I’d like to take this opportunity to thank not only the Pharmaceutical and Health Care Industry but also all the people for their prayers and trust in government I understand that PHAP has started to print Influenza AH1N1 information materials from the DOH, and that these materials are on their way to the provinces. So, I thank you for that.

As more diseases emerge, the role of the pharmaceutical industry in developing and distributing cutting-edge drugs to combat disease has become even more important. And we saw that in the presentation of PHAP. Saving people’s lives is at the core of your mission, the Pharmaceutical and Health Care Association of the Philippines.

For over 60 years, it has been providing cures for diseases, and through your very good PHAPCares Foundation — congratulations to the executive director! — sharing with our indigent countrymen large numbers of life saving medicines, medical missions, participation in emergency and disaster response activities, campaigns for the prevention and treatment of major diseases and support for the victims of these ills.

I laud PHAP for your support especially of what was presented today, our project NARS. And that excellent presentation saves me the trouble of explaining what it’s all about except to just summarize that it was a project we developed both as an emergency employment measure and as a training ground for nurses who wish to obtain some hands-on experience before they can qualify for greener pastures abroad.

And I am happy to learn about all the things that they have pointed out there — your agreement together with the NARS Steering Committee sponsoring the stipends of about a hundred nurses, but now more because you have 3 more companies coming in, fielded to 20 more municipalities. So for that, maraming, maraming salamat.

The work of the PHAPCares Foundation is something I would especially like to highlight during this meeting during this month of May. Because I have proclaimed May as Volunteerism Month and PHAPCares is a great example of volunteerism.

Now is the time for pulling together and focusing on family and the community. We must initiate a new era of volunteerism and community spirit. This should include the government, religious, civic groups and NGOs like PHAPCares harnessing our people to engage in coordinated volunteer activities. That is why your partnership with DSWD and now your partnership with DOLE is really an excellent example of pulling together.

But may I make a call also to focus on initiatives not just related to your core activity of health but also non-core activities like cleaning up our environment — which is after all very much related to health — building parks and planting trees, bringing comfort to the poor not only through medicines but through food banks because nutrition is also important for health, and the dignity of literacy to adults who cannot read. Because the more literate the adults are, the more they know how to take care of their health.

During these trying times, the Filipino spirit and commitment to caring should prompt each one of us, even the non-Filipinos among you, for after all whether your corporation is Filipino or multinational, it’s still a Filipino corporation operating in the Philippines and PHAP is a Filipino association. All of us should count our blessings and give back to those who are less fortunate as you are doing in PHAPCares.

Our nation indeed needs us all pulling in the same direction, and one way to do it is to volunteer time, skills and resources. That is a noble undertaking we should all take seriously. And, of course, you’re all aware that with the poorest of our people in mind, one of the key programs of our government is to bring down the cost of medicines frequently purchased by the poor to one-half of their 2001 prices. I made that declaration in my 2001 State of the Nation Address because when I came in to the presidency our prices were double that of our neighbors. That’s why I made a goal to bring it down to one-half.

But let me stress that this program is not meant to be a grave threat to the viability of the pharmaceutical industry. And I appreciate that PHAP has been active in the campaign against intellectual property and the counterfeiting of products affecting public health and safety, and I appreciate that.

After all, our government supports intellectual property. It supports research and development which requires the protection of intellectual property rights. You do a lot of research but I was asking your Executive Director Mr. Gloor, how much are indeed you do here. You do testing here, but I hope that you can also move towards more basic R & D. And in order to encourage you to do this, we have spent billions of scholarships to include scholarships in the PhD and masteral level for Science and Engineering. And I hope that that will help you that pool of manpower we are putting will help you to make a decision to put more basic research here in the Philippines.

And I’d like to and also assure you that we religiously implement laws that uphold patent protection as a major incentive for scientists and researchers to discover new and effective products. We are joined together in a common fight against fake products, more so of medicines which are crucial to a patient’s survival.

Earlier before the general meeting, we had a meeting with some of your leaders and very concerned corporations about two matters: one, is the recent Supreme Court ruling about the very liberal importation of pharmaceutical products; and the other one, is a recent BFAD ruling about discount cards. On the Supreme Court ruling I understand that you have somebody among you has a motion for reconsideration. So, we will await the Supreme Court’s final ruling on that case.

In the case of the BFAD’s policies on discount cards, I think Undersecretary Alex Padilla made many things clear in the meeting and that can be a subject matter for you to disseminate among your members in other meetings or later in the day. But I think Alex has… from the way you understood everything, it really is something that the industry can very well be able to live with and remain viable. Because after all, government and PHAP need not be on opposite sides. We are both concerned that the Filipino people will be healthy and strong. We are both concerned that the people will be free of disease. We are both concerned that the people of the Philippines live quality lives, and able to contribute to the nation’s continued growth and development.

So, let me finally say that working together as one nation and people, our economy and your industry will not only survive, but will do quite well in this time of global crisis.

Once again, thank you for your cooperation with the government. Let’s continue to work together for the good of the Filipino people.

Thank you all very much. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the general membership of the Pharmaceutical and Healthcare Association of the Philippines (PHAP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412102435/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25132&Itemid=38