Thank you very much, Secretary Angelo Reyes.

Gen. Diomedio Villanueva. For the last time I will call him Lt. Gen. Roy Cimatu because I have just signed his appointment as General Roy Cimatu.

I would also like to join in welcoming to the Philippines Admiral Thomas Fargo, the Commander in Chief of the Pacific; and to welcome him especially because this is his first official trip after assuming his post as commander in Chief of CNCPAC. He likes the Philippines very much because Roy Golez’s his classmate in Annapolis.

I would like to, having mentioned Roy Golez and Angelo Reyes, I would like to greet also the other Cabinet Members who are here, and of course the members of the Boards of Generals of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, as well as the Philippine National Police headed by General Leandro Mendoza.

I would like to greet the Senators, Senator Ramon Magsaysay, Chairman of the Committee on National Defense; and Senator Rodolfo Biazon who is here not sitting with the senators but sitting with his fellow former Chiefs of Staff, and with him I would like to greet the other former Chiefs of Staff.

I would like to greet our local government officials who have already been mentioned by name and also our members of the House of Representatives who have not all been mentioned by name — and I hope I have the list complete. General Cimatu mentioned already Congressman Salapudin, I would also like to greet Congressman Rudy Albano, Congressman Abdullah Dimaporo, Congressman Munir Arbison, Congressman Ernie Clarete, Congressman Constantino Jaraula, Congressman Romualdo Vicencio, and Congressman Harry Angpin.

I would also like to greet the members of the Diplomatic Corps and the members of the Defense Armed Forces Attache.

Troop commander, give the troops tikas pahinga.

Once again, we witness a great tradition as the command changes hands today. And once again it is from an excellent officer and gentleman to another equally deserving of the title of Chief of Staff.

Before I revealed my final choice for the position of Chief of Staff and even afterwards, there was the usual flurry of white papers and derogatory press feeds. I hope they now end, and I hope they do not resurface when it is time to choose the next Chief of Staff.

I can only pick one Chief of Staff at a time; and I have made my choice. And I am supremely confident that I have chosen rightly for the service and for the country — the man who will lead the AFP’s tradition of fine soldiery.

But even before we officially welcome our new Chief of Staff, let me pay tribute to the outstanding soldier, officer and leader, Gen. Diomedio Villanueva, on whose shoulders I entrusted the good of our military service for the past 14 months.

I first knew of Gen. Villanueva’s work when he became Commanding General of SOLCOM, and then as Vice-President I was able to observe and not just hear about his work as Commanding General of SouthCom. I also recall that we had a good conversation when he became Commanding General of the Philippine Army.

And when I became President, and decided to ask then Chief of Staff Gen. Angelo Reyes to become my Secretary of Defense, I started a round of quiet consultations on who should be my Armed Forces Chief of Staff. Some of you may recall, when I was asked by the media what criterion I would use in choosing whom to appoint, I said that I wanted one who could best keep the Armed Forces united behind the constitution. This was a subjective criterion in the sense that it was not quantifiable, but then again it demonstrates that there is reason why the Commander-in-Chief under the Philippine Constitution has the absolute prerogative to select the Armed Forces Chief of Staff.

In any case, as I consulted with middle level officers, retired officers, enlisted personnel and many other sectors, Diomedio Villanueva’s excellent reputation as a soldier made him the overwhelming choice. I decided that he deserved the leadership of the command.

Since Diomeng entered the PMA. in 1964 to the time as three-star general he got into my short list as a probable Chief of Staff, he had acquired an enviable mix of combat and staff duty, academic preparation and actual field experience. Before Abubakar there was Marag Valley in the history of Diomedio Villanueva. These, plus the unflinching courage under fire, his known concern for the soldiers’ welfare, and what I observed to be his virtue of living up to the admirable ethic of soldiery as depicted in the great poem, the charge of the light brigade: “theirs is not to reason why, theirs is but to do and die,” and many times Diomeng Villanueva showed that though he had a different opinion from what I commanded him to do, he would do what I commanded him to do. All these made him the perfect choice for Chief of Staff during the early months of my presidency.

And Gen. Villanueva proved me right. The 14 months that he served as Chief of Staff were replete with crisis and challenges for the AFP and the whole nation. He was barely two months in his post when the mob stormed Malacañang’s gates on May 1 last year and severely tested the temperance of our soldiers. But under his steely resolve and professionalism, our soldiers gallantly defended the palace while resisting the urge to fire back at the unruly crowd. By that act, the uniformed services under the leadership of Gen. Villanueva once again won the nation’s trust, and showed their readiness not only in the battlefield, but in all other fields that require their discipline, courage, skills and professionalism.

Diomedio Villanueva proved true to what he said at his inaugural, for the AFP to be ready, and I quote “… To assist the new government in gathering the remains of a corrupted trust …” General Cimatu, if more chairs break down, the command responsibility will go higher the chain of command. Going back to the words of General Villanueva in his inaugural address, he said that it was the job of the armed forces to create “an atmosphere of confidence for progress and in rebuilding bridges to peace.”

I also congratulate Diomeng Villanueva and the entire armed forces for the many gains achieved in the past months. I am particularly pleased that the proposed national military strategy that he drew up, in response to my call last December for a review of our military doctrine, has been submitted to the Department of National Defense. I am glad that the mechanisms for the creation of the revolution in military affairs at the GHQ level are now in place, and ready for replication in the other commands nationwide. I have high hopes that this program will successfully reorient our soldiers on the role of the AFP in the 21st century and its primary mission of defending national security. I enjoin the new chief of staff to provide continuity on this and other assignments that came directly from instructions of the commander-in-chief, so that no matter how long or how short the chief-of-staff sits at the helm of the armed forces, we will not be forever reinventing the wheel.

I am also pleased that, with Gen. Villanueva sitting as Chairman of the Board of Trustees, the RSBS posted a 39 million-peso income for 2001, ending a long period of being in the red. Congratulations, Gen. Villanueva. Here again, I believe, that there should be continuity. The law calls for the Chief-of-Staff to supervise the RSBS through a Board of Directors. It does not necessarily require him to be the cChairman of the Board of the RSBS. thus, I will probably appoint a Chairman of the Board co-terminus with the Commander-in-Chief who shall be supervised by the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces.

I am confident that Gen. Roy Cimatu, our 29th Chief of Staff, with his long experience in comptrollership, being one of the so-called Santolan boys, can also adequately supervise the RSBS., as I am sure he can more than adequately lead the Armed Forces given his exciting and achievement-filled war record. Gen. Cimatu has had some of the toughest but I might say most glamorous assignments in the field, including the Mindanao war of 1999 and year 2000. It was he as 4th division commander who received my predecessor’s order for an all-out war — a verbal order without any accompanying written operational instructions. But if secretary then Chief of Staff Angelo Reyes told him afterwards, “Gen. Pacman …” — I haven’t heard others call him the thinking general — and as thinking general he worked out the battle plan for the all-out war and carried it out to capture Camp Bilal in Munai, Camp Apo Gil in Baloi, the supposed to be impregnable Camp Bushra, and finally, together with the 6th division under Greg Camiling, Camp Abubakar itself.

Having selected for my Chief of Staff, the general who captured all those camps, I’m sure you will believe me, ladies and gentlemen of the Philippines, when I assure everyone that there is no returning of Camp Abubakar or any other camp to the MILF., contrary to either malicious or paranoid or uninformed or even well-meaning misinterpretations with regard to the back channeling peace talks of government representatives with the MILF.

Let me clarify what my instructions are with this regard. They are: to move forward in the rehabilitation and development in conflict-affected areas. In such areas within the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, consistent with its mandate under the law, the regional government of the autonomous region, headed by Governor Parouk Hussin who is here with us today, shall be responsible for and shall accelerate all rehabilitation and development efforts and activities. In such areas in Mindanao outside the autonomous region, the SPDA. shall be primarily responsible for and accelerate the same efforts and activities. The departments of the national government, through their regional and provincial offices, bureaus, and instrumentalities, including government-owned and controlled corporations, shall assist the ARMM regional government or the SPDA, as the case may be. And by way of restitution for damages caused to private property, specifically the houses that were burned during the conflict, the DPWH, the DND, through the AFP, engineering brigades, and the NHA shall assist the ARMM regional government or the SPDA., as the case may be, in building core shelter units in conflict-affected areas.

The DSWD and the DND shall assist the ARMM regional government and the SPDA in providing relief and rehabilitation to evacuees in all areas within the scope of the implementing guidelines.

The ARMM regional government shall ensure compliance with all laws pertaining to the possession and use of firearms, and in this regard, may be assisted by the Philippine National Police and the Armed Forces. In areas inside and outside the ARMM, the DND and the DILG shall form joint task forces composed of PNP and AFP to enforce the pertinent laws, consolidate intelligence against terrorists and lawless elements. The joint task force for Southwestern Mindanao is headed by the secretary of national defense, covering ARMM and Regions 9 and 12. The joint task force for northeastern Mindanao is headed by the Secretary of the Interior, covering Regions 10, 11, and CARAGA.

Of course like any other Filipino citizens or group of citizens, the MILF has the legal right to form a non-government organization to initiate and determine project proposals for funding, and to manage such proposed projects, once approved. But in this regard, the ARMM and the SPDA shall be the primary funding conduits for these projects.

I enjoin all local government units in Mindanao, especially, may I request this of the muse of South Command, Mayor Tita Caling Lobregat, and the City Mayor of my childhood town, City Mayor Franklin Quijano, and the other local officials who were mentioned by Gen. Cimatu today in Mindanao, i ask them to support these accelerated efforts and activities within their territorial jurisdiction because all of this will be done within the framework of the area coordinating center that was innovated by Secretary Angelo Reyes..

It must be noted that of this date, the evacuees have returned to their places of origin or settled in their chosen new homes. Many of you may recall that I was always rushing the government agencies to speed up rehabilitation and development so that by the time we sign the agreement regarding rehabilitation and development, much of it would have been a fate accomplee — and that is the case with the evacuees, that is a fate accomplee, they have gone back to their old homes or gone to their new homes. Nevertheless, there is a continuing need to extend relief and rehabilitation in the form of appropriate services and material needs.

But we must also continue to focus on our programs of modernization.

Expanding the size of our armed forces is part of our modernization efforts — and I have authorized Secretary Reyes to work towards this. But modernization also includes the upgrade of our soldiers’ benefits. I have certified as urgent the administration bill raising our soldiers’ salaries to the same level as public schools teachers’.

Senator Jun Magsaysay, chairman of the committee on national defense, has sent me a note that this basic salary adjustment bill which i have certified as urgent, in his expectation will probably be passed before the end of may. So they are now in the period of individual amendments.

The welfare of the families of soldiers killed or wounded in action, also highlight our list of priorities. This is one program that Gen. Cimatu will pursue vigorously as he has mentioned in his inauguration speech.

To set our new chief of staff off to a good start, the president’s social fund, I am announcing today, is donating eight million pesos to help the educate and rear orphans foundation, or hero foundation. This foundation was organized in 1989 by a group of businessmen to support the education of the children of soldiers killed or permanently disabled in action. It has already supported 1,439 scholars, and needs a fresh infusion of funds to support the growing number of school-age orphans of our military personnel. So I have here, and I would like to ask the president of hero, Mr. Pl Lim, to receive my first release worth four million pesos of this donation; and I would like to thank hero chairman, Don Jaime Zobel de Ayala, and the members of the board, that includes former Executive Secretary Rene de Villa, who is right now abroad, for their tireless effort to help our soldiers and their families.

Gen. Cimatu, carry on the tradition of valor, service and professionalism that is the mark of the great Filipino soldier.

Gen. Villanueva, congratulations for a job well done and welcome to corporate life.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the AFP Turnover of Command. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225453/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8278&Itemid=38