SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES: THE BACKBONE OF A REVITALIZED ECONOMY

As they say, this is the seventieth seminar being held throughout the Philippines to explain our administration’s number one program – small and medium enterprise development. But I said, I will be the one to give the seminar here in Muntinlupa. Because wherever I go, the national media is always with me, so this is the national launching of our Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) Program.

And why did I choose Muntinlupa? I will never forget that Muntinlupa has won twice, two years in a row, as the most business-friendly city in the country. So, if there is one place where this program will succeed, to be a model for other places, that is – Muntinlupa.

And that’s why without further ado, let me now go to the presentation of the National Small and Medium Enterprise Development Program (NSMEDP).

If you remember at the PCCI convention, where Muntinlupa won again as a business-friendly city, I said that our macroeconomic growth is good to compare with other countries. In fact, five percent was the growth rate of our GNP in 2002. I was even asking our neighboring countries what their growth rates were: Singapore 2 1/2 percent, almost 2 1/2 the difference; Thailand 4 percent, we are higher. But why does it seem like many citizens are saying they still don’t feel it? Because it’s not enough to have macroeconomic growth, we need micro measures to bring the growing economy to the places where the people will feel it. And number one in that regard are small and medium enterprises. That’s why we are here, medium enterprises in our National Small and Medium Enterprise Development Program.

Why am I saying that if we go, we will move, I said at the PCCI meeting, from macro measures we will go to micro measures. Why is the number one micro measure SMEs? Why? Because SMEs are vital engines of the Philippine economy. Almost 100 percent, 99.6 percent of total firms are SMEs. The sector employs 70 percent of the labor force. It contributes one-third of the value added to the economy. And 60 percent are exporters. And so, if we will be able to push for the development of SMEs, because if we just leave it to the market, if we only take care of the macro, do you know which sectors are growing? Telecommunications is growing, utilities like Malampaya are growing, but that’s not where the equity of our country comes from. And so, we need to push SMEs because telecoms and Malampaya are big giant enterprises.

We need to push SMEs to have a more equitable distribution of income and disperse economic activities to the countryside. But not just in the countryside because the biggest bulk of unemployment is right here in Metro Manila. So this is a potent force in the war against poverty.

Ninety one percent of the micro small and medium enterprises are micro enterprises. And so, what do we want to do with these micro enterprises? What’s the difference between a micro enterprise and a small and medium enterprise? A micro enterprise largely is a one-person operation, even less than a mom or pop operation. It’s a self-employment operation. Whereas the small and medium enterprise is an enterprise that hires other people so, therefore, it is really a bigger tool for developing, for addressing what I think is the main problem we have today. And that is employment.

So, inasmuch as 91.1 percent of the SMEs are micro, but the bulk of enterprises are micro small and medium enterprises. Talking about micro measures means that we look at that sector and find out why it is that if left to the market alone, they are not developing as much as we would like them to develop. What are the obstacles in the current situation? What are the structural issues that confront the micro small and medium enterprises? One of them is that they are concentrated in the NCR and neighboring province. But as far as I’m concerned that’s very important because then we can use these enterprises to create more employment in the NCR and the neighboring provinces where unemployment is the highest.

Also, majority of the micro small and medium enterprises are in the service sector, but in low value-added activities. Eighty four percent are in services. But what kind of services? Maybe a cart, selling – you know – but if it’s a service, it’s a service, like a restaurant catering to a tourist, that’s fine. But if it’s a cart, then it’s not so productive.

Therefore, we have to encourage enterprises in the productive sectors that give more employment. So, in higher value-added activities that’s what we would want to do.

So, continuing the productivity of our micro small and medium enterprise is low compared to other Asian economies. But let me say, there are SMEs that are the most efficient users of capital. That is why we want this low productive SMEs to transform themselves into these SMEs who have a very efficient way of using capital.

There are other challenges confronting micro small and medium enterprises, this is a world of stiff global competition. Whether we like it or not, we are in a global world. Whether we like it or not, the Financial Anti-Money Laundering Task Force exists. Whether we like it or not, the banks in other countries do not want to deal with our exporters unless they bring out our documents and examine every recipient of every remittance to find out whether he is a money launderer or not, it happens. That’s the way the global world is and our alternative is to become what? A Mongolia? An Albania? A North Vietnam who does not want to deal with outside world? Well, what will happen to our own development?

Another problem is that they have limited access to technology, and most importantly, limited access to financing. And that is so ironic, because the assets of the banking sector is in the trillions not even in the billions, why is there limited access to financing? And therefore, because of limited access to financing, because of limited access to technology, the cost of doing business is high. Because of the limited access to the institutional financing, many of them end up with a “5-6” and that is certainly a high cost of doing business. Many of them still use the mano-mano methods because of limited access to technology and, therefore, you have a high cost of doing business. These are the challenges confronting SMEs.

And so, what do we do since that is the state of Philippine SMEs? Our response there is the National SME Development Program. What is the goal of our program? We want the SME sector to be a vibrant sector providing a strong domestic supply base manufacturing and services for globally competitive industries, whether they’re for export or whether they’re for the domestic market fighting with the inflow of imports. We want to expand enterprises. If they are micro, we want them to become small. And if they are small, we want them to become medium. That is what we want. And we want to upgrade productivity and value-added capabilities.

How are we doing this? For the next six months, this is what we want to do. Right now, the small and medium segments are 8.7 percent. We want them to graduate to 10 percent. By graduating, as I said, the micro enterprises who are ready to graduate into small businesses and also to generate new small and medium enterprises. There will be 20 small and medium enterprise centers nationwide so that you will have the impression na maraming pera at maraming tulong sa SME ngayon. That is the perception that we want you to be able to feel. And if that is the perception then we will feel that we have succeeded. Now, this is what we want to do for the next six months.

And as I’ve always said, the majesty of democracy is that one president sows, another president reaps. And if we sow this perception in the next six months and this graduation, then the next president will reap the benefits by having an increase in the share of small and medium segments in this sector from 8.7 percent to 12 percent and productivity in terms of gross value-added increase from 32 percent to 40 percent of GDP. That is what we hope can be achieved in three years from the fruits of what we will be planting in the next six months. So, that is our three-year objective. How to do it? Basic strategies, comprehensive approach. Not just financing, not just technology, not just market, but a comprehensive approach, seamless access to government services. Not that when you’re at the national government there’s a lot of help, when you go down to the local level there’s a lot of red tape or vice versa. In the case of Muntinlupa, when you go to Muntinlupa there’s a lot of help, when you go up to the national government there’s red tape. No, we do not want that. We want that as far as the SME is concerned going from national to local, from local to national, the experience is the same. It’s really like one unit. That’s what seamless access to government services means. Virtual organization. We will use a lot of computers. Do you know that during the APEC Summit in 1993, aside from hosting it, our contribution was supposed to be we’re gonna put up a small and medium enterprise center for all APEC economies. But it was in Los Baños, in the remote area of Los Baños. No one wanted to go there. It was a waste of transportation, and even the resource persons didn’t want to go. Well, that was 1993, that was ten years ago. Between then and now, we have developed information technology so instead of locating a center there in the remote Los Baños, we will locate it on the hard disk of our computers. So, it will be a virtual organization.

And, as I said, aside from the demand – which means that for you who have viable projects, you will get approvals – it’s not just that, even on the supply side. The DTI is being reenergized and reengineered to actively seek out and help develop projects that will qualify for this financing. Because if not, it’s a waste of money, the absorptive capacity might be low if we only rely on the market. That is what we mean by supply side push. And we localize the plan. Not everything will go to Mel at SB Corporation in Manila. You should be able to borrow money here from your banks. You don’t need to go to the DTI. That is localization of the plan.

The elements of the plan are the human resource side, the market side, the technology side, advocacy for policy, and of course, the very important thing, financing, the most important of all. So, what are some of the details of the elements of the plan? The human resource because there are so many government training institutes: there’s TESDA, there’s TLRC, there’s LIVECOR, there’s all sorts of things there. They will all be part of the training program to have either geographical or sectoral division of labor. To streamline the training programs and the fees are the same, standardization of fees. Because a big problem, as I said to Mar, they learned how to make soap, but they don’t know how to make a project proposal, or there’s no money. So, there will be 50 SME business counselors nationwide who will teach you how to do your proposal, how to put your financing documents together so that you can access this financing because that is the obstacle. And then, as far as CHED is concerned, the schools, we will review their academic curricula to promote entrepreneurship. So that is as far as the human resource development is concerned.

Now, the market. We have domestic markets. We have foreign markets. We’ve been having trade fairs but we do not need to have a physical trade fair all the time. We will have the virtual trade fair because we will have the Internet as the center, the exchange between buyers and sellers. And we will be organizing and continue to organize buying and selling missions. The SMEs will have display corners and there will be buyer and supplier matching services, and the SME team will be moving around the country. Kaya nga, mayroon ng 70 seminars in order to promote and let you know about all these elements of our development and also to promote the market. And then of course, SMEs produce small amounts but the market sometimes require big amounts. So this service is also part of including the consolidation of production inputs for SMEs, that is as far as market development is concerned.

Now, for technology. We have the Design Center of the Philippines so we will render advising services for SMEs to conform to standards. Sometimes the sizes are not standard. Sometimes the weights are not standard, one is the weight in the shelf, another one is the weight in the farm gate. So there has to be standards. And there will be product clinics in designing and packaging, product technology and also designing and technical information. There are research outputs that are good. We will help commercialize them especially the alternative uses of indigenous raw materials. And technology improvement, improving raw material preparation so that we will have training to sustain the quality of raw material inputs. And we will set up and strengthen common service facilities. That is for product.

And then, of course, we have to advocate for the good carriage of policy. For instance, I congratulate Congress because they passed the Barangay Enterprise Law. One important feature of this law is that it exempts firms who have an asset base of 3 million pesos and below from the minimum wage law. Not many know that. But for those of you who get to find out about that, what a big flexibility it will give you, does it not, if you are able to avail of this exemption.

We will harmonize, simplify, standardize business forms and fees, hopefully, among LGUs. There is big enough for the market, it’s not you who should make a decision. Your only concern is whether people will suffocate physically there or not. In which case, it’s an environmental hazard. But obviously it will not, because we were many inside that room and we were not suffocating. So that’s what I mean, especially if there is no incentive involved, no franchise involved, no government contract involved, the only concern of the regulating authority is that the business does not do harm to the country. Otherwise, they should give out those licenses and permits. So that’s my marching orders to the DTI.

Now, finally, what I’m really after … because you can access all of those other things, but if you cannot access the money, the trillion pesos in the banking system that’s there, doing nothing, so much liquidity, and then so much need, then we are not gonna push our SMEs – that’s the biggest. And that’s why our program is intended to release 10 billion pesos to the SMEs in the next six months.

Hopefully, if we succeed in the first six months, another six months. So that would be 20 billion for one year. And in my successor’s time, hopefully, 30 billion in one year.

How do we do it? One of the reasons why you don’t get access is that Land Bank, DBP, etc. are not present everywhere. So you have to go to Makati, in those forbidding walls and corridors to ask for a loan. The ones that go down to the people, down to the small communities are the thrift banks and the rural banks. Therefore, the money must go through them. Unfortunately today, less than one-half of thrift and rural banks are accredited to be conduits for all these bigger money.

What’s the reason? In 1997, when we had a crash in Asia … understandably, the financial institution became very conservative and put up all these very stiff accreditation requirements to the point that they are now higher than what is the so-called International Camel’s Rating Standard. So what we have done is to bring the accreditation requirements to the International Camel’s Rating Standard. In that way, now more of the rural banks and the thrift banks will qualify to be conduits. And they will be your main sources of financing wherever the money originally came from. They will be your main conduits. Because they may have come from DBP, from Central Bank, from ADB, etc. But they will go through this mechanism.

And so, if there are thrift banks and rural banks in Muntinlupa, we invite you, if you are not yet accredited to get yourself accredited as a conduit of the government financial institutions. And then for all of these conduits, whoever are the conduits and whatever is the source ultimately of the money, there’ll be unified common guidelines and rates, and that common business loan application form. So you shouldn’t care whether the money comes from Central Bank, DBP, Land Bank, all the same requirements, all the same forms.

So, what are these all the same? What are these details that are all the same? Saan manggagaling ang pera? It may come from DBP, Land Bank. It may come from the National Livelihood Support Fund. It may come from the Eximbank. It may come from Quedancor. It may come from SB Corporation. But you shouldn’t care where it comes from. Because when you go to a thrift bank and you borrow money, it doesn’t matter where it comes from because the requirements will all be the same.

What are these requirements? For short-term loans, 9 percent; for medium-term loans, 11.25 percent; for three-year loans, 12.75 percent. So single digit for short-term loans.

The program will not decline a loan only on the basis of inadequate collateral. But surely, if you borrow, you will be able to acquire certain assets that can be used as collateral. Therefore, you must be able to hack that particular asset.

For instance, what can you use as collateral? You don’t have real estate, what can you use as collateral? Post-dated checks. The registered, unregistered REMCHM. The assignment of the life insurance and guarantee cover. If you are a franchisee, the corporate guarantee or you assign your lease rights to the bank. Or if it’s for export packing, the assignment of the letter of credit or purchase order (P.O.) or the sales invoice. All of these are acceptable as collateral.

When we say short-term loan, payable in one year. And then, of course, you have your export financing and your credit line for temporary working capital.

There are also long-term loans up to five years. And for permanent working capital. Also to purchase equipment or a lot or construct a building or a warehouse. Of course, in that case, your collateral will be the will to building the warehouse, the lot, etc.

And how much will this system finance for a short-term loan? Up to 70 percent on a value of the letter of credit or P.O. or 70 percent of the working capital requirement for a maximum of five million pesos. If it’s a long-term loan, 80 percent of the incremental project cost for a maximum of five million pesos. It’s the issue of not at least, at most. At most a debt equity ratio of 80-20. If you are a franchisee, 70-30.

And for the preceeding year, we should have been making profit. Because we don’t want to finance losing enterprises, we want enterprises that are doing well to get more financing. That’s the purpose, because they are the most efficient users of capital.

And if you were not making money last year but you were making money for the last two or three years on the average, then that can also be considered. Those are the hurdles for profitability.

Who can borrow? Any small and medium enterprise except those who import, because that’s not really creating jobs. Those who sell liquor and cigarettes, because we don’t want to foster unnecessarily more vices. And also mining and other extractive industries, because mining to be environment-friendly really cannot be small and medium. There has to be economies of scale. And the enterprises should be Filipino enterprises, and your assets should not be more than a hundred million. Otherwise, you’ll already be considered a large enterprise and not eligible for this special financing window.

Of course, you will have to pay your fees … 2,000 for every one million you borrow. When you apply, an upfront fee of one-half of one percent of the approved loan, and if you don’t use the loan and you don’t hire workers then that means that you will have to pay a commitment fee of 0.125 percent of the unavailed balance for long-term loans.

Aside from the loans, the government is also willing to enter into joint ventures, venture capital investment, and that’s what Mel Alonzo will be doing. So, we can do equity rather than loan financing. And the old “Tulong sa Tao Program” of DTI, which was really good, and I felt bad about that when I became senator because when I was Undersecretary of Trade and Industry, I was the one who got the loan from ADB to make it spread throughout the country. Then when I was senator, I found out that the repayments were being sent to the Treasury and not being reflowed anymore. Sabi nila because of E.O. 138. Ano ba yang E.O. 138? As President, I’m therefore revoking E.O. 138 to revive the “Tulong sa Tao Program”.

I think the reality is that a lot of the loans will be here around Metro Manila, Regions III and IV, because this is where the SMEs are. And this is where there’s a large unemployment. But I want to make sure that every town has at least one product produced by SMEs, and every town will have at least a one-million peso loan for some enterprise or other. That is the minimum requirement. That is what you call affirmative action aspect of this program. But over and above that affirmative action aspect, it will be market-driven in the sense that those who are viable are the ones who will get the loans.

So, we thank the Monetary Board because studying this issue, the biggest reason why the trillion pesos was not reaching the SMEs was originally because of certain stringent requirements. But they have relaxed it. You have champions in the Monetary Board for small and medium enterprises. They have reduced the reserve requirements of rural and thrift banks. They have also made the risk weighing on small and medium enterprise loans also more liberal. As I said, you know in the past, for instance, I hope this has been carried out, there were so many documents required of the SMEs including BIR forms. But many SMEs don’t have such sophisticated records. And as I said, the job of a bank is to determine whether the SME can pay back the loan or not. So I said, why are you requiring a BIR form, a BIR return? And he said, because we want to make sure they’re paying taxes. I think that’s the job of the BIR. That’s not the job of the bank that’s lending money. The main job of the bank lending money is to make sure that it lends money to a creditworthy enterprise. After all, the BIR under Willy Parayno, has its own newly-computerized system which is doing very well in catching the tax evaders. Let’s not mix up the SMEs because after all the tax evaders are really not the SMEs, they are the bigger firms. And besides you have so many tax exemptions. So what’s the use of requiring additional funding and therefore additional requirements for creditworthiness. That’s why the risk weighing on SME loans is now more liberal, allowing the banks themselves to determine. Because after all these banks, if they are Camel’s rated, they themselves know what they need to know to determine whether a loan will turn bad or good. Now, if they are less than Camel’s rated then, you have to dictate to them. But we’re only making the Camel’s rated banks the conduits. Therefore, they should be the ones to determine more the risk rather than the Central Bank so the Central Bank has minimized the ratios on risk weighing.

And loans to SMEs are also now subject to a rediscount rate. That is one percentage point less than other loans. In order to make the banks have more incentive to lend to SMEs.

Now, Mel Alonzo’s SB Corporation is going to provide collateral substitute guarantee. So that’s the reason why you will not be required always to put up the full collateral of the land or the real estate, but just the collateral of the proceeds of the loan. But it will be supplemented by guarantees from SB Corporation.

Also, in order to help the thrift banks and the rural banks determine creditworthiness, we are going to do a credit bureau service. So that you will have in your Internet, hopefully, a master list of SMEs and their respective credit standing. Just like a credit card. Like when we go to a store, the girl who puts the credit card through that machine is really checking on our creditworthiness. That’s the same system we want to use. And that will certainly speed up the loan application. So, these are the things that we are doing in order to make the financing more available to the SMEs.

I would like therefore to be able to ask all of you, to be able to join in this program, because we need to have the 10 billion pesos not in the banks, but in the hands of the SMEs, and, ultimately in the hands of the people that you are giving jobs too. And I hope that this program will touch one-fourth of the SMEs in the country. Because 10 billion pesos will be about one-fourth of the financing needs of SMEs. I hope that you’ll be able to increase your sales, your customer base. I hope that you’ll be able to improve your technical and managerial skills by participating in the programs. I hope that you will be able to upgrade your product offerings to the higher standards.

For instance, our message to the jewelry manufacturers in Bulacan – you can be better organized and therefore get better prices for your products. For the producers in Negros – you can have a wider market reach. For the furniture industry in Cebu – you can become even more competitive. And in areas where there are many SMEs, and that’s in NCR, Regions III and IV, we hope to have an expansion of common service facilities.

And so, this is our message to you: there’s 10 billion dollars available, use it and create jobs for our people. Thank you.

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].