Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 107th Anniversary of the Philippine Army

[Delivered at Fort Bonifacio, Makati City, March 22, 2004]

Thank you very much, Secretary Eduardo Ermita. And other Cabinet member, Secretary Romulo.

Troop commander, give tikas pahinga.

Senator Magsaysay and other elective officials; General Abaya and the other officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; General Ebdane and the other officers and members of the allied Armed Forces, the Philippine National Police; Mr. Lina, Doctor Gonzales and the other partners of the Philippine Army in serving the people and serving our soldiers; distinguished guests, officers, men and women of the Philippine Army, happy anniversary to us!

Today is also the anniversary of the Office of the President because the presidency and the Philippine Army were born on the same day a hundred seven years ago.

Congratulations too, to our awardees. They remind us of great moments in the history of the Philippine Army. They remind us of great battles like the battle of Buliok. They remind us of the ferocious battles in the fight against insurgency. They remind us of the gains that we have made in our anti-kidnapping drive with the great support of the Armed Forces and the Philippine Army. They remind us of what the Philippine Army has done in order to preserve the integrity of the armed forces in great tests of constitutionality such as the moments in Oakwood.

And I’m very glad to remind everyone to be remembered, to be reminded that at that time during the difficult days of Oakwood, the commander of the task force who enforced the deadline was none other than now, the incumbent chief of the Philippine Army, General Efren Abu.

These awards also remind us that the Philippine Army is not just about fighting. It is also about the protection of human rights. It is also about not enforcing just the right hand of the law but extending the left hand of peace and reconciliation and service to our people, to the building of school buildings in the conflict areas through working with the peace and service NGOs who helped promote internal security.

One hundred seven years ago, the Philippine Revolutionary Army came into existence when the Filipino patriot mustered the will to fight for freedom and to secure the future with a few thousand bolos, rifles, rounds of ammunition and whatever armaments could be found and wielded, undeterred by the superior force of the colonial powers.

Today, it is important not to be 19th century, not even to be 20th century about our weapons and our capabilities but to be truly a part of the 21st century.

And in this 21st century today, no goals are more immediate for us than to end the decades of struggle against insurgency and secessionism and at the same time to post lasting victories and prevail over the new threats of terrorism and the continuing threats of criminality and lawlessness.

And it is for bringing our Philippine Army from the 19th century to the 20th century, to the 21st century that I have devoted much of my clout, even in international affairs to the program of modernization of the armed forces by upgrading our force capabilities, both in weapons and equipment in the organization, by training, by professionalism, by increasing the pay of our soldiers to the same level as that of teachers.

And I asked about the one hundred million pesos worth of boots that I said we should provide our soldiers. And General Abaya reports that the bidding has been completed, awarded, and soon, the boots will finally be delivered.

I think it simply shows that we still have to work on many areas of organization and procurement so that we can bring the needs of the soldiers to them much faster.

It takes resolve and leadership to work on organizational improvements. It takes resolve and leadership as well to overcome the forces trying to divide us.

In Mindanao, the overall level of conflict has subsided, the ceasefire has held well and the international monitoring team will be arriving today in a very calm and peaceful environment.

The terrorist networks, which have now been considerably weakened, must however not be underestimated. The recent bombings in Madrid and the continuing assaults in Iraq remind us of the imperative of collective and perpetual vigilance in this greatest threat of the 21st century. They remind us that terrorism can strike anytime, anywhere in an ally of the coalition like Madrid, or even in somebody who is uncomfortable with the coalition like Bali.

Therefore, I have instructed the Cabinet Oversight Committee on Internal Security, which is headed by Secretary Romulo, to put together an Anti-Terrorism Task Force composed but not limited to elements of the military, police, NBI, NICA, and an eminent retired general. And I shall be asking, as I’ve already asked President Ramos, Senate President Drilon, Speaker De Venecia to act as advisers to this task force. I have informed Secretary Ermita that I am appointing him as the anti-terrorism coordinator.

Through the Anti-Terrorism Task Force — congratulations, Secretary Ermita! Or is it condolence? — through the anti-terrorism task force, we shall further combine and consolidate all the resources and expertise we need to fight terror.

We shall connect the grassroots to the national and transnational efforts. It is good we have an anti-terrorism coordinator because the European union has also appointed its own anti-terrorism coordinator. We have so far succeeded in our vigilance and we shall gather the people to protect our gains and our durable security.

But along with our military and anti-terrorism campaigns, we continue to carry out a peace process designed to bring the warring and disaffected elements of society to the negotiating table.

This quest for peace is counterbalanced, of course, by the need to fight against terrorism. As part of the peace negotiations with the MILF, we are persistently pushing for concrete measures that would effectively isolate terrorist elements from the MILF guerrilla bases.

And while the peace talks with the NDF are moving forward, the armed forces will certainly punish terroristic attacks, especially attempts to blackmail candidates and to violate the peaceful, democratic atmosphere necessary for clean and honest elections.

And if by enhancing our national security we improve the economy and the lives of the people, we make the Philippine Army’s job of securing peace and order many times easier.

This indeed makes for an army that as you have adopted in your theme for this year: an army that is relevant, professional, people-oriented, and caring. relevant because you have made gains in the fight against insurgency, secessionism, terrorism, kidnapping. Relevant and also caring because you protect human rights, you build school buildings, you conduct missions together with civil society to make life better for the communities in which you serve.

Indeed, I am very proud of the Philippine Army that has truly become relevant, working to continue to become more professional than ever. One that is truly people-oriented, and one that is caring.

Let us march forward together to the brighter future we all deserve.

Once again, happy anniversary!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 107th Anniversary of the Philippine Army. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090215/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5656&Itemid=38