Maraming salamat.

Thank you very much, Secretary Reyes for introducing me.

And congratulations! Mayor Guico and all the officials of the League of Municipalities of the Philippines and all the municipal mayors of the Philippines for the wonderful achievements that they have shown on our screen as well as the very wise resolution you have passed on to me for adaption.

Ladies and gentlemen, good evening to all of you. Good evening to all my Kapampangan compatriots. Good evening to all of you, my fellow provincemates from my mother's side. To our Visayan and Mindanaoan friends, good evening to all of you. And to the fellow provincemates of my husband, good evening to all of you. To the Bicolanos, good evening. And to all of you — I won't say all the languages or I'll run out of time in my speech — most important as Mayor Guico said earlier, for your timely manifesto of support during the days of our political turmoil, thank you for your unwavering support. As Mayor Monching said, you held the course, you were never distracted, you express your support and you continued to carry out our ten-point agenda. Thank you so much for all of that.

And now, it’s payback time. The economy is pulling up all indicators of stability and growth. I ask your support, your continuing support this time to project among your constituents the brightening economic indicators. For instance, economic growth projected at over 5 percent, boosted by OFW remittances. Your OFWs because most of them come from your municipalities. They used to send us seven, eight billion dollars. Now they are sending us 10 billion dollars this year. Thanks to your constituents. And there will be more, maybe next year because this year as of October, 800,000 workers have been deployed in 10 months, higher than the whole figure of last year. It only means to say that the world has great demand for the great Filipino workers that you produce in your municipalities.

I believe, not in coincidence but in providence. We work hard. You help me work hard to pass the tax reforms that we needed. I remember last year when we were in the middle of a fiscal crisis, many of you were so good as to look for ways by which you would sacrifice your IRA. But I said, “no, instead of sacrificing your IRA, why don’t you convince the legislators and the national officials whom you after all supported to win for Congress and the Senate. Convince them that we need these new taxes in order to avert a fiscal crisis.” and you were successful in your advocacy.

Many gave dire predictions, especially when fuel was not exempted from taxes. And many said the moment vat is implemented there will be spiraling inflation, unrest and riot in the streets. But as I believe in providence, I believe in the timing of the Lord, what happened when we started to implement the tax reform in November first, what happened was the price of oil which started to double in the last year and a half started to go down again. That coupled with the strengthening of our peso because of our OFWs, because of the savings on our debt service, because of the lower interest rates we’ve had to pay, because of the inflow of direct investments and portfolio investments and exports, we have had a combination that has resulted in the easing of oil prices. And diesel prices now are lower than they were before we even put the value-added tax.

Thanks to all of these providential timing, we are posting a lower deficit this year compared to last year, not only because you have helped convince the congressmen and the senators that they must do the fiscal reforms but also thanks to your support in the local governments, BIR has been posting respectable increases in revenue as well as the bureau of customs.

Thanks to your support, the peso has become stronger. Thanks to your support, the confidence of the world is such that there is an increase in portfolio investments. Thanks to your support, because of the strengthening of the peso our inflation is being tamed. Thanks to your support, not only because of confidence due to the political stability that you show but also because you helped us so much in price monitoring as a result of our fiscal reforms.

Indeed, the more investments and business activity, the more jobs for our people and the more revenues for our local government. Don’t forget that with all this value-added tax increase, 40 percent of the increase in revenue will go to you as your IRA share.

In fact, when Monching was talking about the meager resources, I was chuckling to myself because right now the national government is in deficit — although it’s going down — but the local government are in surplus. So congratulations to all of you! I’m glad that, thanks to your support, the national deficit is becoming smaller and smaller because of our fiscal reforms that you so vocally supported.

If we continue this way, the national government may also be able to have, just like you, a balanced budget by 2008. And we will be able to repay our debts so that we will be able to bring every centavo-worth of taxpayers money to needed infrastructure and social services to improve the quality of life of our people while facing head on the enormous challenge of fundamental and long lasting reforms through charter change which you have so kindly and generously supported in this your convention. Thank you for your support for charter change.

And Monching mentioned about how you want to build a strong republic. Yes, we need to go back to our vision of the strong republic where the strongest infusion of service is at the grassroots, with more power to local governments, more accountability from political leaders and less power concentrated here in metro manila.

But of course, as I said, I don’t believe in coincidences, I believe in providence. We must begin working for our vision by reconciling the nation with god, seeking guidance from and concentrating all our efforts to him. And we must also direct the focus of government so that its bureaucracy will be more responsive to the call of the times.

Just now I had a very long cabinet meeting, and one of the last items in the agenda was a presentation by my Deputy National Security Adviser Virtus Gil on what he will do in order to make sure that our front line services will be energized, will be in an emergency mode so that they will serve our people more.

On the part of you, the municipalities, aside from all the things we have already been doing — price monitoring, anti-terrorism, sustainable development. Oh! Sustainable development, not only upland with our support as Monching requested, may I also call for a clean up drive in the municipalities to signal a fresh start, back to work attitude and atmosphere. Because after all, lalo na paglalakbayin na natin ang magandang Pilipinas, the LGUs will more and more become our windows to the world.

You are our windows to the world and you are the window of the national government to the countryside. As Mayor Guico says, our people are made prouder and given more hope by the exemplary practices of local governments throughout the country. Those will be documented.

But can I just say something about my day today. This morning I went to the 49th anniversary of Carmen in North Cotabato. That town for 40 years was a sixth class municipality. And then it transformed itself almost overnight to a first class municipality. Exemplary, indeed. And I saw their terminal and market. I saw their new municipal hall, modern, all built without any borrowing. All from internal funds. That example of Carmen is only one of many examples I have seen in many of your towns that I have visited. So indeed, you are our window to the world. Lakbayin ang magandang pilipinas para makita ang kagandahan ng pamamahala ng ating mga local government executives.

And when I see these thing and how you spend your IRA, I’m so gratified and I do not regret that I give you your IRA in full and on time. And I do not regret that I even pay what the previous administrations owe you. As for the unprogrammed funds that Monching talked about, I am happy to let you know that the Department of Justice has given the opinion that we can return your unprogrammed funds through monetization even without specific budgetary allocation. As I said, as Monching said in your resolution, we will do this through a monetization scheme similar to the program that we also implemented together in 2002.

And I am proud that as you have said, you will use these funds, as you have been using the funds you already have to localize my ten-point beat the odds agenda which is after all our country’s contribution towards the millennium development goals. And so tonight, local governments of beautiful Philippines, I ask you keep the fire burning. The journey to a strong republic may be a long way forward but the warmth of our shared sacrifices and achievements will continue to light the hopes of our people. Truly, travel the beautiful Philippines. Visit the model local government units so that we can reach a beautiful and strong republic.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the 15th General Assembly of the League of Municipalities of the Philippines (LMP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092009/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5391&Itemid=38