Maraming salamat.

Maraming salamat.

Thank you very much, Mayor Lito Atienza and all the leaders, citizens and youth of Manila. Thank you all very much.

We also greet the siblings of our hero, Ninoy Aquino, led by Congressman Butch Aquino, Former Senator Tessie Aquino, Paul Aquino, Lupita Aquino-Kashiwahara and Maur Aquino Lichauco.

We greet the EDSA People Power Commission led by Ed Ermita and Brother Rolando Dizon. Also Bert Romulo, Toting Bunye, Sonny Alvarez and the other Cabinet members and members of our administration.

We greet Ninoy’s comrades in his struggle, Reli German and the others here who are so many in attendance today, I will not mention all their names.

Let us greet the spirit of EDSA led by Cris Carreon and those who preserve the name of Ninoy in our history, the National Historical Commission led by Executive Director Badoy.

To all of you, admirers of Ninoy, future generations of Manila and the Philippines, it is an honor to attend with all of you on the anniversary of the death of our hero Ninoy Aquino by bringing flowers to his shrine and then planting a yellow fire tree here in Manila so that Manila and not only democracy may live longer.

Today, we also begin the “Greening of Manila” by Mayor Lito Atienza and the youth of Manila. Won't you be the ones to plant trees all over Manila? This is a perfect fit, a perfect fit for your future, and a perfect fit for the new green Philippines being launched by the national government together with the next generation.

Because if we want our country to become first world in 2020, in the time of the next generation, the generation for which Ninoy Aquino fought, we need greater attention to our natural environment and make sure, young people, that we grow and do not just consume our natural resources.

Another sign of a modern country that wants to become first world is social justice and human rights. Because today, we remember that Ninoy Aquino sacrificed his life to restore democracy. Ninoy Aquino is the most famous victim of political killing, and until now we still do not know who the mastermind of Ninoy Aquino’s assassination is. We should not ignore his sacrifice.

Democracy in the Philippines will not stand for senseless political killings. Every man and woman in our country is entitled to speak, free from fear that they will pay for their beliefs with their very life. Whether you are a journalist or political activist, of the left or the right, it is the obligation of the government and indeed the entire nation to protect the rights and liberties of every citizen.

And you as fans, fans of Ninoy Aquino — Thank you — as fans of Ninoy Aquino that is why we are here, those commemorating the martyrdom of Ninoy Aquino who fought for the next generation. You know that for too long there has been a culture of violence in our political process. For years, political disputes have been settled looking down the barrel of a gun.

A week ago, I announced that I was going to appoint a Former Supreme Court Justice to investigate the recent political killings. Today, in honor of the great victim of political killings, Ninoy Aquino, I am announcing that Former Supreme Court Justice Jose Melo will lead an investigative group imbued with wide power and a sweeping mandate for its members to put murderers behind bars and break this cycle of violence once and for all.

We’ve been making progress in bringing these cases to court and putting the killers behind bars, but I’ve been impatient, we’ve been impatient with the pace. That is why we took the step of appointing Melo. He will be joined by NBI Director Nestor Mantaring and Chief State Prosecutor Jovencio Zuño and members of civil society including Bishop Camilo Gregorio of the catholic church and Rogelio Vinluan as senior counsel and Nelia Gonzalez in the legal and academic community.

I have directed Melo to prioritize and focus investigation of media and activist killings; to be the government’s sole voice on the issue; and to make a report to me outlining its actions and policy recommendations including appropriate prosecution and legislative proposals, if any, aimed at eradicating the root causes of extra judicial killings and breaking the cycle of violence once and for all.

I have directed him to leave no stone unturned in their pursuit of justice. I want them to pursue every lead down every path. The victims and their families deserve justice to be served; the Filipino people for whom Ninoy died fighting for democracy deserve a democracy they can trust.

It’s time that the culture of political retribution stop. I hope that this special investigative commission will not only solve the killings before us today, but will propose permanent remedies to change this culture.

Let us continue the vigor of the democracy bought with the blood, sweat and lives of our brave heroes like Ninoy. In this way, Ninoy’s sacrifice for us and for the country will not be in vain.

May many emulate Ninoy and care for our beloved country, especially our next generation, the youth of Manila and of the entire Philippines.

Long live Ninoy! Long live Manila! Long live the green Philippines!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Wreat laying Ceremony and Program in Commemoration of the 23rd Death Anniversary of Benigno “Ninoy” Aquino, Jr.. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212134/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2880&Itemid=38