Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the State Dinner hosted by their Majesties the Emperor and Empress of Japan

[Delivered at the Banquet Hall, Imperial Palace, Tokyo Japan, December 3, 2002]

Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.

It’s my great honor and privilege to be in Japan upon your majesties kind invitation. This visit manifests the deep friendship that binds our two countries and peoples.

As the recent events in our region and in the world have made clear, only through earnest acts of friendship and cooperation especially between neighbors like ours can nations hope to effectively address the common threats and challenges facing them.

The friendly relations between the Philippines and Japan are blessed with a long history. This friendly ties could be traced as far back as the exile of Lord Okun Takayama, a great Christian samurai and his family to Manila in 1614.

Three centuries after that, the Philippines began benefiting immensely from the important contributions of Japanese immigrants to our country.

Road construction in the Philippine summer capital of Baguio, which you visited, your majesties received a great boosts from the first large wave of Japanese migration to my country in 1903.

The centennial of Japanese immigration to the Philippines next year is an important milestone. And we already have lined up appropriate activities to mark the occasion.

A subsequent wave in the same year led to the establishment of a sizable community of Japanese descent in the province of Davao in the island of Mindanao. That community became a catalyst for agricultural development in Southern Philippines which today supplies 90 percent of the bananas and the great bulk of the pineapples enjoyed in Japan today.

On a more personal note, i still vividly remember another milestone in Japan-Philippine relations that your Majesty talked about earlier – the visit of your majesties to Manila 40 years and one month ago. And I am very proud and honored that it was my father, then the president of the Philippines, who hosted the then visiting crown prince and crown princess.

Your visit to my country, your majesties signal the close of a difficult chapter in our common history and signal the start of a new one – a chapter of true friendship, a close alliance of genuine partnership.

This partnership has since born mutually beneficial fruits for both countries. Japan has through all these years been a leading supporter of Philippine efforts for sustainable development and nation-building.

The Asian flu and the Asian crisis affected us both. Yet, at the height of the financial storm that hit five years ago, Japan solidarity was a strong and heartfelt presence in my country as it was in the rest of Southeast Asia.

You Majesties, your Excellencies, I’m here to build upon a robust bilateral partnership. This visit of state is the first between our two countries in the new century. And it comes closely on the heels of the launch of new cooperation paradigms in East Asia.

The Philippines and Japan are vital allies in building and maintaining peace and stability in the whole region. Our alliance can be further strengthened. It can be expanded to reinforce the march towards regional integration.

Japan’s contributions to greater East Asian integration is exemplified in its active support for the Asean+3 and the ASEAN regional forum processes. Its comprehensive economic partnership initiatives with Asean and other East Asian countries and its role in building the peace foundation for stability and progress in countries like Cambodia and East Timor.

In this and other important initiatives such as on issues of immediate concern in Northeast Asia, Japan’s unflinching advocacy of dialogue has my countries full support and cooperation East Asia is our common home. In this house, dialogue provides the best avenue for resolving differences. It can be the only means to bring closure to a difficult task.

We have witnessed how dialogue could facilitate greater understanding and chart new avenues for cooperation. We saw this in 1999 when in the course of the Asean+3 meetings, Manila hosted the first summit in half a century between the leaders of Japan, China and South Korea.

Japan and the Philippines have both long recognized that common strands run through our stake in the destiny and cohesion of the region. By working together, we can advance together.

Our two countries have laid foundations of amity, deeper and more solid than those of bridges or factories. I saw this five years ago when their majesties received here, my mother, the first lady, who welcomed them in manila 40 years ago.

Our people shall strengthen this foundation by every passing year. Greater than five thousand Japanese-Filipino couples who exchanged wedding vows each year. They and their many children will provide the strongest bonds that will keep Japan-Philippine relations vibrant and strong, the bonds that only families can build.

In that spirit and in behalf of a grateful nation, let me offer a toast.

To your good health, your Majesty.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the State Dinner hosted by their Majesties the Emperor and Empress of Japan. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409205303/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8527&Itemid=38