Thank you very much Secretary Ermita.

Vice-president de Castro; other members of the Cabinet; Speaker Nograles; other officials of both Houses of Congress especially the authors and sponsors. And I’d like to recognize those in the head table. On the part of the Senate, Senator Ponce Enrile, the principal author and sponsor and Chairman of the Committee on Public Services; (Applause) Senator Angara, principal author; (Applause) Senator Zubiri, co-sponsor. (Applause) On the part of the House aside from Speaker Nograles, I’d like to acknowledge Deputy Speaker Raul del Mar, (Applause) Deputy Speaker Villarosa, (Applause) Majority leader Defensor; (Applause) Congressman Puentevella, principal author and sponsor and Chairman of the Committee on Transportation; (Applause) Congressman Angara, principal author; (Applause) Congressman Zamora, principal author; (Applause) Congressman Edcel Lagman. Members of the Diplomatic Corps; representatives of the air transport and airline industries; other government officials; ladies and gentlemen.

First of all, thank you to Congress for passing the Civil Aviation Authority Act that we will sign today. This is a good sign for the country and the world that the government continues to serve the people and promote the necessary reforms towards better governance.

Thank you to the new law that will create the Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines, air travel will be safer, and obstacles to the growth of tourism and investment, which creates hundreds of thousands of jobs for the country, or even millions, will be removed. This was our aim when it was requested in the State of the Nation Address to become a law. And we are pleased with the focus of our legislators on our call.

Today’s enactment of the Civil Aviation Authority Law is an opportune time to underscore the immense value of the rule of law. The rule of law is the foundation and protection of every citizen’s rights of peace and order in society, and of confidence in our country among investors in the Philippines and around the world. This is indispensable in attracting investment and jobs for our people.

Later on, we will, in the Cabinet meeting, discuss the International Law of the Seas and the filing of the Philippine claim over resource areas within our exclusive economic zone. Through this claim, we shall advance the rights and interests of our nation in harnessing these rich resources. We appreciate that former Secretary of Justice Estelito Mendoza has lent his unrivaled expertise in this field to help strengthen the Philippine claim on this very valuable portion of our national patrimony.

The law and the country should truly prevail over politics. Compliance with the law is the vow of every elected leader and appointed official. This is what we will do even if many do not understand it yet, especially if it is given a negative spin by politicians.

That’s why we uphold the principle of due process in investigating and adjudicating criminal allegations against any citizen. No one’s rights must be sacrificed just to spare government leaders from the ire of protesters and the fire of politicians.

I will follow the constitution and my own desire to step down from office at the end of my term in 2010. But until that day, we will strive to advance reforms so that we can leave the country strong for the next leader. (Applause)

In the Philippines, there is and there shall continue to be due process, rule of law, and utmost respect for the Constitution. This is my pledge as President and Commander-in-Chief.

Thank you. (Applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Signing Ceremony of the Act on Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines (CAAP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123202/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1072&Itemid=38