Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the launching ceremony of the Aboitiz Power Brand

[Delivered at the NBC Tent, Fort Bonifacio Global City, July 22, 2009]

Thank you very much Secretary Reyes for your introduction. Vice President Noli de Castro, Aboitiz Chairman Endika Aboitiz, Aboitiz Vice Chairman Jon Aboitiz, Aboitiz Power President Moncho Aboitiz, Secretary Teves, Zeny Ducut, guests, ladies and gentlemen.

This is a great day for energy independence as we launch the Aboitiz Power Brand and the latest geothermal plants of Aboitiz Power, congratulations! (applause) Congratulations to the Aboitiz group for your 70 years of being in power. You are demonstrating by your investments today that our electric power industry reform has set into motion greater competition in the power sector. Moncho told us many things about the state of the power industry today. But let me walk you through some of the beginnings of the reform. The reform program was initiated with the passage of the EPIRA in 2001 after a delay of seven years. We aimed to address the issue of high power rates and improve delivery of power supply to end-users by encouraging greater competition and efficiency in the electric power industry.

Although the new law did not produce the intended effect within the same year, it nevertheless became the basis for a reduction of prices around two years later. Sometime in 2003 the electric bills of the poor went down after we unbundled costs and strictly implemented the provision on lifeline users. But that was not enough, studies from the Asian Development Bank and our various financial and technical advisers then indicated that we would need an additional 6,000 megawatts of generating capacity over the next 10 years, if we are to avoid shortages and higher power prices. It takes years of lead time from planning, to construction, to operation, in order to establish a power plant. Thus, we needed to act right away.

The studies then also showed that we would need 400 billion pesos in order to finance these power plants, as well as support transmission and distribution facilities. Historically, the main companies providing these power-related assets had been the National Power Corporation or NAPOCOR for power generation, the Transmission Company for power transmission, and MERALCO for the bulk of power distribution. At that time, these companies were all in bad financial shape, so how could they finance our future needs?

NAPOCOR was a case study. In the past years before our administration, NAPOCOR had incurred losses of almost a hundred billion pesos and had seen its debt rising from 4.5 billion dollars in 1983 to seven billion dollars in 2002. On top of these losses and borrowings, the level of service of NAPOCOR had been attacked as being unreliable, and of course in its operations, NAPOCOR was accused of inefficiency and many other allegations.

Therefore the answer to sourcing the huge capital requirements of our power sector was privatization. The first key to privatization was to create an investment climate that is attractive to both domestic and foreign investors. The second key was to create a privatization process that is transparent and free of corruption.

The privatization that is taking place now, exemplified by the involvement of the Aboitiz group will help reduce the cost of electricity in the next administration. Aboitiz power and all the other players who are joining the privatization program will keep competition keen in this industry. Competition forces players to improve services and bring down costs, the beneficiary of healthy competition is the Filipino nation.

Meanwhile, our administration has brought to 98 percent the barangays with electric power. I hope Aboitiz Foundation will help bring that ratio to 100 percent.

We increased energy self-sufficiency from 48 percent to 58 perecent. We reduced oil consumption from a 110 million barrels to 86 milliion. This should be further reduced with the Renewable Energy Act and the Biofuels Act, especially as Aboitiz group and other responsible investors avail of the opportunities provided by those laws.

When I was sitting with Jon Aboitiz in the table and we were looking at the presentation about how we’re moving away from oil and moving into renewables, I saw a chart there that said that the Aboitiz group uses 66 percent of its operations uses renewable energy. But that figure is wrong it seems, it’s out of date. Aboititz is now 77 percent renewable energy, congratulations!

The Philippine energy sector has confronted many challenges, both local and global, in addressing energy security and price volatility. Our energy and power users have always been price sensitive, and that is particularly true amidst the global financial turmoil today that threatens the well-being of billions of people across the globe.

The past twelve months had been a year for the history books. Financial meltdown has spread throughout the world. Financial systems in the West shattered; even conservative financial systems in the East were shaken to their foundations. Grand names in international finance fell into disrepute and vanished overnight. Tens of millions have lost their jobs; billions across the globe have been hurt — the poor always harder than the rich. No one has been spared.

It has affected us already. But the headline story of the Philippines in 2008 is that the country decently survived a succession of global crises in fuel, then food, then financial and finally economic with still keeping our economic fundamentals intact and without losing focus.

My job is to work and to lead, to protect and to preserve our country and our people, especially during this difficult global times. I am gratified that investors like the Aboitiz group understand that philosophy. I am gratified to see evidence of confidence in that philosophy by the investments of the Aboitiz group.

Presidents have terms, but businesses continue as long as the market provides for it. I therefore count on the Aboitiz group to look ahead to ensure that our momentum for growth and for an efficient power sector is maintained. We will continue to focus like a laser on the long-term recovery and rebound of the world, and our own long-term development. And for that, to our valued investor, Aboitiz, for your unwavering support to the nation and your strong faith in our people.

Congratulations! and thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the launching ceremony of the Aboitiz Power Brand. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412100640/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25716&Itemid=38