Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 60th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Philippines and India

[Delivered at the Grand Ballroom, Dusit Thani Hotel, Makati City, May 15, 2009]

(applause) Thank you. Thank you. (applause)

Thank you Secretary Romulo for your introduction.

Other members of the Cabinet and senior government officials who are present here today; Ambassador Mitter and Madame Mitter; of course, Ram Sitaldas and all the other leaders of the Indian Business Community; members of the Diplomatic Corps; former Senator Letty Ramos-Shahani who is a daughter-in-law of India; ladies and gentlemen. (applause)

First of all, to the Indian Chamber of Commerce now to be called the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce, (applause) for your many initiatives including holding a full-year celebration of the 60th Anniversary of the Diplomatic Ties between the Philippines and India, congratulations! and thank you. (applause)

Ram and I were talking about the implications of the change from an Indian Chamber to a Federation of Indian Chambers, and the new roles and the new character of the Federation. While one of them is that, hopefully, individual Indian businessmen who are CEOs of large multinationals like Citi Bank, Nestle`, Sutherland and so on can become individual members and Filipinos who do business in India can also be members — that is truly a significant transformation of the Indian Chamber into the Federation. (applause)

And it is only so fitting because India and the Indian people play an important role in the Philippine experience. Hundreds of years before diplomatic relations were established between our two newly independent countries in 1949, in the 18th century, trade was already flourishing between Manila and the Coromandel Coast in Bengal, involving Philippine exports of tobacco, silk, cotton, indigo, sugar cane and coffee.

Politically, the Philippines is Asia’s first democracy and India is today the world’s largest democracy. (applause) The Philippines has become a second home to thousands of Indians, and I’m glad to hear from Ram that majority have already acquired Philippine citizenship. (applause)

Gone are the days when Indian people coming to the Philippines were considered as restricted aliens. Today, you are very welcome visitors and residents to our country and even citizens. (applause)

In terms of the economy, India and the Philippines are ranked the two most attractive offshoring destinations in the world, and this brings us to another important level of joint venture partnership between Indian corporations and Philippine business investors. We are buying a lot of pharmaceuticals from India as part of our program to cut the price of medicines for the ordinary Filipinos. Many other kinds of relationships were already enumerated both by Ambassador Mitter and by Ram — I need not mention all of them again — they both mention the exchange of high level visits. India’s Head of State and Head of Government both came to the Philippines, and I as Head of State and Head of Government combined have also visited India together with several of you who are part of the Chamber now the Federation. And I’m sure that you all know what memories I have of India, fond memories, not only from that State Visit but from the many times I visited India during my youth. And having visited India in my youth and having made a State Visit two years ago, I witnessed the transformation of India into the fourth largest economy in the world. (applause)

In fact today, BRIC has now become an important acronym standing for Brazil, Russia, India and China, the four new economic giants to whom the world looks today to stimulate economic recovery because the traditional giants of America, Japan and Europe are not to be the ones who will bring us to recovery. India’s projected growth rate of 6.0 to 7.0 percent in this time of global recession is admirable. Having said that, the world economy continues to challenge developed and developing nations alike.

So for us, for Filipinos, for Indian friends living in the Philippines, now is the time for pulling together and focusing on family and the community. We must initiate a new era of volunteerism and community spirit. This should include the government, the religious, the civic groups, the nongovernmental organizations like the Federaiton of the Indian Chambers harnessing our peoples to engage in coordinated volunteer activities.

We should focus on such initiatives like cleaning up our environment, building parks, planting trees, bringing comfort to the poor through food banks, bringing literacy to adults who cannot read. During these trying times, the Filipino commitment and caring – which includes the Filipino-Indian community because having stayed here for so long you have already all these Filipino traits of caring – should prompt each one of us to count our blessings and give back to those who are less fortunate. Our nation, the nation you have chosen to call your home, needs us all pulling in the same direction. Volunteering time, skills and resources is a noble undertaking we should all take seriously.

In lean global economic times, we should tap into national support for “volunteerism.” We need to promote citizen involvement including the Indians who have become Filipino citizens and resident involvement including the Indian citizens who have been residing in the Philippines for so long, we need all of you to help friends, families, communities and the less fortunate, notably revolving around the poor and the environment.

I mentioned all these because I have declared the month of May as Volunteerism Month. And I hope as part of your yearlong anniversary, 60th Anniversary celebration of our diplomatic relationship, the Federation of Indian Chambers can use this month to launch some of your volunteer projects for the poor and the environment.

Also within the context of a turbulent world, it is essential to keep our own continent as calm and coordinated as possible. Perhaps because of the strength of India and China and other parts as well including ASEAN, the Asian continent is the best situated to weather the global crisis and come out the strongest compared with other continents like America and Europe.

It is time to harness the potential of Asia, to capitalize on its resources and to give the Pan-Asian Region a stronger voice in shaping the world economic order. One way to achieve this is for ASEAN and India to accelerate the negotiations for an ASEAN-India Free Trade Agreement. I hope the Filipino-Indian Business Community, the Federation of Indian Chambers will make this advocacy as one of your missions for this 60th Anniversary of our relations. (applause)

Our government views Asian neighbors like India as partners in economic development. We count on you, the Philippine-Indian Business Community, to ensure that our two countries work together to build a more cohesive regional community that will strengthen the economic clout of all nations in our rapidly growing region.

And on our part, to ensure that we remain a competitive player within the region and are able to attract investments from countries like your home country of India, with the support of the Indian Business Community and the then Indian Chamber getting all your inputs, we have invested heavily in improving the quality of the country’s human resources, in lowering transaction flows and the costs of doing business, in developing efficient access to financing, and building a seamless infrastructure network. I have mentioned, for instance, the ease now of immigration procedures for the Indian Business Community and many other types of red tape we did away with because you pointed them out to us.

And as mentioned by our two speakers earlier, we are also focusing on developing our strongest sectors, including commodities, BPO in great partnership with the Indian Business Community in India and around the world and niche tourism. One of the niche tourism sectors we identified is to invite Indian movie companies in Bollywood to come and do films in the Philippines. We have had a couple come. They are happy about the site. They’re happy about the talent. They’re in fact happy about the assistance they get from agencies. They have difficulty because there’s no direct flight. So, what I heard about the direct flight earlier is I think something that we must all work for. We have an air agreement… (applause) We have an air agreement, don’t we? It’s now the economic decision making of the airlines that we must work for, and that would be in the hands of the business community because you are the one who can assure these airlines that they can make money with the load that you will provide with your business activities.

We have unique competitive advantages in these areas. We offer significant value for investors. We thank the Indian companies who have come to invest here over these years where we had different kinds… waves of investments as mentioned by our speakers: textile industry, retail industry, now high-tech and high-value. I remember when I was a young girl living in Iligan and I would go to town to go to the market in that very, very multi-ethnic society. I made a lot of friends among the Indian retail owners of the stores there. So, that’s where you’ve been for a long time, you’re still there, and you are now in high-tech and manufacturing as well.

The Philippines and India, both with strong decades-long democratic traditions, are partners in the continued growth and development of the countries of Asia. So, for the next 60 years and even more, may our two peoples continue to work for the deepening of our relationship that has been mutually beneficial to both our countries.

To all of us, Happy Jubilee of our Diplomatic Relations between the two countries!

Thank you. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 60th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Philippines and India. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412102706/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25090&Itemid=38