Thank you very much, Senator Ed Angara, former Senate president, for your kind introduction and thank you for your continued support of the policies, especially those concerning the economy of our administration. Thank you very much for that.

Governor Bellaflor Angara Castillo, thank you also for your welcome and explanation of what we are celebrating today. Ed mentioned my visit here when I was still a young woman, during martial law, surfing here. But when I entered public service, one of my first visits here, I remember Bella was still in the private sector and we came here by helicopter together. So thank you very much, Bella, for always welcoming me.

To Congressman Sonny Angara, thank you also for inviting me here and for the good work you are doing there in the House of Representatives. And of course to Mayor Arturo Angara and all the people and officials of the Municipality of Baler, Happy 400th Anniversary to all of you!

I would like to greet the members of the Diplomatic Corps, thank you for joining this 400th anniversary of the founding of Baler. And thank you in behalf of the officials of Aurora for the support that you are giving to the development of this beautiful province.

We have with us some officials from the national government, earlier Ambeth Ocampo and Vic Badoy stood up; and here is my assistant for Region III, Reli Fajardo; I see… I also see Mike Romero of the Development Bank of the Philippines and the Chairman of the Commission on Filipino Language is also here, Jolad Santos; and we are very proud to have one of our favorite painters, Jovenal Sanso; and of course the family, the family of the one we are celebrating… of the hero of Baler and Aurora whose birthday we are celebrating today, the members of the Quezon family, especially Ricky and Pia and the other great-grandchildren of President Manuel Quezon. And to all of you, the people of Baler, a warm greeting to the people of Baler on your 400th Anniversary of your beloved town. The warmth is somewhat literal, as Ambeth said — oh my! it’s hot — we said with Mayor Arturo Angara it’s good that it’s hot rather than raining because… because Baler is far away, so if it rains it’s hard to get here.

And I would like also to greet our generals who are here headed by on the side of the military, General David, our Northern Luzon Commander, and on the side of the police, General Nilo dela Cruz, our Region III Director, and all the officials of the national government regional who are here now.

Earlier we unveiled the marker and there, in a very short, concise way, is the history of Baler. The first mentions of our history about this town are when Baler was established as a friar mission in the year 1609, that’s why 400 years ago. And there also when a large tsunami occurred which caused fourteen Balereño families to evacuate to the current higher location, and from there, but you would still think that among the families who survived and were considered the founders of the Town of Baler were the ancestors of Senator Ed Angara and Congresswoman Castillo and Mayor Angara and Congressman Angara — their founding fathers, right? — of the Town of Baler.

Then after a time, Baler was mentioned again when it became part of the community called El Principe, that’s also on the marker. The teaching of Christianity to the people here by the friars was successful — there, your church is very beautiful. And when Ed Angara and I went to Spain in the town of Almonte, they had a museum that was a replica of this church in Baler. So that is a sign of the propagation of faith and along with it the people here also learned foreign culture and language. That culture we still see today when Ed Angara and I were together in the Senate. And even before that time when I heard about him, I wasn’t yet in the Senate, I really knew then that Ed Angara was a culture vulture perhaps because of what we call customs and traditions here in Baler.

But perhaps the greatest event we read about is before the Philippines became a full-fledged nation, the so-called Siege of Baler in 1899, which is why there is a replica of the Baler Church in Almonte.

Baler is historic because it was here in Baler where a group of Spanish soldiers took their last stand against one of the longest sieges in Philippine history. It was also here in Baler where the enduring friendship between Spain and the Philippines took root through the magnanimity of the revolutionary General and President Emilio Aguinaldo, the first president of the Philippines.

And speaking of presidents, this town of Baler, as we have heard today and many times over, is also historic because it is the hometown of President Manuel L. Quezon, second Philippine president after Aguinaldo and the first president of the Philippine Commonwealth, as the 'Father of the Tagalog language' as a basis for the National Language — that’s why Jolad is here — and whose birthday we celebrate today.

As appreciation for the role of Baler in the history of the Philippines, we supported the resolution passed by Senator Angara in the Senate, and we signed Proclamation 1696 last year to prepare the people of Baler for the celebration we are doing now, the 400th Anniversary of your town. And we have heard about all the beautiful events that had been taking place.

And as Ricky Avanceña said earlier, if President Quezon brought Baler back to the limelight in his time, the Angara family also have brought to this historic town a national prominence once more. Not only has Ed Angara made headlines with his achievements for the nation; he has also done a yeoman’s job of bringing to Baler and the whole province of Aurora the development that it deserves. And I am very grateful to have the opportunity to be able to help him in his efforts.

We must also thank Senator Angara not only for what he has done here for Baler and Aurora, but I thank him as President of the country for his staunch support and sponsorship, as I said earlier, of many of the economic reforms and the financial reforms that gave the country an unprecedented 33 quarters of growth, Ed is not just a culture vulture, not just an educator but also a very expert in economics. And with his support we have reinvested the gains of our growth in programs and projects that have enabled the country to survive the global economic slump and put us in an even better position to compete once the world’s economies regain their health.

Earlier, Ed and I were talking about the world economy, and I congratulate the Chinese government because they are leading the world in economic recovery. And Ed and I were talking about this coco coir here, and China needs a lot of these. So, since China is doing a lot of pump priming on infrastructure including slope protection they’re going to need these a lot. I told Ed, let us be ahead in taking advantage of the economic recovery of the world, let’s sell our coco coir to China immediately.

The talk about “Feeling the Progress,” I think Aurora is also feeling the fruits of progress, right? Because Aurora province has had its share of growth programs. There’s more coming, the Aurora Special Economic Zone Authority sponsored by Ed and Sonny, R.A. 9490 passed in 2007, this will hasten the entry of investments and the creation of more jobs.

This Aurora Economic Zone is Ed’s vision that it will be the country’s first “green” economic zone. It is taking shape to bring in investments in agriculture. In fact, Ed said that an aquaculture [project] will be arriving here in our economic zone soon.

Also, eco-tourism and related services. It has already attracted the interest of Japanese — thank you, Ambassador — Spanish and other European investors. And I heard that the Mutya ng Pilipinas pageant happened here recently in Baler, so it again rekindles the people’s interest in Aurora and the economic zone. And we all hope that physical development will begin in the first semester next year.

To also bring the fruits of progress to the people of Aurora, we further improved the airstrip in Casiguran as one of our priority programs. Sonny said that I am the only president who put Aurora in my State of the Nation Address, and I am glad… I’m glad to note the improvements in the airport are now about 82 percent complete. Hopefully, this airport will be completed this year.

And adjacent to our airport or to complete the infrastructure there in Casiguran because of the economic zone is the Casiguran Port project which we also expect to be completed within a few months.

When I was still a senator, as someone from Pampanga, from Central Luzon, I saw the need for a port on the Pacific Ocean, that is why it was in our interests to push also for the Dingalan Port. And that’s why when I became president, that was the first thing I did, it was also one of our priority projects. We visited it last year and we even saw that one of the most important projects leading to it was the Tarlac-Nueva Ecija-Aurora-Dingalan Road project. We completed the Dingalan Port to Dingalan Road and Gabaldon, Nueva Ecija in 2007 then Bongabon to Gabaldon in May. But I think the most important infrastructure for the people of Baler to feel the fruits of progress is the SCTEX to Baler Road.

That’s why when I sat in the coaster, that was the first status I asked Governor Bella, and thankfully Senator Ed already told me, he spoke with the Regional Director of the DPWH and the construction is ongoing and it is expected that the road will be completed by the end of this year. That is truly the fruit of progress.

So because we want the economic zone, we are also prioritizing the Baler-Casiguran Road which we started in 2007 and is now half-way through.

That’s why I am happy that even though Baler is a small town and the Province of Aurora is small, it is historical and has great potential, and the people are hardworking and intelligent so they deserve… they truly deserve it and that’s why here at our 400th anniversary of the founding of Baler, we commemorate your history which is the fruit of the faith of the friars, the fruit of the unity of the founding fathers, and the good governance that we see in the progress of Baler in these current times.

And above all, we celebrate the progress not only of Baler but also of the entire Aurora province. Happy 400th Anniversary and Happy Quezon Day to all of you!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the commemoration of the 400th year of Christianization and founding anniversary of Baler. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412100300/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26021&Itemid=38