Metun a mayap a pagbati keko ngan king mumunang diling pamagdiwang ning Candaba king IBON-EBON FESTIVAL.

Abalu ku na adwa yang bage iting pamagdiwang: ing tagumpe yu king pamag-protekta da ring ayup a manibat karing aliwang lugar o migratory birds ampo ing pamanyulung king industriya na ning itik.

Pauli ning galing da ding kekayung gewang akbang ban sesen la dening ayup, lalu la pang darakal banua-banua. Balita ku, atin pang atlung e karaniwang species da ding ayup a dadayu ngeni king Candaba Swamp.

Iti metung ya karing bunga ning pamagsumikap nang Mayor Jerry Pelayo at ikayu ngang taga-Candaba, pati na ing mabilug a probinsiya ning Pampanga a akamit na ing ustung balansi king kailangan da deng tao ampo pa ing kapaligiran o “Balance Between the Needs of the People and Those of the Environment,” a tema king pamagdiwang.

In the case of our country as a whole, we have begun the Green Philippines plan. This is a blueprint for mapping our environment and economic policies that will allow for sustainable development that doesn’t fall on the backs of the poor or erode our environment. There is a cost to make the Green Philippines come to life. But the cost is greater without the plan and the investment in our people and environment.

From rising tides, to changing weather to deforestation and pollution of air, sea and land, the challenges of the environment at this time of climate change are great. As a nation made up of over 7,000 islands, rising seas due to global warming takes on a whole new meaning. Florida may lose some coastline, we lose a nation. Our response to this grave challenge may sound humorous, but our intent is deadly serious: we must work together to solve this problem. If we do, it will be one of our great achievements.

Every nation, developed or developing, must assume the mantle of leadership and work to address the challenge of climate change. Each and every person bears some measure of responsibility for what we have done today and throughout history to diminish our environment. Obviously, some are more responsible than others; and some are more responsible today than yesterday. But all that apportionment of blame does nothing against a rising tide of global warming that will swamp our nation if we do not act with solidarity.

Unity is a real aspiration that manifests itself through progress.

Unity is about action, not discussion. It is about working together and not just talking together.

Therefore, the key to our successful response to the migratory birds is our management of the environment and natural resources. Along with the increasing number of birds landing in Candaba Swamp comes an increasing number of visitors, both local and from other countries, to witness this unique natural phenomenon.

Regarding duck raising, many of you probably want to do it, but lack the capital.

That is why, during this Ibon Ebon Festival, we have a check for one million [pesos] for the livelihood projects of the people of Candaba.

Poverty alleviation is our overarching goal. We will continue focus on it. Getting our growth rate of 7.3%, the highest in 31 years, is just the first step. Over the next few years, we will translate the positive results of our reforms to real benefits for the people. We will increase investment in our country and our people to: 1) improve our infrastructure, kalupa ning Subic-Clark Tarlac Expressay ampu ing potang umpisan tang Third Bulacan Circumferential Road, to create an environment in which businesses feel confident to expand and employ more people, because more jobs means less poverty, 2) improve social services such as health insurance subsidies for indigent families and Food for School anti-hunger programs, 3) boost educational support in our efforts to reduce poverty by investing in better school buildings, new textbooks and teaching materials, training programs for teachers and school administrators, ampu karing facilities kalupa ning binuklat tang aklatan nandin, and 4) cutting red tape and continuing to eliminate corruption from the system.

Puspusan ing pamagpatupad na ning guyernu – kayabe da karing lokal a opisyales- karing programang tutugun karing pangunahing kailangan da ring kekatamung memalen.

Iti parte ne ning pamagbalik tami karing kekatamung membalin karing bunga na ning pamanyulung ning kekatamung ekonomiya.

Dakal a salamat kekayu at masayang pamagdiwang kekatamu ngan.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). Speech of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo during the Ibon – Ebon Festival. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123641/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1006&Itemid=38