Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Conferment of the Golden Heart Award

[Delivered in Washington, D. C., June 24, 2008]

Thank you very much. Thank you, thank you.

Our honorees… Secretary Romulo and the other members of the Philippine delegation, ladies and gentlemen, good evening.

The Order of the Golden Heart represents our nation’s humble way of recognizing those who help build life to the noble aspirations of the Filipino people. Relations between the United States and the Philippines will always be close as well as special. In fact, those of BBC poll (?) released this past April our global perceptions towards the US. And you guessed it, Filipinos are, hands down, the most supportive nation of the US in the world.

Against the backdrop of these close bilateral relationships are tonight’s… who have forged an even stronger bond between our two nations. We’re here tonight to honor our distinct awardees with the Golden Heart Award for their exemplary contributions to the Filipino people, especially to Filipino veterans. The Golden Heart award is given to those with a golden heart. One of these gives hope for our nations and our people.

And so, on behalf of the 85 million Filipinos and their families and friends who make up the four million Philippine-American community, thank you for continuing the deep friendship. Thank you also for your expression of support and… thanks from our friendly half of Congress. And if you appreciate… (unclear) about our Filipinos, and we do hope as you have said that we will find more survivors, and thank you for all of the support that you have given.

And I’d like to take this opportunity to thank everybody here in the Capitol who has expressed sympathy and who has also provided support for our efforts now in the Philippines. And we are very happy to have so many friends in Washington and we are very happy to have the three gentlemen that we are honoring tonight among the leaders of that friendship.

Once again, congratulations!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). Speech of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo during the Conferment of the Golden Heart Award. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412120357/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1544&Itemid=38