Thank you very much. Thank you very much. Thank you very much.

Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas for your introduction of me. Thank you very much also because you don't just take care of Filipino workers, you also take care of workers all over the world because Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas is the president of the International Labor Organization.

I would like to congratulate our new ambassador to the People’s Republic of China, Ambassador Willy Gaa. And I think it’s an opportunity for all of us to congratulate for the first time our new Consul General, Corazon Belmonte Jover.

You know, I sent Vicky Bataclan, you remember, and from what I saw, you and Vicky really clicked. Because of her good work here, it was also time for her to be promoted and become a full ambassador. So Vicky is now our ambassador to Sweden but she sends her continued love to all of you. And I hope that just as you clicked with Vicky Bataclan, you also click with our new Consul General, Cora Belmonte Jover.

I would like to greet my colleagues… Oh, I would like to introduce to you my colleagues who are visiting you today. We have a Muslim association that I met earlier, we have a representative of the Muslim community in our official party today, the governor of the province of Sultan Kudarat, Datu Pax Mangudadatu; And the one arranging our priority projects and our aid coming from other countries, Secretary Marita Jimenez; my Presidential Spokesman is Toting Bunye; the one giving me advice for our peace talks, whether with the communists or with the MILF, is Secretary Ging Deles; my adviser in the north of the Philippines, a fan of Hong Kong, so that every time I visit Hong Kong, I want us all to be together with former governor Chavit Singson.

My colleagues in the executive branch who are also here to help serve all of you, the one providing various services to you is the head of OWWA, Ver Angelo. In our OWWA board, the representative of our overseas workers is from here in Hong Kong. That's why Hong Kong is very important to OWWA.

Our Undersecretary of Trade and Industry, Undersecretary Tom Aquino; our Undersecretary of Tourism and also the Chairman of the National Commission on Culture, Evelyn Pantig; our Undersecretary for aid coming from other countries, Lina Amata.

I would like to thank i-remit global remittance and confed properties for their help with our Christmas party today because they provided the two lots and housing that we gave away today at our Christmas party. Thank you to Mr. Bansan Choa.

I would like to greet the leaders of the various Filipino communities here: the children of Villaviciosa, Abra, especially Corazon Carsola, thank you all, my dear; the Laisam International Association headed by Teresita Dumdom; the large group there, El Shaddai. Thank you, there are so many of you here that one of you won housing. And I would like to greet Sister Tessie Wong who leads El Shaddai here.

The Hong Kong musicians union under the leadership of Jun Cortez, good morning to all of you. I remember when I was still a young child – not you specifically, but your predecessors, they were the first OFWs here in Hong Kong – weren’t they all in different hotels? How many hundreds were you back then? Now there are hundreds of thousands of Filipinos here in Hong Kong.

I also want to greet Chato Carlos, the colleague of Mr. Choa at I-Remit. And I remember, my friends, the professionals in Hong Kong, when they built the Philippine Association of Hong Kong, so I greet them here, represented by Daisy Catherine Mandac; there are Ilocanos here in Hong Kong and there is also the beauty of the Ilocano Association, especially Miss Petra Regua; and from Nueva Ecija, the Gimbal Filipino workers Association led by Irma Jiolamin; and of course the Novo Ecijiano Association of Hong Kong, especially Rosita Estipolar; the Zamboangita Association; from Negros Oriental, Jolita Elnas; the St. Joseph Philippine Prayer Group, especially Mr. Luis Sible, your group is very large.

I mentioned earlier the Muslim Filipino Association, Brother Asisto Juano, salam alaikum pagariya; the Philippine Bankers Club, especially Dennis Juico; again, Ilocano, Ilocos Sur International Association, especially Elizabeth Quemado; and I saw the beauty of your homemade streamer here, Marinduque Migrant Workers Association, especially Adelaida Mogul; and we are proud of what the Philippine community has built, together with the partnership of the Hong Kong government and the Philippine government, the Hong Kong Bayanihan Trust. Oh, many of you go there, it's very obvious. So I greet Miss Lourdes Salazar who manages the Hong Kong Bayanihan Trust; the Vilomen Hong Kong Association, Irene Domingo, I greet you too. That’s your banner; and thank you Pastor Oral Paul Guevarra, thank you for your prayers together with the International Christian Assembly of Filipino Ministry.

So earlier, they stood up and displayed their placards: the League of Overseas Filipino Midwives Hong Kong headed by Janet Japsay; the Association of Filipino Builders in Hong Kong, thank you Mr. Crisanto Ogoy; and… And all our Visayan members under the Federation of Visayan Association in Hong Kong, especially Amelita Deslate; and my fellow countrymen from Mindanao where I grew up, the Mindanao Hong Kong Workers Federation, especially Miss Myrna Padilla; and the Kabayan Radyo Fans Club led by Cely Gonzaga; Federation of Bicol Associations, Agnes Gahonera, good morning to all of you; partnership for progress, Ching Baltazar; Ilocano again, Corazon Manayan and Alcala Migrant Workers Association, perhaps… Maybe Alcala in Cagayan province; Pinoy Abroad True Friends, Linda Layosa. Where are you Linda? ha? Ah, she’s in Manila, you represent… Please give her my love, ha? Okay, so nice to see you; Sunday intake volunteer group headed by Susie Dela Cruz; and thanks for the welcome from PWU Hong Kong represented by Dr. Angel Ramos, oh, you have your nice uniform; the black panther martial arts group headed by Joseph Bautista; the Hong Kong Chapter of the National Organization of Professional Teachers headed by Lolita Brana. I understand you’re the biggest association in Hong Kong, congratulations; and my wife’s fellow provincial, Sagay Association of Hong Kong, Milagros Serica. oh, Sagay is Cebuano, right?; and Pinay Justice Volunteer Team, Eleanor Arellano; Ilocano again, Ilocos Norte Phil Alliance of Hong Kong, Sister Miriam Bartolome, Miss Miriam Bartolome; Abuyog Migrant Workers Association, Rosario Lajer; Philippine Airlines Joseph Gonzales; there are two from Alcala, there’s Alcala in Cagayan, Alcalanian Overseas Association, Clofe Torado; my wife’s fellow provincial, Migrant Ilonggo International Association; fellow provincemates of secretary and hopefully future senator Mar Roxas, Capiznon Association in Hong Kong, Armando Villasoto

And so, if there are any that I failed to mention, I just want to greet all of you including all the religious groups and to all of you, merry Christmas, advance merry Christmas.

Thank you for using your day off to make time for my visit to Hong Kong. You remember when we were here together at HITEC, I told you, it’s okay, we’ll make your day off meaningful. We’ll open the consulate to serve you on your day off, so it’s continuing now. Thank you to those from Hong Kong, thank you also to those from Macau because you took an early ferry to attend this gathering. Where are those from Macau? There they are! Thank you, thank you.

And to all of you, thank you for being topnotchers in the registration for Overseas Absentee Voting. Because you are voters, I just want to state: I’m glad the opposition is moving towards unity so that we can get down to the business of threshing out the issues of the campaign. On my part, I’ve just finished a fruitful trip to Japan where I worked for a better deal for our OFWs and marked more gains for peace and development in Mindanao.

I believe that because you are OFWs, you know that Japan is not open to OFWs, unlike Hong Kong. But I agreed with Prime Minister Koizumi that in January, we will begin formal negotiations to allow OFWs to enter Japan. Our agreement, we said, I said to Prime Minister Koizumi, the first we will request for OFWs to enter Japan are caregivers. Because I told Prime Minister Koizumi – and he admitted it – Japan is called an aging population, there are many elderly people. There are not enough young Japanese, not enough nurses, not enough midwives, not enough caregivers, there are not enough young Japanese to take care of them. But I said our Filipino caregivers are well-known all over the world. Known in Hong Kong, known in London, known there in Sweden, where Vicky is now, known in Canada. I know that the elderly Japanese really want a Filipino caregiver to take care of them.

One other thing I will pursue for entry into Japan is information technology professionals. after my meeting with you today, I shall leave for Bahrain. And in Bahrain, the meetings will also pursue the same thrusts at what I sought in Japan. We shall widen the range of our diplomacy to reinforce our domestic policies and programs to uplift the lives of our people. My administration, ours is an administration that has been working across continents to bring the message of Filipino pride and pride in the Filipino’s bright future. this is part of the reform and the changes in the system, and part of the unity and reconciliation we are seeking in our country as we bring all Filipinos worldwide and at home together behind the sustained march for peace, progress and prosperity.

I said, change in system, change in the system. In my two and a half years as president, I have seen, I have understood what changes need to be made in my system. One of these systemic changes that I am striving to do and will further strive to do, I want to establish in the Philippines something like the change made here in Hong Kong, the established Independent Commission Against Corruption or ICAC. And in the change that I have already begun preparing for, my advisor is none other than the very first person who established the ICAC here in Hong Kong. And when he went to the Philippines and looked at what I had already started to prepare for it, at his press conference, he praised my administration and saw that I was determined to further improve our system in the Philippines against corruption.

Regarding peace, perhaps you have heard that Commander Robot has been suppressed and arrested, that is the leader of the most shameful kidnapping in Sipadan in the year 2000. Now, all the surrounding issues of the Sipadan kidnapping can be given light through the judicial process and institutional investigations. Our priority is criminal justice and we will pursue this without being distracted by the peripheral issues. Let the light come out so the public will see the truth behind this most notorious incident in the history of crime and terrorism.

Regarding development, in the past quarter, according to our statistics, our growth rate in the Philippines is number 6 out of 21 economies in Asia and the Pacific. And on top of the increase in production within the Philippines at 4.4 percent – indeed number six among 21 economies because of your remittances – the 4.4 percent GDP growth rate became a 5.9 percent GNP growth rate because remittances are included in the GNP. So thank you very much, your remittances worth over 200 million U.S. dollars per year greatly help not only your families but also our country.

So to those of you listening to me in our past meetings, you might remember I always say you are overseas Filipino workers, but you are also overseas Filipino investors because your remittances serve as investments in education, housing, and the capital of your loved ones. Aren't those all investments and come from you?

I want to give back to you by helping through programs that you and your loved ones in the Philippines can benefit from.

So, regarding the Overseas Voting Law, which you have waited for several years, several administrations, several congresses, the Overseas Voting Law finally passed within my administration. And not only that, the Anti-Money Laundering Law – it’s not just to catch money launderers, it’s so that we don’t receive penalties from the international community and to reduce the red tape of your remittances. So this Anti-Money Laundering Law is also beneficial for our OFWs so you won’t have difficulty sending your remittances to our country.

I also expanded our housing program for workers. In my administration, we intentionally included overseas Filipinos in our housing program for workers. And I heard that the results of the three Pag-IBIG housing fairs held in Hong Kong since last year, where we intentionally included OFWs, were good. According to our PAG-IBIG office in Hong Kong, you, overseas workers in Hong Kong, have purchased housing worth 78 million pesos, which was accepted by various housing developers from the Philippines at said housing fairs. That's why Confed Properties, with the size of their income, are okay with donating additional housing because you have given 78 million pesos in housing revenue to our housing developers. So for those who haven't participated in the Pag-IBIG housing fairs, a fourth housing fair will be held in January. Join so that the money you worked hard for goes to something beneficial, either a house for your relatives or a house for yourselves if you are retiring to the Philippines.

Hong Kong is not only good at registration, but also at SSS membership. Did you know you are also topnotchers? Our SSS officer here told me that there are already 88,000 SSS members in Hong Kong. That’s a lot, a vast majority, and we continue to promote the good programs of the SSS here, as well as in Macau.

Didn't we establish the provident fund to provide social services and emergency loans to our OFWs? We now have enrollees from Hong Kong, Jeddah, Qatar, Milan, and Rome.

It is also good that many of you are actively participating in the livelihood and skills training services that we have expanded. Our program for teachers for examination and finding an item for you, all of that was ordered by the President of the Republic of the Philippines. I ordered that. Some have returned, some want to return here because there is a shortage of items. I want to tell you that in the 2004 budget, there will be additional items again for new teachers.

Here in Hong Kong, I know that Hong Kong is suffering. The Philippines, thankfully, has a 4.4 percent growth rate, GDP, 5.9 GDP. Hong Kong has a negative growth rate this year. The hardship of Hong Kong, I know, is also being experienced by you who work here in Hong Kong. First of all, with SARS, I am saddened with you that we have compatriots who became victims here in Hong Kong, as well as in other countries like Singapore and Canada. We will not forget them in our prayers, and I thank all those working in Hong Kong hospitals for your sacrifice, and let us also thank our doctor that I sent here – isn’t it Dr. Fajardo? – to serve all of you. He made a great effort when SARS occurred to ensure that our OFWs, as much as possible, were safe from SARS.

It is good that in the Philippines, we were able to contain SARS. Aside from the two who died from SARS – one worker from Canada and his father – SARS did not spread. And the whole world praised the Philippine government for our SARS management. That is a proof that our administration is expert in crisis management.

Another problem with Hong Kong’s economy, where you OFWs are also affected, is the very unfortunate reduction of the allowable wage and… Minimum allowable wage and the imposition of a levy on employers of foreign domestic helpers. I, among all seven countries that send OFWs here, am the most zealous of all heads of government in fighting for my OFWs. I offered, I even offered to other leaders. I fought for you and offered to other country leaders with domestic helpers here to all come together in this fight and we filed a case. We led that. Seven countries came together but the Philippines was the leader.

Second in activeness is Indonesia, and according to reports, the first part of our fight here in the Hong Kong high court regarding this issue was successful, although it was slow. You know in the Philippines, we think the court process is long, as well as in other countries, including Hong Kong. But according to the lawyer handling the case and also our consulate, there is already a date for argumentation regarding this case. Trust that I will not stop in conveying to the Hong Kong authorities my fight, our fight for the welfare of our OFWs here in Hong Kong.

After all, as I said, you are model Filipinos. A model in work, that's why your employers love you so much and even defend you. A model as citizens, that's why you are number one in Overseas Voting Registration. A model in serving our economy because of the large amount of remittances you send.

Filipinos in Hong Kong, in Macau, thank you for being model Filipinos. I hope your success continues.

Thank you very much and Merry Christmas to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during a meeting with the Filipino Community in Hong Kong SAR. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140458/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7539&Itemid=38