Thank you, Secretary Artie Yap for your introduction. And thank you for reminding everybody about how we were among the first in the party, that’s how we got party favors.

Senator Ed Angara, thank you and please convey to all the senators who ratified the JPEPA last night, our heartfelt thanks. Yes. One of the biggest winners of the JPEPA is our agriculture, food and aquaculture industry, so to all those who support these Agrilink, Foodlink and Aqualink Exhibits that have a new market, congratulations on the ratification!

Congresswoman Nelly Chavez who represents the Farmers’ Party of the Philippines whose Tagalog translation has the acronym BUTIL Party List; our hosts here in Pasay City, Congressman Jun Roxas and Mayor Peewee Trinidad; Mrs. Dulce Gozun and Lyndon Tan; His Excellency Ambassador Chesnel and our French delegation, which is one of the biggest delegations in this exhibit, benvenuto!

This event is timely because a whole new market has opened up for the Philippine agribusiness through the JPEPA ratification. This event is also a venue to remind ourselves that four years ago, we resolved to develop one million hectares of agribusiness land and water to make them productive and to transport their products to the markets efficiently.

“Sustaining Agricultural Growth through Niche Markets” is indeed the way to go in a globally competitive world.

While we may know how to grow rice well, our productivity per hectare is very high. Topography doesn’t always cooperate. Nature did not gift us with a mighty Mekong-like Thailand and Vietnam, with their vast and naturally fertile plains. Nature instead put our islands ahead of our neighbors in the path of the typhoons from the Pacific. Thus, instead of producing 100 percent of our needs, the last ten percent of the rice we consume is imported because it had been more expensive to produce them on marginal land. And we earn the foreign exchange to buy the rice by exporting our own niche commodities like primary products, call center services, niche tourism, and as the theme of this exhibit, “niche agribusiness”.

However, at the price levels reached last year even if the Philippines is a rocky, densely populated archipelago with relatively few resources of fresh water, in one of our meetings with Congress and the industry we all agreed that it is now desirable to become self-sufficient in rice while still increasing our production of other plants, fruits, fish and livestock for the markets.

Therefore, the global credit crunch should be an opportunity, not a crisis, for Philippine agribusiness.

The U.S. financial crisis appears deeper than most anticipated. Any slowdown or even recession in the U.S. is not good for the global economy. That said, the Philippines appears in relatively good shape, thanks to our fiscal reforms — again, thanks to Congress and the Senate. Ed and Nelly were very active in our fiscal reforms — that manifested a seven percent plus GDP growth last year. Our debt-to-GDP ratio has gone down, and our credit ratings reflect it.

We came to office determined to change the strategic paradigm for the Philippine economy. A strong and growing economy is the most important thing we strived to establish to help achieve peace, order, and stability in our country. We have been working tirelessly to address the challenges brought about by the weakening global economy coupled with the increase in the price of oil and food.

Notwithstanding all that, we have created almost 7 million jobs in 7 years, many of them in agribusiness. Investments continue to come in despite continued volatility in the global markets.

And I am pleased to see here that in this exhibit, we have a wide range of non-mainstream products like mangosteen and papaya pastes, yogurt, civet coffee, goat’s milk soaps, the golden “Dory” fish, black tiger prawns, low-fat salad dressings, palm sugar, indigenous plant and unconventional cutflowers. There is also a new organic fertilizer product — isn’t that organic fertilizer, Artie? — that will be launched at their booth after this program called “Nutrisphere”. All of these will all appeal to different segments of local and foreign markets.

I am also pleased to hear about the use of nutritious indigenous vegetables like malunggay — which we are using extensively for our school feeding program — alugbati, saluyot, katuray and pako or fern. These are not only promising niche crops that translate into more incomes for the planters, they are also excellent sources of the vitamins and minerals we all need.

In fisheries, the profitability of mariculture has been demonstrated. Growing fish in the seas has proven to be one of the best methods to increase fish production and meet demand without significantly reducing the volume of fish outside the cages. We now have 34 mariculture farms throughout the country.

We have diversified our economy not only in terms of niche agri products and aqua products and food products but also in terms of markets. So that the U.S. is no longer our top export market; that now is China. And now Japan will open up with the JPEPA ratified. And with our French ambassador here and the French delegation, we also look at the European market.

As a result of our economic turnaround, we were also able to invest in the most important sectors such as agriculture, food, and fisheries to alleviate the harsh impact on our poor of the high prices of food and oil that hit this year. In addition, we are investing in the most extensive modernization of infrastructure in history, such as roads including farm-to-market roads, bridges, and ports.

We are also investing in expanded education, including enrollment in agriculture which we are providing with many scholarships, as well as health care and other social services. Meanwhile, we are balancing these necessary investments with a commitment to meet our fiscal obligations.

And as we have done this, our part, the production is actually to be done by the private sector, by the business community, by the agribusiness community. And therefore, we encourage continued activity by the agriculture, food and aquaculture business groups. This also means the government continues to promote privatization, including the Food Terminal, Incorporated, as a counterpoint for our own pump-priming.

To the fiscally strong, this is a time of opportunity. To the likes of the oil-producing countries, for instance, this is a time to fill up the financial vacuum. Similarly, in the private sector, this is the time for agribusiness to exploit the financial liquidity of our strong banking sector to expand your role in your respective niche markets.

I said, strong banking sector, because we are proving this here in the global credit crunch. The potential exposure of our banking sector to the asset deflation triggered by the sub-prime mortgage losses in the U.S. accounts for less than one percent of their total system assets here in the Philippines. This exposure is fully reserved, our banks are well-capitalized, and the innate conservativism of our bankers is matched by the prudence of our regulators.

And let us be thankful to the banks, such as the cooperative banks supported by Congresswoman of BUTIL, because their banks lend at four… four percent and do not offer discounts. So agriculture should benefit from that. And as I told Nelly, we expect the process of borrowing from banks to become easier once the Credit Information System Act, a pet bill of Senator Angara, which I am about to sign, is implemented. Thank you very much, Ed. We will sign it upon Ed Angara's return from the World Bank conference.

Of equal importance to sheer financial capacity is the ability to decide and move quickly — the road between the decision to buy and the actual placement of the order is fraught with uncertainty. In our country, SMEs are quick to act, but large agribusiness entrepreneurs are also quick to act.

Internationally, the bastions of wealth with both financial capacity and quick execution are the Middle East powers, given their oil-driven wealth and their unitary government apparatus. The fact that the Philippines has a Mindanao close to the hearts of powers such as Saudi, the UAE and Libya opens up opportunities for niche marketing of products especially from Agribusiness Mindanao.

That’s why I was happy earlier while walking on the red carpet, many delegates from Mindanao greeted me. This is an opportunity because the Middle East countries really value you and have a lot of money now to buy our products.

We have been working hard on all fronts to manage inflationary pressures. Thankfully, inflation is leveling off. Inflation was lower in September than in October.

We’ve also been working hard to provide a safety net to those hit hardest by these global events. Most notably, we are working hard to ensure a stable food supply and that there is food on every table.

Therefore, this Agrilink, Foodlink and Aqualink are very important. They greatly help to increase yields and expand the markets for our products from the farm and the sea. This exhibit is held regularly because the members of the agriculture, food and fisheries sector are united. And I would like to greet my fellow Kapampangans in Clark because there is now a permanent Agrilink there in Clark that is being done. You always work together to ensure the availability of food on every table.

From the day we took office, we have been focused on our economy and modernizing every aspect of the economic underpinnings of the Philippines. This includes agribusiness, from development of new hybrids, to unprecedented investments in irrigation, to dramatic increases in loans to help our farmers, among other activities. Again, Senator Angara is here because of his love for agriculture. And we are carrying out his Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Act.

What happened this year with rice and global prices notwithstanding our preparation is a once-in-a-millennium global crisis.

In the face of storms in the global economy, we need to be steadfast, work together, and strive to save our countrymen from hunger and falling into poverty.

Despite this storm, we have great faith in our country. We strongly hope that we will reach a good future, so let us all be a force for good, and this Agrilink, Foodlink and Aqualink is a very important force for the good of our farmers, fishermen and ordinary citizens who need to have food on every table.

So to all of you, on this occasion of this exhibit, long live you all and thank you very much.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the opening ceremonies of the Agrilink/Foodlink/Aqualink 2008. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135119/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1757&Itemid=38