WALANG NANG MAMAMATAY NA TAO

Today in signing the abolition of the death penalty, we celebrate life in the most meaningful way by gathering our institutions together to repeal the death penalty.

I appreciate the enthusiasm of Congress in expressing the moral and spiritual force of the Filipino in this law.

I thank the Church for the beacon of grace and discernment. When I meet the Holy Father soon in the Vatican, I shall tell him that we have acted in the name of life for a world of peace and harmony.

I allay the concerns of those who think that the abolition of the death penalty opens the floodgates to heinous acts. We shall devote… We shall continue to devote the increasing weight of our resources to the prevention and control of serious crimes, rather than take the lives of those who commit them.

I call on the entire criminal justice system — law enforcers, prosecutors, judges, jailers and the whole community — to take stock of the responsibility of sharpening law and justice for all.

On the bombing in Maguindanao targeted at the governor and which killed five people, I condemn this act of terrorism in the strongest terms as a crime against peace and humanity. The authorities must identify the perpetrators, launch a manhunt with the proper rewards, and bring them to justice.

I extend my sympathies to the families of the victims and assure them that the search for justice will be firm and relentless. We will never be intimidated by these treacherous acts and we shall fight terror as seriously as we embrace peace and development, solidarity among our law-abiding citizens, and our strategic alliances. This commitment stands firm and will not relent until the total defeat of terrorists in every part of the country.

The rule of law, strictly enforced, shall ride side by side with social justice in paving the way for an atmosphere of political and economic security, so that every person and family shall have the blessings of stable employment, better health, education and public safety.

We have taken a strong hand against the threats to the law and the republic, but at the same time we yield to the high moral imperatives dictated by God to walk away from capital punishment.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].