Thank you very much, Secretary Dodi Limcaoco.

I also greet my youngest Cabinet member, Secretary Mike Defensor. Where is he, has he left already? There he is! He joined our… I also greet our youth representative here, Mark Castrodes, National Youth Commissioner. And also our… Our fighter not only against drugs but also against those pirated discs to defend our Filipino artists, Bong Revilla.

I thank Assistant Secretary Rudy Caisip for his presentation. And Undersecretary Efren Fernandez, he manages the Dangerous Drugs Board and he is with us in various activities to fight drugs.

Thank you for your songs and… Well, I want to mention all of the stars who are here today but if I start I won’t be able to finish. Thank you very much to Vic Del Rosario because you invited them, many of them are here now. And to all of you, all I can say is — long live the young artists! Long live the artists fighting against drugs! Thank you all.

I just came from Sangley Point because there was a graduation for those who studied under the American Drug Enforcement Agency on how to fight drugs in our seas. Because as you saw with Assistant Secretary Caisip, many of our shabu here are imported, coming from other seas, especially now that we have closed many factories in the last three months. And while I was there, I also called Efren Fernandez — he was with you then — I said, “Efren, start the Drug Enforcement Academy. So that we will also have a new generation of those fighting drugs like the young blood of the show business industry who are here today.”

That is why I am happy, I am very pleased that we are gathering today to strengthen our unity against illegal drugs.

Before I became president, the law on illegal drugs was difficult. Because before you can be imprisoned, you need to be caught with two hundred grams of shabu first. One of those who complained to me was Bong’s father, Don Ramon Revilla. That’s why it needed 200 grams of shabu. But there were 1,500 “bigtime pushers” caught but only two of them were imprisoned. Because the others were able to post bail. Because who would carry 200 grams on their body. Most carry less than two hundred grams.

That’s why when I became president, I remembered Don Ramon’s complaint when we were both senators. So when I became president, I lowered the two hundred grams and made it only ten grams of shabu. So now with that amount, you are caught for life.

This fight against drugs remains the primary priority of my administration. Because most crimes are related to drugs. So if you can stop drugs, you can also stop many robberies. If you can stop drugs, you can also stop many rapes. If you can stop drugs, you can also stop many killings.

And when I face children like you, like those children who are less fortunate than you, I remember my granddaughter Mikaela. I don't want it to be the case that when she becomes a teenager, there will still be a lot of drugs around.

And just as much as I love my granddaughter, I think parents love their children just as much. And they are all against illegal drugs. That's why I said earlier, long live the child artists, the youth. Long live the artists who fight against drugs. Parents should also live because they are also against drugs. And I am sure that the parents are united in the desire to suppress the threat of drugs to improve our lives.

And I am also a mother. One of my children is also an artist. And I know the grief of a parent whose child is going astray. And I see many parents, their feelings when their child's future is lost.

So our message is, let us all tell the youth that they should never give in to the temptation of illegal drugs. And I expect you artists to convince the students, children, movie fans not to give in to this temptation. And tell them stories and give warnings that they should always be careful, not just accept anything, such as candy, food or money from people they do not know.

And tell the youth that if they have a classmate or friend who has a bad attitude, suddenly has a bad attitude, or is learning to steal or pickpocket, or is no longer taking care of themselves, or their eyes are always drooping or they seem weak, or they are associating with suspicious people, I hope you give them advice to inform their teachers, parents, authorities.

Because as you know, drug users are often lazy, have no self-confidence, get bored easily, have no interest in studying, have no interest in work, like to blame others, choose groups. This kind of life should not be emulated. And you can tell the youth.

As long as there are drugs in our community, our youth are still not safe. As long as there are those selling illegal drugs, families are still not safe.

So we all have a responsibility. As long as we have influence, we have a responsibility. Artists have a responsibility. We should not allow drugs to destroy the lives of our countrymen, especially the youth.

We’re at war with illegal drugs. And in this war, we need the collective efforts of families, communities, schools and various sectors of our society, including the media and the showbiz industry. As Kuya Germs said, no one gets left behind in this fight against drugs.

I have already told the military, the police, the politicians: no cover-ups! No protection! No one is spared in this fight, everyone involved will be held accountable!

Now I am appealing to and thanking our artists. You are idols of the youth. You are role models for them. When you say that you also avoid this bad vice, your fans will also emulate you.

That’s how strong your influence is on the youth. That’s why I am grateful that you are here and said you will help prevent young minds from being tempted to use illegal drugs.

Our movement aims to influence the youth of the country to stay away from drugs and to help rehabilitate those who have become drug dependents.

When I go to those drug rehabilitation centers, there is a program. Some of the talents there are showbiz personalities that are undergoing therapy. So they are usually the stars of the shows. And I am grateful to them because they are at the center stage of the programs in the rehab centers, they show that it is not shameful to enter rehabilitation. In fact, that is the way they can recover their ruined careers.

And this, our call today, my gratitude to you is part of the many steps we are taking. Like earlier, the training of our enforcers at the drug enforcement agency of America or the establishment of our Drug Enforcement Academy.

Last June, we were at Luneta. That was the program “Batang Iwas Droga” or BIDA. And here, the strength of children is used, not the youth, the children. Those who are too young to use drugs, so that before they are even attracted to it, the problem is suppressed in their batch.

Just a while ago, as I said, I was at Sangley Point, the training. There were fifty-two of them, from different backgrounds, those who enforce the law against crime in our seas. The next one here will be training for land-based law enforcers. But this sea-based one is important because, especially since we closed many factories, drugs are still on the streets. Where do you think they are coming from? Well, they are imported.

That is why I am grateful that today, you told me, you expressed to me your cooperation. And I hope that through you, even other people from the entertainment industry will join this campaign. I need the cooperation of everyone, young artists and young people who are not artists, all the youth. Because the future of our youth is at stake here, so the future of our country is at stake. That is why I thank you for saying that you will not allow our youth to be destroyed.

Thank you, my courage is strengthened and we will fight this for the future.

Thank you very much.

Long live the artists fighting against drugs!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Launching Ceremony of the “Sagip Kabataan sa Droga” (SAKADA). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140723/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7518&Itemid=38