Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During a Dialogue with the 10th ASEAN Business Advisory Council (ASEAN-BAC)

[Delivered at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang, August 13, 2004]

Thank you very much, Secretary Purisima.

Secretary Romulo and other members of the Philippine Cabinet; Mr. Chairman Oudet Souvannavong and the other leaders of the ASEAN Business Advisory Council especially our member, former secretary Jose Concepcion; excellencies of the diplomatic corps; distinguished guests; heads and delegates to the 10th meeting of the ASEAN Business Advisory Council, ladies and gentlemen:

First of all, welcome to the Philippines! And welcome to Malacañang!

Over the period of your existence, you’ve established your group as a key component in our common endeavor to create an integrated and competitive regional economy in ASEAN. Therefore, I welcome this opportunity to dialogue with you as a group and to Joe Concepcion for making this possible, thank you very much.

I thank all of you and I have noted your agenda and I see that you have a full plate beginning with discussions on your two most important accomplishments to date — the ASEAN Business and Investment Summit or ASEAN-BIS and the ASEAN Pioneer Projects Scheme or APPS.

When you have the first ASEAN-BIS last year in Bali, all of us, the region’s heads of state signed the historic Bali II Accord, which set ASEAN’s directions for the future and addressed our collective economic, security and socio-cultural aspirations — the three pillars of ASEAN regional cooperation.

That summit in Bali last year, and the next one to be held in Vientianne when the leaders convene for the 10th ASEAN Summit, will continue to provide the stepping stones for our formidable aspirations — a single market and production base, enveloped in the free flow of goods, service and investment and skilled labor among us, and the freer flow of capital by the year 2020

I’m happy that you are here preparatory to Vientianne because the commitment to ASEAN is a cornerstone of Philippine foreign policy.

We, the ASEAN governments, have the vision, but we can have all the vision we want but it can only be fulfilled depending on you the private sector.

The private sector is the engine of our region’s unprecedented growth. We the governments have the duty to provide the environment for business to thrive but it is you the private sector that carries out the transactions that actually create wealth.

We’re conscious of this. We are conscious of this in pushing ASEAN. We are conscious of this in the face of global and national crisis like, for instance, today the unprecedented increase in the world price of oil.

Let me go to the price of oil. We’re experiencing this in the Philippines, ASEAN is experiencing this, the world is experiencing this. And so, we are on a round the clock alert on consumer prices. We call on all players — and many of them are here — in the supply and distribution chain of goods and services to try to hold off increases, to calibrate these in smaller increments over time while the government spreads out more extensive safety nets for the most affected sectors if they cannot avoid the price increases. The concerned agencies are exercising strict vigilance against profiteers, but we thank the manufacturers and the traders who are exercising restraint in keeping the lid on prices.

Yes, the private sector must be an integral part of meeting the crises of the moment like the oil price increase the world is suffering as it must be an integral part of our long-term strategic aspirations like ASEAN cooperation and even ASEAN decision-making.

The market has always been the foundation of our economic if not political stability and progress. In this environment, the ASEAN leaders created the ASEAN Business Advisory Council or ASEAN-BAC soon after they agreed to establish an ASEAN economic community. As I said earlier while they created the vision and put the government machinery to work to provide the legal and regulatory framework they realized they needed a partner to make things happen on the ground, and that is the business community.

Governments and business must work together to multiply the purchasing power of our peoples and to create jobs at speed.

In the Philippines, on our part, we’ve already identified two focal sectors in which we will advance with regards to ASEAN — agriculture and tourism.

Putting agriculture at the frontline combines the premium of food and jobs. It attacks poverty squarely. Our department of agriculture has already given the ASEAN-BAC a bill of particulars for consideration but in the end, it’s the private business sector that will decide whether you will respond.

Putting tourism beside agriculture is important as a start-off enterprise because people first visit the country in which they later engage in business. Tourism is the midwife of business.

On tourism, we’re already up 30 percent from our arrivals a year ago. Thank you, ASEAN neighbors for visiting the Philippines more. But we are driving more investments into the country under the concept of tourism enterprise zones. If we have industrial estates, we now have I.T. estates, we now have tourism estates. And we are addressing the infrastructure demands and encouraging investments in hotel facilities to promote our tourism hubs namely Metro Manila to Tagaytay, Cebu-Bohol-Siargao, Davao, Cordillera, Clark-Subic, Ilocos and Palawan.

Our regional airports are being internationalized. We are providing more seats for direct flights to the Philippines by way of liberalizing the airline industry. And in this, since 9/11 travel has been more regional than long-haul. Intra-ASEAN travel has been a key to our tourism, it is also a key to integration. The Philippines will continue supporting the common effort to promote ASEAN as a single destination. Those long-hauls will only work if they’re going to go to more than one destination.

But there is more to the apps than agriculture and tourism. Under the APPS, we plan to identify feasible projects for indigenous ASEAN companies that could grow into ASEAN multinational companies. And Secretary Concepcion told me that they’re all set to present the proposals in Laos during the summit.

I look towards that day when we shall enjoy an ASEAN common market, ASEAN brands, and the proud concept of “Made in ASEAN.”

The competitive pressures of globalization have set the pace of economic integration, marked by the establishment of production bases where the cost of doing business is lowest, and outsourcing inputs from countries that can supply them at least cost.

Much of the exports of ASEAN like garments and electronics are intended for markets across the pacific. We can be more competitive if we build a network of industrial zones linked to one another across borders.

Member nations can specialize in their segments of the supply chain and pass on their output to the next stage of production located in neighboring countries.

The Philippines can provide the final link towards the ultimate delivery of consumers across the pacific and along the coasts of Northeast Asia. We offer Clark-Subic as logistics and service centers.

I’m glad that several items in my economic agenda — including making Clark-Subic as the competitive hub of the region – I’m glad that many of them fall squarely into the mold we are creating for regional integration and prosperity.

Our job creation, for instance, our initiatives are dovetailed in the prime attention placed upon SMEs, which is a very ASEAN concept. In this light, our financial institutions are building expertise and experience in retail lending. We can all team up on this effort to uplift and empower the broad masses of our people.

Another field is education where we can share basic commonalities. I encourage the ASEAN-BAC to consider joint ventures in tertiary and especially in the specialized technical education institutions.

Also, in line with our common concern for decentralization of economic growth, I invite ASEAN consortia to participate in ports development and shipping, as well as basic infrastructure services for power and water supply development in the Philippines.

And I’m aware that in the high end of the housing sector, a number of ASEAN firms are offering their products in the market. But we can initiate commercial ventures that will use ASEAN design and ASEAN materials integrated across the region to provide affordable housing to our citizens.

Yes, all of these are examples to show that ASEAN has created and continues to offer opportunities for economic consolidation. And so I look forward to the Philippine business proposals for ASEAN joint venture, ASEAN supply chain arrangements. I look forward to those proposals in Laos. ,I look forward to meeting you all in Laos after a fruitful dialogue here.

Once again, welcome to the Philippines! Welcome to Malacañang! Bon apetit.

And thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during a Dialogue with the 10th ASEAN Business Advisory Council (ASEAN-BAC). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133255/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5691&Itemid=38