Thank you, Secretary Teodoro.

Troop Commander, give “tikas pahinga.”

His Excellency President Ramos and the other former Chiefs-of-Staff of the Armed Forces; General Yano and the other officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; Archbishop Tumulak and our other friends of the Armed Forces from the civilian sector; members of the Diplomatic Corps; the family of 2nd Lt. Gutleng and the family of the other soldiers who gave their lives in defense of our nation; Sergeant Villar and the other combatants who have been awarded for their heroism during this past year; CAFGU Cabarles and the others who were wounded, whether soldiers or CAFGU, during the times when our country needed to suppress [rebellion]; Don Emilio Yap and our other civilian awardees, thank you for your support to our soldiers; General Rommel Gomez and the other officers who have received awards for your exemplary leadership of our combat troops; our Presidential citation recipients, congratulations also for your distinguished service in your last assignments!

Men and women of the Armed Forces, Happy Anniversary to us all!

Another year marks the gallanty of the Filipino soldier performing the duty to advance peace, freedom, development and human security.

Our soldiers are expected by the Filipino people to stop the threat of terrorists and the disruption of communist rebels, and to bring peace to Mindanao. The communist guerilla fronts have dropped to 63 from 107 in 2005. This year alone, our troops neutralized 15 of the most notorious communist insurgents, 58 Abu Sayyaf and Al Khobar operations and three foreign terrorists. Congratulations to all our soldiers!

And we congratulate our incumbent officers among the medalists of valor because by their leadership they had inspired many of these acts of valor in the battlefield. Soldiers are also the first we call during disasters caused by storms, floods, and other calamities. When the small-scale miners were trapped in Benguet, we had an awardee from that incident. When the ship Princess of the Stars sank in Romblon. During the height of Typhoon Frank. When there was a typhoid outbreak in several towns of Quezon province and also in the repair of roads, bridges and schools. And in helping families affected by storms and unrest in Mindanao. Thank you to all our soldiers.

I will give my command guidance during our command conference on January 8th. For today, we focus on aspirations rather than orders. Peace is the only path for Mindanao and the nation. I was so glad to hear Genral Yano saying that our soldiers are not really fond of fighting, they want to have peace because war is never the final answer. We are committed to peace and restarting the peace process. And in order to do that, we count on our Armed Forces to bring stability to the island, to regain order, to bring the lawless renegade elements to justice. This is the way we can be confident that responsible elements regain control of the MILF so that we can effectively reactivate the peace process again in earnest. The peace process must proceed. And we are assembling the pieces to get the peace process started again in a way that upholds our commitment to peace, to the strong sentiments of the communities, and to the rule of law.

The key to resolving peace in Mindanao is for all sides to be committed to peace, progress and prosperity. This includes reaching out to all sides and hearing the voices in the communities. We must all be willing to put ourselves in each other’s shoes and understand various points of views and be willing to give and take to bring permanent peace to the island. And that is the way that we can promote democracy and a strong republic.

We always support efforts to strengthen democracy. But we are not focused on politics. And I thank General Yano, and I congratulate the Armed Forces, that as General Yano says, “the enemy has been slain, the enemy that is called politics in the Armed Forces.” Congratulations for that!

Our priority is implementing the pro-poor and economic reform agendas that have given our country the strongest and most resilient economy in decades. This is a time when our nation’s leaderhip must give all its attention to managing the impact of the global crisis so that it does not become a Philippine crisis. The national leadership’s attention must not be on politics but on the economy with our soldiers taking care of security in the background.

There is indeed a global economic crisis, but fortunately through a mix of careful planning, economic reforms and the hard work of many people, we have thus far prevented the global crisis from becoming a Philippine crisis.

Two-thirds of the globe is now in recession, but not the Philippines, which is growing 4.6 percent after growing 7.2 percent last year. The Bank of New York Mellon says, “The Philippines is inherently strong, a potential beneficiary of the financial woes.”

JP Morgan says, “The Philippines is in a relatively strong position to weather the global downturn with the economy driven by private consumption and services, which are less vulnerable to external shocks.”

Congratulations to all the Filipino people!

The fact that we have avoided the crisis that is plaguing the rest of the world is a testament to the tough choices we made several years ago. Economic reform has been at the center of my presidency. It is because we took the politically unpopular decision to raise unprecedented new revenue that we have been able to generate additional resources and invest in physical and human infrastructure: roads, bridges and ports — many of which were built by our soliders; expanded access to healthcare, including improved military hospitals; education and social services, including more housing for our soldiers and their families. And on top of all these the upgrading of our defense capabilities, including new helicopters, Squad Automatic Weapons, inflatable boats and other facilities and equipment. Upgrading will continue, particularly in training. We will make the Philippine Defense Reform work to stop the insurgency by 2010.

As part of the Philippine Defense Reform, and in gratitude for the heroism of the AFP, last year, at your request, the subsistence pay was increased and the hazard pay of our soldiers was doubled. And this year, your base pay was also increased.

This is a small way to convey to you the immense gratitude of the Filipino people. Our celebration of Armed Forces Day is always held a few days before Christmas. So this Christmas, let us all count our blessings and look to the future with greater hope, confidence and optimism. And because of the very good service of our Filipino soldiers, we expect this coming Christmas to be even more peaceful and for everything our Filipino soldiers do for the people to be even more meaningful.

To all of you once again, Happy Anniversary! Merry Christmas! and thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). Speech of President Arroyo at the 73rd Anniversary of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134530/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=17051&Itemid=38