Thank you very much, Executive Director Vic Badoy, our friend from Cotabato City and Executive Director of the National Historical Institute.

Manila Mayor Lito Atienza; Hey, the ladies are here too; Vice Mayor Lacuna and the various members of the city council; members of the cabinet: Metro Manila Chairman Bayani Fernando, and Secretary Luis Lorenzo of the DA, and Undersecretary Chito Brilliantes, representing the Department of Foreign Affairs, Evelyn Pantig who is not only Undersecretary of Tourism but is also the Chairman of the National Commission on Culture and the Arts; Excellencies of the diplomatic corps; chairman Noli Barcelona of the Postal Corporation who provided those commemorative stamps that are being issued today; members of the religious; the caretakers of the Mabini Shrine headed by the Curator Azucena Fido; the Inter-Agency Organizing Committee of the Death Centenary of Apolinario Mabini; officers of the military and the police led by General Narciso Abaya and Deputy Director General Edgar Aglipay; I would like to greet the descendants of the heroes of the freedom war represented here by Mr. Roy Daza on stage; friends, teachers, barangay leaders; students:

Our country unites today on the centennial of the death of our great hero, Apolinario Mabini.

Mabini is one of the most intelligent and famous heroes we have, even though he had a disability. He is considered part of our historical and cultural heritage.

He was born poor — there’s that nipa hut. That is a replica of the nipa hut where he was born — but he became one of the most significant leaders of the Philippine revolution.

He became a lawyer, he supported his studies through various jobs in different branches of the court. He served in the Aguinaldo Cabinet as President of the Council of Secretaries and as Secretary of Foreign Affairs. In other words, in Aguinaldo’s presidency he was the Bert Romulo and the Blas Ople combined.

And in his work as Executive Secretary, he created the first municipalities, provinces, courts, and police of the First Republic of the Philippines.

From his brilliant mind came the program Constitucional De La Republica Filipina, which became the main source of the first Constitution of the Philippines. He also wrote El Verdadero Decalogo or “The True Decalogue” which formed the moral and political principles of the First Republic.

During the time of the Americans, Mabini was exiled to Guam. Not long after he returned home, he died at the age of thirty-nine. So our heroes were very young during that time. So our youth here today have so much to do for our country before you become 40 years old.

And Mabini is called the Conscience and Brains of the Revolution. He was known as the Brains of the Revolution.

As we honor Mabini today, we also honor all current Filipinos who are helping to shape — oh, let me also greet… I saw earlier Congressman Zialcita. Thank you, yes. He doesn’t belong to the City of Manila but thank you to the Congressman of Parañaque for honoring the memory of Apolinario Mabini by being with us. I remembered your joke, Ed I remembered that when I was talking about our modern day heroes. Anyway, when we give honor to Apolinario Mabini we also give honor to the current heroes, exemplary citizens who are doing a lot to shape a peaceful, dignified and progressive future for our country.

For example, in the midst of our fight against the dreaded disease, we remember the health workers who are facing it in our country and abroad. What the firefighters and the New York police were in 9-11 our health workers are the hero in the battle against SARS. Not only in the Philippines but in Hong Kong, Singapore and wherever we have health workers all over the world. They are our heroes of these days. So when we honor Apolinario Mabini let us also honor our health workers who are very skilled and compassionate.

Because of them, so far, we are winning the fight against SARS. Every Filipino must continue to take responsibility for the health and welfare of the entire national community. Everybody has a stake in making the Philippines SARS free.

When we remember Mabini’s heroism, we also remember the various other heroes who are fighting now. Not only fighting against SARS, but also fighting against other threats such as terrorism. In the midst of our fight against terrorism, we remember the citizens in our remote communities who are standing alert.

Yesterday, in Siocon, I gave the highest award that can be given by the president to a police officer, the Medal of Valor. Because they strengthened their defense of the town of Siocon against the terrorists. So we gave the Chief of Police of Siocon the Medal of Valor.

The government is nearing a decision point on whether to declare the MILF a terrorist organization, and to take the necessary operational and diplomatic measures to strengthen this prospective policy. We are holding this decision in abeyance upon the recommendation of the Cabinet Oversight Committee on International Security. We will talk to our friends who want peace in our country, especially in the southern part of our country. We will be meeting there at a conference in the coming weeks. There will be a forthcoming OIC conference of foreign ministers to be held toward the end of this month. And even as we fight terrorism together, we want to thank our foreign friends especially Malaysia, whose ambassador is here and I gave him our thanks today for continuing to patiently help the Philippines achieve principled peace here in Mindanao.

Meanwhile, the security of our civilian communities is of our utmost concern. Punitive actions will continue and the peace talks remain suspended. We will treat those who attack civilians as plain terrorists.

As I said yesterday, in Koronadal, time is running out for the MILF to prove its sincerity in the peace process. It must cut the double talk and make a clear statement on whether it is allied with the Abu Sayyaf and foreign terrorist groups such as the Jemaah Islamiyah or Al Qaeda, or unequivocally reject them.

The MILF can no longer hide behind a veil of legitimacy under the growing suspicion that it is involved in the entire web of terrorism, domestically and regionally.

Therefore, in these times, a hundred years after Apolinario Mabini died, we have many threats, threats to the health of our country. Threats to unity under our constitution, where the first constitution was drafted by Apolinario Mabini.

Therefore, on the day we give him our tribute, 100 years after his death, let us fight for the principles he fought for, the principles he built as the brain of our revolution. Especially our youth, many of whom are here, students, girl scouts, boy scouts. Apolinario Mabini was the youth of our country during his time, you can have a model for your actions for the good of our country.

Again, to all those who benefit from the freedom built by the spirit and fought for by Apolinario Mabini and other heroes of our country. Let us remember the memory of Apolinario Mabini and let us live by the ideals of the brains of the Philippine revolution.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Commemorative Rites on the Death Centenary of Apolinario Mabini. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412201316/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6320&Itemid=38