Thank you, Secretary Alabastro for your introduction. And thank you for helping me so much make Science and Technology the foundation of Philippine Economic Development.

Fernando Zobel de Ayala, Jimmy Ayala and the other officials of the Ayala Land; Dr. Roman, CHED Chair Angeles and the other members of the Board of Regents and the whole U.P. family; Mayor Belmonte; our Congresspersons from Quezon City: Nanette Daza and Annie Susano; Vice-Mayor Herbert Bautista and everybody from Quezon City, to all of you, congratulations!

The U.P.–Ayala Land Techno Hub is one giant step to bring our country closer to the goal we declared in 2001 of making technology the foundation of our economic development. This is an important step together with the three billion pesos that the government is investing, has been investing in R&D manpower development, and the one billion pesos that was mentioned by President Roman that we put in the national budget for U.P. to build its own Science and Technology Complex.

And now here we are, we have the S&T Park of the U.P., with the Techno Hub as indeed its hub. And as Jim Ayala said, we can now create our own version of Stanford University’s Silicon Valley and MIT’s Route 128, the birthplace of so much research that has changed lives and lifestyles. The numerous applications of the research from these two cradles of modern technology today define the way people all over the world do business, work and spend their leisure. And we hope this U.P. -Ayala Techno Park will do the same. With this Science and Technology Park, of which this hub is a central portion, we hope that U.P., the country’s premier academic institution, will ignite a new technological revolution that will upgrade our total science and technology capability and bring our country to the threshold of the first-world in 20 years.

This Park will serve as our country’s foremost IT laboratory, training ground and incubator of new and high value-adding products and services. Together with the Science and Technology Complex and the Science and Technology Park, it will provide the nurturing environment for new IT-based businesses that transform new technologies into useful and commercially viable services.

We must make sure that it has the physical infrastructure to support the academic, scientific and technological pursuits of noted U.P.-based specialists. And as Jim said earlier, this community-like environment, campus-like environment will strengthen the synergy between the academics in R&D and the technology-based entrepreneurs. The closeness to U.P. will offer the academics a better appreciation of the needs and risks of businesses, and the entrepreneurs located so close to U.P. here in the hub and in the entire Science and Technology Park will give the entrepreneurs valuable information about R&D.

As the pioneer academically-based IT Park, U.P.- Ayala Land Techno Hub plays a central role in the future of the bigger U.P. Science and Technology Park.

Techno Hub will set the standard against which future S&T Parks and locators will be measured. And that is the same for the country as a whole. Even in the face of new challenges brought about by the financial asset meltdown and the deepening recession abroad, our priority projects such as technology and R&D development will continue.

We all know, that there is a global economic crisis that has been responsible for driving up the prices of food, fuel and rice in the Philippines and around the world. In the country, we are not in crisis, thank God. But, we are facing strong challenges like all other countries. During these troubled times, it is the role of the government to help insulate the Filipino people from these price shocks and economic pressure. That is why the government is doing everything in its power to put food on the table, and protect the paycheck from high prices and inflation. And one way by which we are protecting the U.P.’s paycheck is to increase the paycheck. That is why we have exempted you from salary standardization and we’ve also given (applause) the power to the Board of Regents to increase your salaries. We are also continuing to invest not only in education like U.P. but in the nation’s system of healthcare and social services.

Were it not for the painful reforms of the past seven years — and we thank our Congresspersons for helping much make those fiscal reforms — the impact on our country of the global meltdown would be much worst as it is in many other developing countries. Instead, the credit rating agency Standard & Poor says that, “the Philippine economy– in a very stormy sea of economic global uncertainty, the Philippine economy is an island of relative calm.” (Applause) But this relative strength and resilience of our people and our economy is still no consolation to the average Filipino who is paying higher prices for basic commodities. We are very aware of the pressures the average Filipino faces from high prices and high rates of inflation. We know the average Filipino is concerned about job security and the buying power of his wages. We are also concerned. That is why we are working hard to keep the prices of rice, food and fuel down and to continue to increase the number of jobs and the investments that will continue to generate employment opportunities for more of our countrymen.

What we are inaugurating today is one of those investments. We are dealing with the effects of the worldwide financial crisis through a comprehensive program that creates emergency jobs through pump priming measures, ensures food on every table, delivers targeted relief to the most vulnerable sectors, and encourages investments like this in industries with high resistance to the economic crisis.

Right now, the ICT sector is one of the areas where growth is robust, employment generation is on the rise, and investors are excited and placing money to back up that excitement.

Yesterday, we were very alarmed to read the news that one of the call centers supposedly laid off 700 workers. So we checked with that center, ACS, and they totally denied it. In fact, they are looking for more workers. And they were even telling us the story that when other call centers like Teletech and others read the news, they called up ACS and said, where are the workers you’re laying off, we want to absorb them right away. But ACS says we’re not laying off anyone. We’re looking for more.

And so because of this robustness of ICT, I have instructed the Commission on ICT to make a technical study on the resources needed to transform not just Sonny Belmonte’s hub but also every province in the country not necessarily a hub like this but to be an ICT-enabler.

After completing the technical studies, the national government through the CICT, shall guide the LGUs concerned on how to pursue the technology programs with these twin objectives:

1. Develop a technology hub — a small one, not one like this – in each of the country’s provinces with the hub capable of hosting, at the very least, contact center operations; and

2. Expand the capabilities of provinces that are already currently ICT-enablers so that they can increase their absorptive capacities and expand into hardcore ICT operations.

The national government will merely provide guidance and advice on a menu of pathways and strategies towards these objectives. It will be the LGU leaders who will decide on the level of technology and development they want; each to its own need. And Sonny has decided that this city will have the highest level of ICT; each to his own need. And this is what we can do, given that we have not been able to put together a national broadband. This is a good second best.

In the ICT jargon, we need to “wire” the entire country to attract more BPO and hardcore technology companies and help train young Filipinos into world-class workers in programming, embedded technologies and network engineering.

There is a wealth of technical and created talent from where to draw this world-class pool of technology workers and there is the U.P. Science and Technology Complex to develop their potentials.

Let us direct the talent of the young away from hacking and other disruptive undertakings into productive ones. The CICT can utilize the National Computer Center and seek the support of state colleges and universities specializing on courses in ICT, like the U.P. We cannot let this window of opportunity close.

Technology has also helped the government make sure that we now have a solid supply of rice for the foreseeable future. Furthermore, we are happy that distribution of rice is working. The people are getting the rice they need.

Our farmers are getting the investments they need. Instead of buying only 30,000 metric tons of rice from our farmers as before, this harvest season government is buying one million metric tons. This should encourage rice production to go up. With this, inflation has started to come down. The price of rice together with fuel has come down. And we expect the earning power of U.P. employees and others’ paychecks to increase. We want to harness the wonders of technology to produce more food, create more jobs — as what will be created here — and improve our productivity. The U.P.-Ayala Techno Hub and the whole S&T Park and the U.P. S&T Complex will help achieve all these objectives.

So, I thank Ayala Land. I thank the early locators, who are already here, sounds like a nice place to spend an afternoon having coffee and spaghetti here. I thank you all for your continuing faith in the nation’s ability to stand up to any challenge.

Our people are as optimistic as you, and as eager to work harder to get our country back on the growth track.

This afternoon, we leave for the APEC Leaders Meeting in Peru. We are optimistic as we leave about our future and the hope, optimism and resilience of the Filipino people, because we are revitalized by what we see here.

We will express to the other leaders of APEC the hope of our people that in seeking common ground on ways to coordinate assistance to our economies, we must do so in a way that puts the interests of the poor and the dispossessed ahead of the rich and the powerful.

As we inaugurate a symbol of a new age of technology in the Philippines, let us continue to be hopeful that the global storm will soon subside.

Let us wish the whole world the best. And here within our country, let us resolve to work even harder to keep our economy resilient.

To Ayala Land and U.P. for your contribution to these important goals, congratulations and thank you. (Applause)

Pursuant to the provisions of Republic Act No. 8189, otherwise known as the Government Procurement Reform Act, and its Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR), the [Name of Procuring Entity] through its Bids and Awards Committee (BAC) is conducting a Public Bidding for the procurement of [Project Name].

The BAC invites all interested Filipino citizens, or juridical entities with at least sixty percent (60%) ownership interest belonging to Filipino citizens, to participate in the said public bidding. The details of the project are as follows:

1. Project Name: [Project Name]
2. Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC): [Amount]
3. Contract Duration: [Duration]
4. Source of Funds: [Source of Funds]
5. Location of the Project: [Location]

Prospective bidders may obtain further information and download the Bidding Documents from the [Website Address] starting [Date]. A pre-bid conference shall be held on [Date] at [Time] at [Location].

All bids must be submitted on or before [Date] at [Time] to the BAC Secretariat at [Address]. Late bids shall not be accepted. 

For further inquiries, please contact [Name] at [Contact Number] or email at [Email Address].

Ang BAC ay nagpapahayag na ang lahat ng dokumento ay dapat isumite sa tamang format at kumpleto. Ang mga bid na hindi sumusunod sa mga requirements ay hindi tatanggapin.

The [Name of Procuring Entity] reserves the right to accept or reject any bid, to annul the bidding process, and to reject all bids at any time prior to bid award, without thereby incurring any liability to the affected bidders.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the Inauguration of U.P.-Ayala Land Techno Hub. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134635/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=9493&Itemid=38