Masayang pamagdiwang ning sentenaryu Pampanga king High School.

Malapit ya king pusu ku ing PHS uli na ning ing kanakung tatang, i Presidenti Diosdado Macapagal, kabilang ya king Batch 1929 na niting eskuwelahang iti.

In 1925 when he was 15, he was chosen class valedictorian in Lubao Elementary School.

The nearest high school was in San Fernando, some 40 kilometers from Lubao.

For the children’s sake, his mother moved the entire family to San Fernando. She rented a nipa house in San Fernando and accepted boarders in order to meet their our living expenses.

Pampanga High School opened a completely new world for my father. For one thing, education, which until then had been a chore, though an easy chore, began to be a pleasure. He started to make friends who would remain with him for life, even as far as Malacanang. One of them recalled, “He borrowed textbooks because he could not afford to buy them. Ten minutes before class he would ask a classmate for a textbook and stand under the shade of an acacia tree skimming it. Then, to the astonishment of everyone, he always knew the lesson.”

His four years of stint in the secondary courses were spiced with memorable events. He did his best to rank among those at the head of his class from school year to school year, to show his undying gratitude to his mother.

My father’s experience reflects that of many Filipino families. Education is a core value of Philippine society and family life. The hard working men and women of this nation put their family first. The best gift any family can give to a child is access to a good education.

Education is the foundation of economic prosperity and individual liberty, justice and self worth.

Ding eskuwelahan ila ding pangadwang bale na ning metung a anak, inya pin yang metung a maragul a panibatan na ring mayap a bage a dadala na king mabilug nang bie.

Deting bage deni ilang pigkalub ning PHS karing keyang estudyante king kilub na ning metung a siglo.

Ngening aldo iti, pagdiwang taya ing metung a siglo ning tradisyun ning PHS king academic excellence ampong de-kalidad at relevant a edukasyon a bibie na karing kekatamung kabalen a kayanakan ban saupan lang magsadya para karing pagsubuk king karelang panahun at maka-ambag la king kekatamung pagnasan a bawasan in kasakitan.

We are making real progress in alleviating poverty. The rate of poverty is down, both objective measures and self-rated poverty. Employment is up. Our education and healthcare services to the poor vastly improved. Only through a strong economy can we improve the plight of the poor. To that end, we have turned the corner on our economy.

Today the Philippines is on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. Investments are pouring in, the peso is strong, our stock market has reached historic heights and we have created 7 million jobs in seven years.

For the first time in a generation, we are investing heavily in human and physical infrastructure. Roads, bridges and airports as well as new school buildings and scholarships are the central building blocks that are necessary for our long term prospects.

Later today we will ground-break new classrooms in Mexico, part of the 10,000 classrooms we will build this year.

King Pampanga High, binie na ning gubyerno ding rehabilitation na ning Gabaldon Building, Elevated Drainage System, Dama de Noche Building at ing Diosdado Macapagal Inner Court.

Kinimut tamu ban pasikanan ing kalidad ning edukasyon king elementarya ampong High School.

Sasaupan tala ding estudyante king high school a maki-agape la king panahun na ning internet kapamilatan na ning pamalage ning computer linkage balang metung a public high school. Atin na ba king Pampanga High School?

Makanyan mu naman, ban ta lang adinan tsansa ding pakakalulung estudyante king high school a makapag-kolehiyo, digdagan ta la ding scholarship para king kolehiyo at pesikanan ta ya ing ladderized system, para karing vocational/technical students a magnasang manikwang diploma king kolehiyo.

Teachers are the backbone of our educational system. Without these selfless men and women, our children would fall short of their dreams and aspirations. We are deeply indebted to the hard work and dedication of all our teachers. Their work is noble and patriotic. They deserve the praise and respect of every Filipino.

Therefore, we collected approximately 53,000 records from 2002 to 2007.

Teachers received additional compensation in 2006 and a 10% salary increase in 2007.

Unlike in previous Administrations, teachers now share the increasing bonus that other national government workers receive. Teachers received a P10,000 bonus in 2007.

Teachers are included in the salary increase provided in our Administration bill for a new third round of salary standardization. Let’s ask our Capangpangan Congressmen to author the bill.

Pasibayu, congratulations king Pampanga High School, king kekayung pamagdiwang king kekayung sentenaryu. Pupugayan da ko king pamanyiguru yu king kinabukasan kapamilatan na ning pamag-tuun yung pansin king panyulung da ding kekatamung peka-maulagang yaman – ding kayanakan.

Dakal a salamat.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). Speech of President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo during the Sentenaryu: 100th Year Celebration of Pampanga High School. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123517/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=995&Itemid=38