COMMUNICATING THE GOOD NEWS AND BRIDGING THE DIFFICULTIES

I am very happy to see so many of you here. And I am happy because the theme you have chosen is very fitting and beautiful and perfectly suited to the intense change of the times.

It is not easy to shape a single basis for the proper assessment of vigorous and honest governance. But you are doing many things that are difficult.

Our country’s leadership from top to bottom must be driven to excel, and I thank you for your wanting to excel. For wanting to put country first before self to galvanize a nation in search of more jobs, electricity, clean water, education for all. The things you have in your program that are in line with my ten-point program.

I need you for this ten-point program. You stand in the frontline of service. But not only that, you stand in the frontline of compassion. And I know of the great sacrifices that many of you have had to endure to help the needy and provide counsel to those in need of counsel.

You are also the vanguards of vigilance. The Bicutan incident is a lesson of sustained vigilance for all our people. And that must be under your leadership.

We must be prepared to fight evil, not only with intelligence work, not only with enforcement, but also with our moral ill to uphold what’s good and right.

Therefore, I not only expect you to report when there is a suspicious terrorist in your area, I expect you to report to the Presidential Anti-Graft Commission government personnel residing in your barangays who act and spend as if they were Bill Gates, the so-called richest man in the world. And so, we expect you to report things to Malacañang about these things. But we also hope that you will speak for Malacañang or the things that we need to communicate.

We must reach out to the people to make them understand accept and support the programs of government and unite behind activities to transform our society.

I ask you, tell our people that we’re doing our best to diminish the impact of rising prices by creating new high-wage jobs, attracting investments, and bringing overall economic stability to the nation. I count on you to tell our people that we’re cutting wasteful government programs and limiting expenditures to necessary investments for infrastructure and people. And I count on you to tell them that under the leadership of vice president Noli de Castro, we’re also taking action to protect consumer rights, expand spot checks against price gouging, and that we will undertake new conservation measures and provide tax incentives to employers to kelp their employees with transportation costs.

The other day, I was in Siquijor, the barangay captains who are here and they were with me then. And I when I was driving around the island with Governor Fua, he was telling me, “I think we need a new gasoline station here to compete with the one Petron dealer because he is charging us so much.” So I called up the chairman of Petron, when I was in the car, and I told the chairman, “I’m going to look for a dealer to rival your dealer because he’s charging such a high price for gasoline.” And the chairman of Petron said, “but that cannot be, because even if there’s one or there are ten or a hundred, there is a prescribed price that they can charge. So, I will check on that.” And sure enough, I saw him the chairman, today — oh, yesterday — and he said, “you’re right, he was overcharging against the rules.” So, it’s very important that we have these checks because there are those who abuse if we are not vigilant. And I count on the barangay captains to be vigilant about those things.

The fact that you have tailored the resolutions you’re giving me to the Ten-Point Agenda means that you are quite familiar with the acronym “BEAT THE ODDS” representing the ten specific points in our program of action: B for balanced budget, that’s why we need taxes; E for education for all; A for automated elections; T for transport and digital infrastructure. And then the next T for terminating the conflict with the MILF and the NPA; H for healing the wounds of EDSA; E electricity and water. O opportunities for 10 million jobs, and DS for developing Subic-Clark

Within that ten-point vision which is for 6 years of my term, I would like to use the next 2 or 3 years to prioritize three parts of the pro-poor agenda: firs, education — upgrading teaching standards in English, science and math; second, food production — so, we can lower the cost of food, beginning with rice and corn and then fisheries; and third, infrastructure — particularly those that support food production.

The overall framework therefore for pursuing our ten-point vision is as follows:

Phase one — fiscal reforms: during the first 12 to 18 months of our current term, focus on passing revenue measures, plugging corruption leakages, and rationalizing the power sector.

Phase two — upgrade educational standards and lower the cost of food. We will prioritize this during the middle 2nd and 3rd years of my term. So, we focus on education, food production and infrastructure.

And then phase three — achieve a critical mass of success with the rest of the Ten-Point Agenda during the second part of my term, building on the foundation provided by the earlier phases.

Our Ten-Point pro-poor Agenda is backed up now by a national budget that was passed by Congress in a singular act of statesmanship, and which I signed today.

The passage of the 2005 budget is a milestone in turning around the economy and providing real investments in the lives of the average Filipinos in your constituencies. The budget will accelerate the implementation of our ten-point program of action including our pro-poor agenda. Most importantly, the budget will begin to help create 6 to 10 million jobs with higher wages in the next 6 years. And it will fund the pro-poor agenda including more money for micro, small and middle class entrepreneurs, clean water and electricity for the entire country, better access to health care, a school in every barangay and computer linkage in every high school.

You will be at the vanguard of implementation, that’s why I thank you, all of you for your resolutions that are a parallel to my Ten-Point Agenda. Our national agencies and local Governments cannot move without your leadership and support. For this reason, I’m reiterating my support to the kill to postpone the barangay elections.

In return, I ask you what I asked you earlier, I expect you to be informed and tell the people where assistance for the ten-point program can be availed of. And I expect that when someone approaches you and asks why the value-added tax is important to the economy, we are prepared to answer it.

You must be prepared to communicate the good news to our people and help them bridge their difficulties as we work forward to broaden the impact of reforms.

We have long left the train station of empty promises. We are now on a long and difficult journey to full economic freedom. We shall not let our guard down. We shall prevail in every battle for peace and economic freedom. And in every battle, in every victory, let me assure you the barangays will never he left behind.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: Adamson University Library