Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the mass oath-taking and celebration of the 7th anniversary of the Volunteers Against Crime and Corruption (VACC).

Thank you very much, Ka Lauro for introducing me. You’re already in the province now. Your aura is very different.

I greet our VACC leaders today. The one who started the VACC, Dante Jimenez. Congratulations! And belated happy birthday; Captain Martin Diño, the president of VACC now. Captain Diño and I have known each other for a long time, since Baby Echegaray, and now thank you for bringing our fight against drugs to the barangays; Merly San Pedro, Secretary General of VACC; our officials who are here today, especially those who received awards; other guests who are taking their oath of office with our induction and we will be having our photographs later on. But I’m glad that you are here because this is very much related to your concern fighting against crime; General Lomibao and the other awardees; ladies and gentlemen:

First of all, happy anniversary to VACC! Congratulations! For your good work.

You are one of the most believed… Believed groups in what we call the community pillar in the fight against crime, congratulations! Congratulations! For your good work.

Almost everyone sees your monitoring of the other four pillars against crime. Is this correct, General Wycoco? The police, the prosecutors, the courts and the prisoners. You are partners with the police, and thank you for the award you gave to General Lomibao, congratulations! General Wycoco’s, on the other hand, is part of the prosecution, right? Because of the investigation.

Today, because you are involved in monitoring the police, let us encourage the police to further improve their work against crime.

Thank you for what you said, Captain and Dante, for what we have accomplished together, simultaneously, guiding each other against crime. You mentioned the size of our accomplishments against drugs. Captain Diño was saying that before, shabu only cost 100 pesos. Now, it’s 250. So, times two-and-a-half. That means, proportionately, the problem of drugs in our country is less than half, and congratulations! For our partnership of the five pillars of crime prevention and destruction, especially the contribution of VACC in this fight.

Now, I noticed, Secretary Angie Reyes and I discussed, that—because of course, we monitor the figures on crime—there is another increase in crimes. I asked Dante, what crimes are increasing? It’s not drugs because if the price of drugs is times two-and-a-half, that’s not what’s increasing. Jueteng, illegal gambling, has been almost zero until now, since a few months ago when I instructed, previously, I instructed General Lomibao to fight it. The longest period in any administration where illegal gambling is almost zero. This is happening now.

And I reiterate my instruction to our police—let us continue and prevent the resurgence of this illegal gambling.

So, what crimes are increasing? According to Dante, these are robberies. A little kidnapping. These are what we call economic crimes. This is probably included because of our economy, the problem coming especially from the increase in oil prices around the world. Imagine, a year and a half ago, the price of crude oil was 30 dollars per barrel. Now, it’s 65 dollars per barrel. So, it’s more than double in two years, so of course, because we are import-dependent on crude oil, products that use crude oil and transportation become expensive. That’s why it’s important, very important, if we fight crime, we have programs to alleviate the problem of rising oil prices around the world.

That’s why I’m instructing the department of energy, their energy conservation program and energy independence program. In energy independence, for example, yesterday I went to a gasoline station—one of half a dozen new ones or maybe eight new ones—that uses bio-diesel. If you put one percent of bio-diesel in the gasoline you load, ten percent of the trip is extended, so it saves.

Now, some independents are already using this. The oil majors are not yet ready to use it in their pumping stations. But consumers, you can buy a bottle of bio-diesel and you can put it in yourself. For every 100 liters of fuel you load, put one liter of this bio-diesel, and your trip will be extended by ten percent so you can save almost 120 pesos per full tank.

That’s one of the conservation measures that we should promote. I’m also telling the DOE to campaign in institutions, both government and private sector, because large companies have high electricity costs. There are many ways to be able to save. First, using fluorescent instead of incandescent. Here in Malacañang, I’m thinking about how we can do that. We have chandeliers in public areas but maybe in working areas we can do things… We have few ceremonial halls, more working areas. Hopefully this will happen in government offices and private sector offices.

And others, Secretary Lotilla says there’s a capacitor. Install a capacitor in offices to also reduce our electric bill. And the ethanol plant, we are still pushing for that. And coming soon, the compressed natural gas station from abroad will be dismantled there and put here, from Brazil I think because Brazil uses a lot of—oh, no. It’s an ethanol plant—the compressed natural gas so those are what we use to become independent or at least partially independent from the high price of crude oil.

So these things are connected to the increase in oil prices and therefore to the increase in the prices of goods and to crime, especially theft.

That… Because the price of crude oil has increased worldwide, the price of fertilizer is also increasing and therefore our agricultural products — right, Tetchie? — are in danger of increasing. Increasing too much… I am not content with the movement of rice prices. We need to avoid this or find relief. And one thing we are doing is that because the increase in the price of rice is also largely due to the increase in the price of fertilizer, I have authorized Secretary Panganiban to release several hundred million [pesos] for a massive distribution of organic fertilizer to reduce our dependence on oil-based fertilizer. This is to provide relief from the hardship of the people due to the increase in oil prices worldwide and thus lessen their temptation to resort to theft.

Now, let's move on to enforcement regarding that. I instructed Secretary Angie Reyes — we remember she stopped the kidnapping in our country — to call a command conference regarding the return of crime in our society. And we must do that because we need to suppress street crime, kidnapping, robbery again, and continue the fight against drugs and illegal gambling.

Especially regarding illegal gambling, it's there, General Lomibao, Mayor Edward Hagedorn, whom I asked to lead this crusade because the primary responsibility to fight illegal gambling, right? according to the local government code, is the local government unit, which is under the oversight of the secretary of local government.

This VACC of ours is one of the most credible organizations in our community pillar. You monitor the police — thank you for the outstanding policemen award that is outstanding according to your monitoring — you monitor the prosecutors and the Department of Justice, where General Wycoco is also an awardee. And you are right about what you said, since you became an organization in 1988 — isn't it because of the crime against Dante's brother and Lauro's son? — you have contributed in no small way to speeding up the investigation, prosecution and trial of 82 cases, 75 of them have resulted in conviction. The VACC's success rate is 92 percent.

We discussed the Department of Justice. I hope the VACC will help the Department of Justice with my latest instruction to Secretary of Justice Raul Gonzalez to look into the cases of minors in prison, the ones that appeared on international television. We cannot say that we cannot do anything about that. We can do something, so I hope the VACC, DOJ and other agencies will work together to give more justice to these minor offenders or juvenile delinquents, whose… The way our society treats them is in accordance with our laws and the laws of the whole world. Because there are so many crimes happening. Many have been reduced: drugs, kidnapping — although it's coming back but still less than before — illegal gambling.

One more thing we need to watch out for is terrorism. As president of the Philippines, I tirelessly write to other heads of government who are expressing condolences for terrorist attacks against them. And we had another one in Zamboanga. Congratulations! General Lomibao, three of those who carried out this bombing have been arrested by you. Congratulations! On your accomplishments.

I hope the VACC will also help the police with monitoring terrorists. Because terrorists are strangers who will suddenly appear in your community. If you have strangers in your barangay, you need to inform our police.

Police, community pillar, prosecution. Congratulations! To our prosecutors, some of whom are now judges. Congratulations! On your…

So, community to prevent crime. Police to catch the criminals. Prosecution and DOJ for speedy prosecution. And evidence is very important. That's why I'm happy that… Our state prosecutors, our prosecutors have been given an award. I am happy that General Wycoco has also been given an award as an outstanding investigator.

So, community, police, prosecution, the judiciary. Thank you to our outstanding judges who were given awards or recognition today. Of course, as the executive, we cannot order the justice system or the courts. But you, as a citizens group, can order them, not the executive. So the VACC and the community pillar have a very big role to play in ensuring that these cases move quickly in the courts. And I congratulate you for what you have done.

And fifthly, our correctional system, our prisoners. And as I said, the place in prison should be for adults who have committed crimes. In fact, I want the elderly to be given pardon when they are old. In fact, that's what I said before to — just remind Atty. Acosta of the Parole Board — that hopefully when they reach retirement age, they should also retire from prison. Because our prison is becoming too congested if the elderly prisoners have already paid their debt to our society. And give a place, give their place to other adults who committed crimes recently. I want it that way. In fact, I even wanted to make it automatic that when you are 70 years old, you are released. But they said it's not possible. It has to be submitted to me one by one. I don't know if that's true, Atty. Acosta? Just look if that's true. But our policy is that once they reach that age, they should be released.

Now I learned that there are some who, even if they are about to be released, have no family to accept them. So the prison is now their home. They are happy there. This is a sad commentary on our society. And that's one reason why it shouldn't be automatic because they might have nowhere to go. So these are the things we want, the reforms in our justice system. As I said, adults, able-bodied adults are the ones who should be in prison. Not the very old and not the children. Because according to the law, when you are a child offender, you should not even reach prison, it should be welfare. That's where we have boystown and girlstown. When you are a juvenile offender, you will be tried until before a judgment is made. Then the judgment of the judge — right, Judge, it's like this? — the trial of a juvenile offender is like an adult offender at the point of judgment, the judge will say you are committed to this institution instead of prison. Now, if how juvenile offenders ended up in jail, it may be because of detention awaiting trial. Because juvenile offenders do not go through a trial like any adult.

What is our solution to those juvenile offenders that are under detention awaiting trial? One important thing perhaps — but you can do that, I cannot order the judge — maybe prioritize the cases of juvenile offenders so that they can be released to welfare institutions where they should be staying as soon as possible and not mixed with hardened adult criminals. That's what I'm asking the Department of Justice to study. We cannot say we can't do anything. We can do something, we have five pillars of justice.

So today, I congratulate the VACC again for your good work. Let's continue our successes against drugs, kidnapping, illegal gambling. Let's fight the resurgence of street crime, kidnapping. Let's fight terrorism. And let's find a way to defend the youth who have strayed from the path of the law.

To all of you, we have a lot of work that needs to be done. Good luck! To all of us. Let's not allow the system of our politics to decay so much that we allow the gains we have achieved to be destroyed and our minds and what we want to do for the peace of our country to be hindered.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Mass Oath taking and 7th Founding Anniversary Celebration of the Volunteers Against Crime and Corruption (VACC). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412063032/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5111&Itemid=38