Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Economic Briefing and Lunch with the Economic Journalist Association of the Philippines

[Delivered at the Makati Shangri-La, Makati City, February 20, 2007]

When Tony said that I have the right staff. I said, “is it s-t-u-f-f or s-t-a-f-f-?” because look at our economic managers here: Peter Favila, Gary Teves, Popo Lotilla, Arty Yap, Fe Barin, Lilia De Lima — great! Great economic team.

And I’d like to thank the Lopez brothers for hosting this. You remind us of the President of Marubeni and the President of Tokyo Electric because they’re brothers. Also, the Prime Minister and the President of Poland. So that’s how important are the Lopez brothers to our economic journalism. Thank you also Tony for the kind words — not just words — kind words and the kind numbers that you pointed out in your opening remarks. And to all of you good day.

Thank you for being in this economic conference or conference on economic growth hosted by EJAP and MOPC. And I asked for this occasion so that we could celebrate six years of uninterrupted growth. And why did we ask the Lopez brothers to host it? Because it was Tony Lopez who pointed out about the 24 quarters of uninterrupted economic growth. Thank you, Tony.

And so as Tony has started to do, we’re all here to review the economic progress that has made our nation stronger and that’s working to improve the quality of life of Filipinos throughout our great nation.

Reforming the economy is one of the most difficult tasks any administration can undertake. Especially the Philippines, as Tony said, if s very difficult to manage the Philippine economy. If s not easy to raise revenue by raising taxes and making people angry. But it is necessary, if we are to invest new money in vital infrastructures.

It is not easy to crack down on tax cheats, be they rich or famous, as Gary Teves knows, but it’s necessary if we are to invest in education and health care.

It is not easy to balance a budget so that we can save billions in interest payments, but it’s necessary if we are to modernize our nation and lift up the poor.

From the start, we set a course to reform the fundamentals of our economy. The seas were often rough and the wind was in our face. The wind was often in our face but we sailed on because the choices were stark — sail against the wind and change our economic fortunes or perish.

No, economic reform is not easy. No one said it would be when I got into this job. But together with our economic managers and the people who supported us through these tough decisions, the Filipino nation is better off today than it was six years ago.

And there is no turning back. We will balance the budget, create new jobs, and lift this nation up. As Tony has pointed out and I wish that we would all remember – for once, we have traveled the path of 24 quarters of uninterrupted growth.

We have demonstrated to ourselves and to the world that we can sustain our economic growth and not be derailed by political sideshows. We aim to stay on this course and to continue to prove to ourselves and to the world that the Philippines has arrived at a new place, where issues, policies and ideas trump personalities and politics.

Yes, we have made the tough but necessary decisions to strengthen our economy. And these painful steps are paying off: we now have the money to invest in job creation, new roads, bridges, and ports, and more for education and health care. And while we were able to spend more on our country and our people, for the first time in a long time the government is doing what average Filipino households do: move towards balancing the budget and not borrowing more and more.

Through strong international alliances, we have forged new partnerships that have led to billions in investments that helped create five million new jobs. We have strengthened our military and security alliances in the region and the world. That has led to major gains for peace in Mindanao, the isolation and tracking down of known terrorists and a reduction in violent crimes. Our neighborhoods, barangays and nation are more secure, more peaceful, more stable as a result of these efforts.

I’d like to take this opportunity to thank the House for ratifying the Anti-Terror Bill and other measures of national interest. And I urge both houses to strike while the iron is hot and join hands to send out the enrolled bill so that I can sign it, and so that we can have uninterrupted momentum in our fight against terror — with all the legal teeth we need to curtail the clandestine movement of funds, materiel and persons who are out to sow evil.

It’s somewhat saddening that the day of statesmanship was clouded by the death of Congressman Serapio on his way to join his colleagues on the House floor. As we sympathize with his loved ones and constituents, we dedicate our relentless efforts to work for the peace and safety of all Filipinos wherever they are. With the passage of the anti-terror bill, our nation would have a potent weapon and armor to shield not only the people but our economy as well from this global scourge. So I urge our Congress on, as I extol our troops who are in the thick of this fight to finish off the Abu Sayyaf and keep our national perimeters clean of terror.

In the next three and a half years remaining in our administration, we will invest about a trillion pesos to build much needed infrastructure that will support our economy and attract further investments.

This year in 2007, we will continue on our path towards a balanced budget, which our medium-term plan had set for 2010, but which our economic managers insists they want to achieve it by next year.

This is great news for the nation and particularly our young people who can rest assured that their government is investing in their future, not borrowing more and more to leave them with the debt as has been done in the past.

Because of our successes, I’m optimistic about the future of the nation and the well-being of the people. We have worked tirelessly to build a modern nation that will one day take its rightful place beside first-world countries.

We have a national agenda designed to move the nation forward toward greater political stability, economic prosperity and peace and order. It is a pro-poor, pro-growth, pro-modernization agenda.

We’re working hard to create an environment conducive to businesses and economic growth. This is clearly visible in our improved fiscal performance, widespread positive market sentiment and upbeat economic forecast for 2007, all of which were mentioned by Tony earlier, and will probably be amplified by Joey later with a six-year perspective, as well as the briefing that will be done hosted by the Central Bank in the other room today.

Our administration will focus on the national agenda that includes more jobs, stable prices and peace and order. We will work to expand education and health care. We will do so by working with our local and provincial leaders to see that the benefits of the new economy are spread to every corner of the Philippines, not just Metro Manila.

The next wave of reforms focuses on enhancing infrastructure and national competitiveness.

Our infrastructure program is focused on enhancing the competitive advantage of the natural “Super Regions” of the Philippines: farm-to-market roads and irrigation in the North Luzon agri-business quadrangle and including also no frills airports, expressways and ports in the Metro Luzon urban beltway; roads and airports for Central Philippines tourism; farm-to-market roads and roll-on/roll-off ports for Mindanao agri-business; and connectivity and technology in the cyber corridor.

We need to improve our infrastructure and our regulatory regime so that goods and people move cheaply and freely by road, rail, sea or air and have access to cheap power and world-class telecommunications. With our expressways, ports and airports visibly under construction, the biggest infrastructure challenge now is electric power. That is the next area of major economic reform.

To be world-class we invest in five comprehensive strategies for global competitiveness:

One, make food plentiful and affordable to keep our labor cost globally competitive. That’s Arty Yap’s job. And human resources must be on the frontline of our competitive comeback, aside from having access to food that’s affordable, nothing is more important than the health of our children and quality education.

Second source of competitiveness, reduce the cost of electricity to make our factories regionally competitive. Oh, Lilia De Lima is here. Can I already announce it, Lilia? May I? Okay. With due respect to Chairman Albano of the ERC, the Department of Justice has said that there is a specific law that says that the economic zones have regulatory power over the factory operating in their areas. And therefore that should help to reduce the cost of electricity in the economic zones.

Third source of productivity and competitiveness, modernize infrastructure at least cost to efficiently transport goods and people.

And fourth major area of competitiveness, mobilize, upgrade and disseminate knowledge and technologies for productivity. I said it in 2001, but I can say it with more fervor now that we have the money to make it come true, technology is the foundation of future economic development. And for starters, I have asked Nonoy Andaya, our Secretary of the Budget, to release 200 million pesos for scholarships for masters and PHd in science and engineering.

Fifth, reduce red tape in all agencies to cut business costs. And that is the great work of Secretary Peter Favila today. And to help Peter do that, we have appointed Pita Flores as the — what do you call it? — Investment Ombudsman.

There is much to do if we are to work toward a more just, modern and prosperous nation. The government cannot do this alone. In fact, that will be the theme of this year’s economic briefing later today. Ensuring the country’s sustainability is a shared responsibility between the public and private sectors. And through you, our economic journalists, members of the oldest press club in the region in Asia, we challenge the business community — although some of the movers and shakers are already here today — through you, the leaders of the associations, we challenge the business community to take a bigger stake in the country s development.

This partnership between the government and the private sector should focus on the exchange of new ideas to propel our economy forward and not on old complaints that will only hold us back. It should be about fighting for a stronger nation.

We have a vision for the day when all Filipinos can choose to live and work here in the Philippines, close to family and friends, owning a home with a high quality of life.

We hope for the day when enough jobs are created in the Philippines so that hardworking Filipinos don’t have to go abroad for work. We see a day when going abroad for a job is a career choice, not the only option for work.

And we call on the private sector to make national interest a top priority and to take advantage of the positive economic momentum and make investments that will contribute to the long-term sustainability of the nation.

I believe in the Philippines and its hardworking people. I believe our people want their elected leaders to stay on the part of economic reform, social justice, and peace and security. The people want a future they can count on and leaders who have a vision and a plan.

We will continue to work hard to make these aspirations a reality for a new, modernizing Philippines. And we hope you, the economic journalists, the founding fathers of Philippine media, the business leaders, we hope you will join us in realizing our nation’s goals.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].