Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, on the 108th anniversary of the proclamation of Philippine Independence.

Thank you very much, Secretary, Ace Durano for your introduction.

Distinguished members of the cabinet; Mayor Atienza and various elected officials from Manila and throughout the Philippines; Excellencies of the diplomatic corps; officials of the Philippine government, civilian and military; my beloved countrymen, happy anniversary of our independence to all of you!

Let us once again honor our ancestors who suffered to liberate and make our country independent. Likewise, we pay tribute to our countrymen who sacrificed in the past sixty years to defend our freedom and democracy. Let us continue to protect the legacy they left us. We do not underestimate the value of our sovereignty.

But independence of the country is meaningless if the citizen is not free. That is why we are on guard against enemies who want to destroy the democracy created by the struggle of our ancestors 180 years ago, as well as our continued defense of our democracy in the past sixty years.

We know that sovereignty comes with a corresponding duty – the duty to expand peace, the duty to expand the principles of democracy, and the duty to ensure that all Filipinos have the opportunity to provide for their families and educate their children, and the duty to defend our constitution.

Our heroes fought to achieve freedom, and so we will continue to do so to stabilize the foundations of the Republic of the Philippines and strengthen our nation.

Democracy may be vibrant, but it should not be divisive. It is only right that Filipinos respect the rights of those who have different views, but we must all agree that we need to move forward together for our future as a nation.

The struggle for freedom is not against each other, but against foreign oppressors who do not accept not only our identity, but the nation united by beliefs and dignity that we all embrace.

There are insulted memories of those who fought for our freedom through their schemes to destroy the unity of our nation. But I hope, my fellow countrymen, that we will strive to build a better life for all Filipinos, and we will unite to achieve that primary goal.

Our country is at a crossroads. We have already accomplished much, and many greater things lie ahead, but we need to stop the old ways of politics and strive to shape a Philippine Republic that will truly provide opportunities for all.

We must ask ourselves if those who fought for our independence would be happy with the country that emerged from that struggle. I believe that we owe it to our ancestors to unite in our efforts to deliver a higher level of peace, equality, and opportunity in every corner of our country.

Let us create a nation that is truly global in outlook, and let us deal with countries, such as Spain and America, that were part of our past, with no history better than the present. They are our partners in trade and peace, as well as in the fight against terrorism. I believe our ancestors are pleased with this step. Let us add to this the statement of American businessmen that they have noticed the reduction of corruption in the Philippines. Thank you all.

Our nation has overcome many challenges in the past six decades, and nothing surpasses the struggle for the continued growth of our democracy.

Just last week, it was reported that the extreme poverty level in the country has decreased, which also showed an improvement in the situation of our Muslim brothers and sisters in the south. But even though the percentage of the poor in the country has decreased from what I inherited from the previous administration, millions are still poor.

However, we have a unique opportunity to deliver peace to a part of our country that has seen excessive bloodshed in the struggle to establish our nation.

I am especially encouraged by my recent monitoring and observation of the situation in Mindanao. I am encouraged by the coming of peace in Mindanao. And I commend all those who believe that we can achieve greater good for the Filipino people if we lay down our arms and work together.

And the time for a decision that could end the disagreements that have long hindered our nation from reaching higher levels is fast approaching our people.

Our ancestors did not sacrifice their lives to create a free nation where politics takes precedence over progress. I hope that the memory of our struggle for freedom will inspire a shared commitment to our goals for the nation in the years to come.

And to you, my beloved countrymen, thank you for joining us in our celebration. To those who are unemployed and have come today, please go to our job fair being held here in Luneta. And to all of you, especially our enthusiastic youth of Manila who are here in front, thank you and you represent the future of our country.

Long live the freedom of the Philippines!

Long live the Filipino people!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 108th Anniversary of the Proclamation of Philippine Independence. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213029/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2807&Itemid=38