Thank you very much, Joe.

Many have already spoken, so perhaps I will say this: I will offer an apology on behalf of Congressman and Mrs. Zialcita; on behalf of Mayor and Mrs. Jun Bernabe and all the officials of the city of Parañaque; on behalf of Captain Jun Virata and all the officials and our mothers and children in Barangay Don Bosco. We would like to greet Gina De Venecia with a happy birthday! We would like to congratulate the Class of 1966 and thank you very much for the beautiful day care center that will be built here, plus College ’70 as well.

And next, let us greet the recently concluded president after sixteen years, Celina Bautista, for her wonderful work. Celine Bautista turned over [the position] to Gina after sixteen years with the Class ’66 and Class ’70 foundation. Well, KC passed away at 16 years old as well, so Gina now has a new [responsibility], taking care of the wards of Class ’66 and Class ’70. And we also want to greet, on behalf of everyone here, the mothers, because you are also mothers to our young students here at this beautiful new day care center. We also want to greet Claudine and the other Congressional Spouses. Madam has united three groups – Class ’66 and ’70, INA, and the Congressional Spouses – and all of them, rather than just socializing, are doing social services for those in need.

We were hoping Gina would run for senator, but perhaps what Gina would say now is, instead of her running, let us not forget her candidates, including the Sultan of Sulu. Hopefully, if we want to have more sectors represented – those who are left behind, the widowed mothers, the children in impoverished areas who need daycare – let us also not forget the Muslims who need to be cared for, and that is what our candidate, the Sultan of Brunei… oh, the Sultan of Sulu, represents.

Day care is the responsibility of the local government, but we commend the local governments for receiving additional assistance, because with the number of children who need care and early education, it is truly wonderful when NGOs like Class ’66 and ’70 are able to help.

So Gina, instead of us giving you a birthday gift, you are the one giving a birthday gift. So thank you very much. May you have many more birthdays and many more birthday gifts to the Filipino people to come.

Thank you.

[MOCK TRANSLATION] So Gina, sa halip na nagbibigay sa iyo ng birthday gift, ikaw ang nagbibigay ng birthday gift. Kaya maraming salamat. May you have many more birthdays and many more birthday gifts to the Filipino people to come.

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the 58th Birthday Celebration of Mrs. Gina De Venecia and Groundbreaking Ceremony/MOA Signing for a Day Care Center and Multi-purpose Hall. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151600/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1915&Itemid=38