Many thanks to our Secretary of Agriculture who is also able to speak Visayan because his wife is from Bohol, Secretary Leony Montemayor.

And I would like to thank Mayor Emano for his generous words. Thank you, mayor, I finally have you on my side. Our honored governor, Governor Calingin, Governor of Misamis Oriental and governor…; Our regional chairman, RDC for region 10, Governor Ocampos; the mayor from my city, Mayor Franklin Quijano of Iligan; and my congressman from my district here in Lanao del Norte, Abdullah Dimaporo; Congressman Nereus Acosta, Son of Bukidnon; Monsignor Monsanto, who was with us during the hard times when Dongkoy was not yet on my side. Joji, congratulations once again for hosting this. And I would like to acknowledge the members of the Cabinet who are here with us aside from Leony Montemayor; Son of Bukidnon, of region 10, Cito Lorenzo; Presidential Adviser for Modernization of Agriculture, Lito Sarmiento, also Son of Mindanao; Jess Dureza, my Presidential Assistant for Mindanao; and the leaders of this Congress, Mr. Andot of the Chamber of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries Industry of Northern Mindanao; Atty. Montalban of the cattle raisers, who when I was a new Senator hosted me in his lovely ranch in the backyard of Bukidnon; to all of you, my colleagues, good morning.

I wanted to speak in Visayan for my speech, like in my speech last year in Butuan at the Mindanao Congress. But our organizers said that there are ten percent who come from Manila and we also have our VIP guests from other countries, so they said it is important for me to speak in English in my speech. And so with your indulgence — I feel very awkward because everytime I come to Mindanao my mind goes to thinking in Visayan. But here I will speak in English for the benefit of our Manila-based visitors, our foreign VIP guests and also for the national audience that is listening to what I will have to say about agricultural and food policy.

First of all, thank you very much for inviting me here once again. This is my second meeting for the Mindanao Food Congress, and in fact, Joji said that she was afraid I wouldn’t be able to make it. At first, I wasn’t going to be able to make it, but thank goodness re-arrangements were done because this is a very important meeting. Because as Monsignor Monsanto said in his prayer, getting enough food is a day-to-day challenge to most Filipino families.

I would like to acknowledge also Mr. Jeff Nash, the Deputy Chief of the growth with equity in Mindanao project. And he is the reason why we are speaking in English. But aside from USAid.

Actually, our administration has been spending more public resources than any previous administration to stabilize the food supply. 26 billion pesos — right, Leony? — went to agricultural modernization in the year 2001 — unprecedented in the entire history of the Philippines. And we are doing this because we want to stabilize food supply especially of staples, especially of rice. And we are doing this in a setting where we are affected year by year by the vagaries of the global market. And to me, agriculture policy actually should be more of a social policy rather than economic policy. I will confess, if I’m spending 26 billion pesos on agricultural modernization, it is not so much because of food security because we can buy food from anywhere in the world, it is because as our farmers and our fisherfolk suffer from price instabilities and other sources of uncompetitiveness then our economy and social fabric also suffer.

But your Congress does not simply underscore the importance of food. It also underscores the importance of Mindanao in the national food agenda. Mindanao is the food basket of our country, producing 40 percent of our food supply. Our focus is here on food and we will not be distracted.

But Mindanao could assume a much, much larger role in food supply if it were not for problems of law and order. Our land of promise sadly is also a land of conflict. And we must always strive for peace so that the promise will be fulfilled.

With peace, more farms can be tilled, more bounties from the sea can be harvested, more crops can be reaped and sold. Then we can talk about the dream of having food on every table for every Filipino family. I therefore wish to set the keynote of this congress by bearing a message of peace, stability and progress amid the diversity and vibrance of this region.

This message carries a reaffirmation to finish off the threat of terrorism in Basilan and elsewhere. To uphold the law against criminality and do enforce the necessary measures to enable enterprise, productivity and livelihood.

I also reaffirm my commitment to peace, development and inter-faith solidarity. And I call on all armed groups in the region to join me in a quest of peace that is just, honorable and enduring. We need peace to uplift our people and empower our communities. We need peace for progress. We need peace to fight poverty and destitution.

I addressed your congress last year, just one month after I assumed the presidency. In that event, I laid before you some of the programs we intended to undertake and are now undertaking to realize our dream of making Mindanao the country’s food basket.

One of these programs — in fact, the main program for agriculture — is agriculture and fisheries modernization founded on social equity. This program as i said with 26 billion pesos spent for it last year is now in full swing not only in Mindanao but all over the country.

The spirit of achievement is high. One proof of this is the completion under the leadership of Secretary Montemayor and the Son of Cagayan de Oro, Jess Paras, the head of NIA — one of the achievements is the completion of Mal-mar dam, which after more than a decade of waiting and waiting was finally inaugurated last September 22 and is now irrigating more than 5,000 hectares.

In Mindanao, agriculture and fisheries modernization takes the form of irrigation projects like the one of Mal-mar and the smaller ones as well, farm-to-market roads and post-harvest facilities, as well as capability building. A flagship program in our agricultural modernization is the hybrid rice program, a result of my state visit to China last year. Jobs creation Secretary Cito Lorenzo, Son of region 10, is introducing the very productive Chinese hybrid to 50,000 hectares this April and May. And the 50,000 hectares all over the country that will be exposed now to this hybrid 37,000 hectares will be planted in Mindanao — 37,000 out of 50,000. 37,000 Mindanao farmers in irrigated land are being trained, seeds and inputs are being prepared for them, soils will be analyzed for them, and they will get 10,000 pesos per hectare financing from the Landbank thru Quedancor. This means a total of 370 million pesos to be lent to Mindanao farmers this April and May.

And from the agriculture modernization budget, 450 million pesos of the 26 billion pesos is being put into this program.

Hybrid farmers who started last season — they were the pilot — produced 7.5 to 9.3 metric tons of palay per hectare compared to the old 3.5 to 4.3 metric tons produced when they were not yet using the hybrid seed. And with this increase in their hybrid they earned 35,000 pesos to 43,000 pesos profit, net profit per hectare at 9 pesos and 50 centavos per kilogram of palay per 115-day crop. Indeed, this will revolutionize agriculture in our country.

And this is a concrete example of agricultural modernization in action, moving with energy under — may I brag a little — the Arroyo administration.

And this should serve as a response also to your resolution to improve utilization of agricultural inputs and to access competitively-priced farm inputs. The hybrid rice program addresses soil analysis. The soil will be analyzed so just the right amount of fertilizer and curative agents will be used, therefore, nothing will be wasted. Because if you don’t have soil analysis you might put more fertilizer than needed and the inputs becomes more expensive that needed. And therefore, let this serve as an example to foster more efficient use of agricultural inputs to other commodity sectors.

This program of the hybrid should also serve as a response to your resolution to enhance the credit accessibility of the farmers in Mindanao. The hybrid rice financing program took 22 days from conception to execution. The credit program, as I said earlier, will originate from the land bank through Quedancor. And as I said earlier, the money will be made available to accredited farmer-borrowers this month and next month.

How? Farmers are organized into groups up to 15, where leaders will be chosen and incentivized to collect the money loaned to them.

Now, for the fisheries. Under the fisheries modernization program, there is also 250 million pesos available to fisherfolk for the handline vessel financing at 500,000 pesos per. And the first 50 million pesos is readily drawable today.

For coffee, the Jolo coffee project is an example in Sulu, it leveraged the commitments for the local government internal revenue allotment to cooperative coffee ventures to supply Nestle.

Earlier, Mayor Emano said, he was so surprised because he has not been able to help me in the past election especially this last one for my candidates lost, what? 12 to 1, awful. But i am not a vindictive person. And the Jolo example is another one. Because the project is in the town of Parang where the mayor is Mayor Loong and I had asked his brother Ben Loong not to run for regional vice governor against my candidate Governor Mutilan of Lanao del Sur. But — and he was in the middle of this loan — he still defied me. He still ran, anyway. The loan still continued anyway — 38 million pesos. So, therefore, what is more important is not politics. What is more important is agricultural modernization.

Politics, modernization rather than politics, and I say the same for the coconut industry. For coconut, I am happy to point out that the government is now in control of the United Coconut Planters Bank. This bank through several layers of corporations is the manager of the Coconut Levy Fund. And while the principal of the fund is still under litigation, this bank through those layers of corporations may now manage the fruits of the fund soon and we will be able to use this fund soon for the coconut industry. And I would like to thank the church, especially a great Archbishop from Mindanao, Archbishop Capalla of Davao, for helping this come about. And as a result of his work I have instructed that the first fruits of the coconut levy fund should go to microfinancing for our coconut farmers.

At the same time, I would like to appeal to private banks, and I am hereby instructing the government financial institutions to accelerate restructuring for the individual farmers and food corporations who now want to renew accessing credit especially now that interest rates are at their historic lows.

Last night, one of the senators told me he must congratulate the Central Bank because the interest rate is at its lowest in history. I said, “wait a minute. Yes, we congratulate the Central Bank but the Central Bank could not have provided such low interest rates alone because interest rates are market- determined.” The reason why interest rates went that low is because our government controlled our budget deficit and therefore controlled and reduced our borrowing from the domestic market. Because if we had let our deficit go out of control or gone beyond the ceiling then we would have had to borrow — competed with you, the businessmen — and the interest rate would have gone up.

Now, in response to your resolution to expand the utilization of advances in science and technology through an effective extension program, the hybrid rice project will utilize extension work. Also, under the leadership of Secretary Montemayor the guidelines for genetically-modified organisms were approved in principle at the cabinet level yesterday.

Now, in the cattle sector. I would like to address the friends and associates of my host in that wonderful overnight stay I had in Quezon, Bukidnon, 1992. Ten years ago.

In the cattle sector, we need to replenish the cattle population and help nurture the growth of the beef sector. Thus, I instructed very early this year — yes, last January when I went to Masbate. And as a result of my consultation with the Masbate Cattle Industry — I instructed the secretary of DENR, Sonny Alvarez and Secretary of DAR, Secretary Braganza to decrease the pasture lease rate of cattle from 250 pesos per hectare — where the last supposed pro-poor administration made it — to 40 pesos per hectare in our administration. Also, to decrease the cattle to hectare-ratio from one-is-to-one to one-is-to-six. And this policy is now in place retroactive to January 1st 2002.

When it was announced that I was coming to Cagayan de Oro, my friends from Cagayan de Oro – I had a few of them. Very few of them I realized in the last elections. But now that Dongkoy is with me, I have many more friends again. Anyway, my few friends from Cagayan de Oro heard on CDO radio that the newscasters were wondering what pasalubong am I bringing when I come. Well, Dongkoy already told this a lot of them, and I have just mentioned my pasalubong for the farmers and cattle raisers and fishermen of Mindanao, in general. But for Cagayan de Oro, in particular — well, under my guidance Land bank lent 287 million pesos for Bulua barangay for the construction of the west bound integrated jeepney and bus terminal market.

And I would like to congratulate Mayor Dongkoy for his foresight in proposing this project, because you’re gonna be a very busy transient place when all of these roads in Mindanao are finished. But I’d like to congratulate him for finishing it in record time, and people who’ve seen it said the quality is indeed impressive. There is also, as mentioned by Dongkoy, in the pipeline a Land Bank financing for 400 million pesos for the construction of the Cagayan de Oro diversion road and cargo bridge. Also, as Dongkoy mentioned, the 140 million-peso Phividec International Container Port is now ongoing — dollar — is ongoing. Started construction last February, two weeks ago. The contract was awarded last February, it will be operational in 2004. Not to mention the 100 million of the Cagayan de Oro port project. So this will be major gateways to improve an efficient movement of inbound and outbound cargo including the food sector. And so I am not surprised that Mayor Emano said that no administration before mine has ever provided such a big pasalubong to the city of Cagayan de Oro.

Well, I talked about Mayor Emano, who said he wasn’t able to help in the last election. And I talked about Mayor Loong, who also did not help in the last election. Well, Ben Loong lost, so that’s already his… Enough punishment. But I would like to say though — before anybody thinks that they can just defy me and then get all the support they need — that we do things on the basis of merit. And truthfully, I was good to Mayor Emano during that election because we have been partners for a long time in helping here in Misamis Oriental. Even when I was still an Undersecretary of Trade and Industry with Nimfa Albania, our Regional Director here, with the plan for the DTI to start the Phividec Industrial Estate. Then Governor Emano said, how can he allow that when that development is anti-people. Because everytime a project is set up, the people who are living there are moved from one place to another and they were being herded around like cattle. When I was an undersecretary, we talked about it and therefore I also said, in the national government, we cannot proceed with the development of the industrial estate unless we have a permanent resettlement site for the people who are being dislocated. So, Dongkoy and I became friends. And when I became a senator, I became his guest of honor at the conclusion of the inauguration of the permanent relocation site for those dislocated in Phividec, so during that election. You can understand why I support Mayor Emano. But now, he can’t forget our promise.

Anyway, all of these infrastructure are also… Should also serve as response to your resolution urging the government to accelerate infrastructure development in Mindanao.

And aside from what I mentioned these are just prototypes of our increased absorptive capacity. With increased absorptive capacity by the government of the credits and grants coming from official development assistance and improved tracking of projects, we will get better at infrastructure delivery. The military corps of engineers is helping. They are constructing slow-moving infrastructure projects in difficult areas like Basilan. I would like to encourage private sector participation here in the form of build-operate-and-transfer infrastructure projects.

Related also to your congress resolution to transform the sea transport industry and improve the agricultural marketing and logistics system in mindanao, I am instructing the Philippine Ports Authority and Leony Montemayor to come up with a program on logistics cost reduction steps which will have an impact on the logistics cost to the market. I understand that PPA manager Al Cusi has already been talking to Ito Carlos of the Mindanao Business Community but so far impasse — no result, no solution. And so I need to give a deadline. So I’d like to ask Leony to come in and make sure that this logistics cost reduction will be implemented this coming May 1st.

Speaking of inbound cargo, we are all concerned about agricultural smuggling. This is being addressed with the Appointment of Customs Collector Antonio Bernardo. I empowered him to make Customs a showcase in the fight against graft and corruption in the same way that we are achieving visible results with BIR Commissioner Rene Banez.

I am also empowering certain Cabinet members to act as my Cabinet officers for regional development or cord. This is a very successful system during the administration of President Cory Aquino, and I would like to revive this. And I am hereby appointing Cito Lorenzo as cord for region 9. Region 9, Western Visayas, (SIC) because he is the grandson of Don Pablo Lorenzo of Zamboanga City. Vice President Tito Guingona as cord for region 10 and CARAGA, but to be assisted in region 10 by Cito and in CARAGA by DOTC Secretary Bebot Alvarez. I am appointing Bebot Alvarez, son of Davao del Norte as cord for Region 11. And I am Secretary Sim Datumanong, son of Maguindanao as cord for ARMM and Region 12, to be assisted in ARMM by DND Secretary Angie Reyes because we cannot have development unless we have peace.

In response to your resolution urging the government to enhance the competitiveness of the Philippine canned tuna exports in the european union through the removal of discriminatory tariff barriers, I would like to let you know that DTI Secretary Mar Roxas is focusing efforts to negotiate not only with the European union but also with the united states for zero tariff.

Last night, I gave a very nice little dinner for senator Inouye of Hawaii and senator Stevens of Alaska, who are great friends of the Philippines. And they said that they’ll make sure, their work is to make sure that President Bush complies with the promises that he made to me when I visited Washington. Well I said, “that’s great, senators. You know, his promises from the U.S. government alone not including the U.S. business amounts to 2 billion dollars.” “oops!” They said. Yah, because one billion dollars of that includes market access because their zero tariff law is in congress. And i told them that we especially want canned tuna to be able to enjoy zero tariff in the u.s. and that’s a special mission that Senator Inouye and Senator Stevens will work for when they go to senate this coming session.

The DTI is also focusing on tropical fruit market access to Australia, Taiwan and the U.S., and the reduction of tariffs of these exports to south Korea and China.

On your resolution requesting that Mindanao be declared the halal production base in the Philippines — I am directing the Department of Agriculture, the Department of Trade and Industry, and the Southern Philippines Development Authority under my former DTI colleague Sam Ampatuan, as well as the Department of Health to submit their joint recommendation on this matter, including an action plan to effectively implement the proposal. The food trade with the Islamic world would be mutually beneficial, economically and politically.

Sam Ampatuan was working on this when he was the head. I made him the head first of the Office of Muslim Affairs but when I found out that SPDA has so many development projects and I need DTI experience for that I moved him to SPDA but I am therefore asking him to… And I am transferring the function of the halal administration from OMA where he was — and I put it there because he was there — to SPDA where he is. And therefore he is very familiar with DTI, and I’m sure that there’s going to be a lot of progress under his leadership.

All these spell out the realization that agriculture especially in Mindanao and the rural sector, alongside with information and communications technology and tourism, and the other service sectors all play a critical role in our quest to win the battle against poverty within the decade. I said in my state of the nation address that we should try to create one million jobs in agriculture by 2004. But I’m happy to say that according to national census office during this past year, we already created almost 800,000 jobs in agriculture. And we are still moving forward.

So, Mindanao, I am here not only to support you in your quest to be the Philippines’ food basket, I am here because I want the people of Mindanao to feel the blessings of employment and development. Dayon Mindanao atong isla nga manindot kaayo. Dayon sa alang sa kauswagan. And let us have peace and development in our beautiful island of Mindanao.

Daghang salamat kaninyong tanan

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Program of the 4th Mindanao Food Congress. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230124/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7654&Itemid=38