NO FILIPINO LEFT BEHIND

Since the elections last year our people have been gathering around democratic solidarity and an indomitable will to move on. The roots of democracy have taken firm hold at the level of human and institutional interaction but we’ve had to spend time and effort working at that.

Broadcasters just recently have agreed to deny air time to terrorist groups. That shows how sobriety and prudence are perceptively dawning upon the media that’s taking part in the high responsibility or remaking our national destiny.

Landmark decision or the Supreme Court and the graft court on the Marcos wealth and the Coconut Levy Fund have spoken or sure justice for the poor and those who have less in law.

And I’m very happy to have Congressmen present here. Were working with Congress to overcome what you have identified and what we have also recognized as the most important structural issues and enact the laws that will enable us to resolve our fiscal problem within this year.

The force of political stability can be seen in other facets of national life. Creating sale streets free from crime and kidnapping are central to our workers and investors to go about their jobs. Crime is down, kidnapping is down. And I’m sure you recognize that investments in the nation are up as a result.

And as a result of our increased investigative capability, we’re able to charge more government officials for corruption. And we are beginning to forfeit their ill-gotten wealth to the government prior to indictment and conviction. We’ve been able to interrupt illegal logging.

The force of political stability can be seen right here in Mindanao. And I’m very happy that we proceeded with the decision to hold this conference here in Davao. Here in Mindanao, we are winning the peace based on strengthening autonomy and respect for ancestral domains. We are dealing with terror with an iron hand even as we wage peace with the rebels across the negotiating table. The chief of staff of the armed forces will give the signal when he is done with the military operations in Sulu which are now pinpointed at residual terrorist targets. But even now we’re implementing a normalization plan that will preempt terrorist bases permanently and enable affected civilians to go home.

As you have recognized among your five points, our local government units are the vanguard or peace, security and development in the grassroots. We’re a nation of remarkable resilience combined with deep natural resources, a young and motivated work force, a dynamic democracy, and a growing economy.

You’ve talked about six percent as a threshold, we’ve reached that. Many other countries don’t have that in the region. I can’t offer to fix each and every problem of every citizen or family but with your support I can fight to bring this nation to the edge of shared prosperity across all regions, cultures and creeds.

We had a strong finish in 2004. The Supreme Court reversed the negativism over mining development. We bit the bullet on the debt of the National Power Corporation while erasing subsidies in the use of electric power. Congress as you recognize approved the taxes on alcohol and cigarettes and also the law on accountability reform even as we mounted strong austerity measures in the government.

I recognize your concern about the narrowing window. I recognize that 2005 is a year of urgent change but it’s also a year of fervent hope. We’ve formed a new economic team that will revitalize our revenue administration and privatization program including the consolidation of billions worth of government shares in San Miguel Corporation for sale.

We were delisted from the list of non-cooperative countries of FATE. And the California Pension and Retirement System rated the Philippines as investment worthy. Our peso is stronger, our stocks are up. The budget will restore fiscal control and accountability. It will allow the government to cut wasteful spending and invest in the vital needs of the average Filipino. The same needs that your ODA is prioritizing including my pledge on my pro-poor agenda. The budget will fund the pro-poor agenda with your official development support including more money for micro, small and medium class entrepreneurs, clean water and electricity to the entire country, better access to health care, a school in every village and computer linkage in every high school.

Our ongoing tax reforms which in fact were front loading — this tax reform should have been taking place over the whole six years of my administration but we’re doing them in the first year — will provide… These reforms will provide the additional revenue needed to rein in our deficit, which by the way is on track. And they will support the important programs that as I said are part of our pro-poor agenda, namely, more jobs and more investments in our people.

Our tax measures I recognized will send the signal to you the international community that the Philippines has turned the corner and is a place to invest and tap the vital talent pool that exist in our nation.

I thank your various countries for the important investments that are leading to new high wage jobs in call center employment, high technology, automotive manufacturing. Micro, small and medium enterprises, agri-business, housing and mining will lead the trend towards creating ten million jobs in the medium-term. The Clark-Subic corridor shall become the best transport and logistics hub in the region. And I thank you that you are all committed to making that logistics corridor from Clark-Subic to Batangas truly world class and competitive.

A knowledgeable and skilled work force will spearhead development. We will build knowledge in math, science, English and technology, and protect knowledge. I’m ordering the optical media board and the new chief of the intellectual property office to strengthen the campaign against anti-intellectual property piracy through strategic raids on points of entry and storage centers of pirated material.

We’re backing our drive for foreign markets, foreign investments, international tourism, development assistance and the protection of territorial integrity. And the protection of overseas Filipinos through a strong strategic alliance with the united states, a steady consolidation of trade with East Asia, making foreign policy decisions more and more in the context of Asean and Pacific dialogue, nurturing our partnership with the international Islamic community, and protecting common interests through multilateral organizations such as the world bank and inter-regional organizations such as the Asean-European community meeting. We know that public administration as well as private enterprise, and I’m glad that my economic managers have included private enterprise in this conference We know that public administration and private enterprise must be driven by the capacity to manage change, steward the economy and enforce the law to yield common prosperity.

So, therefore let me end this conference by assuring you that the Cabinet and I in partnership with Congress, the Judiciary and the private sector will continue to keep our sights aligned with the complex challenges in the horizon and with your support resolving these challenges so that no Filipino will he left behind as we march to prosperity again with your support.

Thank you for supporting our aspirations.

Mabuhay!

Source: Adamson University Library