Thank you for being here. And to all of you, our Muslim brothers and sisters here, to all Muslims of the Philippines, all Filipinos who are not Muslim, Assalamu Alaikum and Blessed Ramadhan!

Congratulations to the young Muslims who completed the trainings under the ALIVE program. Your ALIVE program is really good, very lively or Arabic Language and Islamic Values Education of DepEd followed by skills training.

New and better collection has put the Philippines on a path to permanent, sustainable economic growth and stability. We are committed to consolidating the gains in new revenue by making long overdue investments in physical and human infrastructure. This includes along with billions of pesos for new bridges, roads and ports billions of pesos for education, healthcare and training.

In training, almost eight million people have completed various training programs in our administration, double the number in the previous 14 years. We hope that you young people learn skills that you can use for your future. We have spent on various training programs including short trainings that can immediately earn income such as sewing—I saw a dressmaking shop here, Boboy said there are good opportunities, or hair styling, I hope there are good opportunities there too. We are phasing out caregiving because there is already a surplus. So those who cannot get a job in caregiving now, go back to other types of training because there are many others.

Those longer programs such as welding, automotive, cell phone repair, which are in high demand abroad, and vocational or technical courses including skills upgrading. Well, we started the program at ten o'clock, but what time did this jobs fair start? 8 o’clock. Secretary Lapus told me that some of them have already gotten jobs. There are already those who have gotten jobs in call centers.

This is an auspicious way of celebrating the first days of Ramadhan. It’s just the start of Ramadhan, and I want to use this opportunity to deliver to all of you our deepest prayer that Ramadhan may be a way towards achieving peace and quiet in the whole nation.

I would like to take this opportunity to assure you that the highest respect shall be accorded to our Muslim brothers and sisters during the month of Ramadhan.

I would like to assure you that the law enforcement activities in Mindanao shall give the utmost consideration to the unhampered observance of Ramadhan by peace loving and law abiding Muslims.

Many of you are young Muslims from Metro Manila and surrounding areas, Cavite to Pampanga, and many of you or your parents have evacuated from Mindanao. Mindanao continues to feed you even if you are here in Manila. Mindanao is a food basket of the Philippines, but the sad irony of Mindanao as a food basket is that it has some of the highest hunger in our nation. That might be one reason why you and your families moved here.

Mindanao has the large fields of the highest productivity, yet it also has the majority of our ten poorest provinces. The prime reason is the endless Mindanao conflict. A comprehensive peace has eluded us for half a century. And we thank our Muslim neighbors, we thank Malaysia for helping us in our search for that comprehensive peace in Mindanao. But, we must bring stability to the region and regain order before we can effectively reactivate the peace process in earnest.

In the light of the recent violent incidents committed by lawless MILF groups, the government will not sign the Memorandum of Agreement on Ancestral Domain. The peace process — and we’d like to assure you and our neighbors and continue to convey our gratitude to Malaysia — the peace process must proceed. But, only after we have expanded the number of stakeholders for consultation.

We have refocused all peace talks from one that is centered on dialogues with rebels to one of authentic dialogues with the communities. Our commitment is to peace, the constitutional process, and the rule of law.

Let me take this opportunity also to be very clear to those elements who seek disruption and destruction: There will be no peace gained through violence. No peace agreement can or will be reached through intimidation or the barrel of a gun. The way to peace isn’t through the barrel of a gun rather it begins with providing a person a job, food on the table and human dignity.

Central to that success is to invest in people, in education like ALIVE, in healthcare, roads, bridges and training such as TVET. And we are making those investments as we see in this affair, this jobs fair today. The TVET program with ALIVE is unique because it is only intended for young Muslims while you are given alternative knowledge and livelihood training, you are also given additional knowledge that is in accordance with Islamic rules.

In the TVET program with ALIVE, the Madrasah program and the teaching of livelihood skills are combined. Based on the consultations with the youth in thirty-eight towns mostly Muslim, courses were selected that focus on the needs and desired jobs of Muslim youth.

Over the past five months, nearly a thousand Muslim out-of-school youth from Metro Manila and Pampanga have been given ALIVE training along with livelihood or TVET training. And according to Jing Lapus, the target is 25,000 Muslim youth to be able to benefit from TVET with ALIVE. And through this jobs fair, we hope that you, the Muslim youth, will be able to find jobs immediately, which is why we organized this exclusive jobs fair for you.

Peace is a central ingredient to the nation’s future. It is a central ingredient for stability in our region. And we’d like to thank again our Malaysian brothers and to assure them that peace is a path we remain firmly committed to achieving, and this includes working to achieve a permanent peace in Mindanao.

With all of us working together, Muslim, Christian, those here in Metro Manila, those there in Mindanao, and all our brothers in the Muslim world and all our brothers and sisters outside the Muslim world, if we all work together, peace will happen. Meanwhile, in our jobs fair today, we wish the Muslim youth success.

Blessed Ramadhan and thank you all very much.

Source : Adamson University Library