Thank you very much, Secretary Peter Favila, our Minister of Trade and Industry.

Mr. Chairman, members of the Philippine delegation, members of the Jeddah Business Community, ladies and gentlemen.

Peace be upon you!

I’m deeply honored to be here today, and to be here in Saudi Arabia to begin with, making this state visit. We are here in Saudi Arabia and now in Jeddah in the name of peace and common prosperity and security of our respective nations and peoples.

I’ve come here to acknowledge and reminisce the years that Saudi Arabia and the Philippines have spent in a lasting partnership for peace and development.

Saudi Arabia has stood by the Philippines, the side of the Philippines for peace and development. And as you very well know, being the movers and shakers of the Saudi business community, more than one million overseas Filipinos help build your economy. The relationship is both reciprocal and synergistic.

And we are very happy about the accession of His Majesty, the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques. And also, we would like to congratulate the business community of Saudi Arabia on your accession last December to the World Trade Organization. This is one of the reasons why it’s a good time for us to be here in Saudi Arabia. With your accession to the World Trade Organization, the Philippines feels inspired and buoyed by the challenge of more fruitful participation in the continued affluence of your kingdom and its people.

The Philippines sells consumer products to Saudi Arabia and buys a lot of oil. The trade is 20:1, the trade balance is 20 to 1 in favor of Saudi Arabia. And while Mr. Chairman has said that you would like to buy industrial goods from us, we thank you for giving us the tip, and the business community will look for the industrial goods that we should be selling to you. But we would also like to bring in more garments, more fresh and processed foods, more marine products, more tropical fruits — we’re already selling a lot of bananas and pineapples to you — more consumer manufactures such as furniture and furnishings, beauty products and consumer electronics as well as products catering to the over one million Filipinos in the gulf states. One million here plus half a million in other gulf states because those Filipinos by themselves already constitute a major market.

You know the Filipino workers. They had been here in the kingdom for the past 30 years. You know the quality of the great Filipino worker. Many of you remember how they first came here during the first petrodollar boom of the 1970s. And now that there is a new petrodollar boom, we hope that the ongoing expansion of the various sectors of the Saudi economy, including oil and gas and basic infrastructure will again present an opportunity for the Philippine construction companies who were once very active in Saudi Arabia to be back particularly in the fields of engineering, construction and engineering-related I.T.-enabled services.

When the Philippine construction companies came in the last 30 years, you saw the quality of the great Filipino worker and therefore the Saudi companies kept hiring more and more Filipinos. But somehow the construction companies themselves sort of faded from the Saudi scene. Now with this great new developments in oil and gas, and then the new economic zones, I hope that this Philippine construction companies will be back again in Saudi Arabia. That is as far as activities here in Saudi Arabia are concerned.

But I know that even as you’re investing very heavily in Saudi Arabia, you’re also investing very heavily all over the world. And it is as just as it should be because in this day and age with the current volatility of world oil prices, we know that the Saudi business community has a lot… Has billions of petrodollars, billions of profits of trade, and we hope that you can recycle these billions of petrodollars and profits from the oil trade in the form of equity investments in middle-income and low-income oil importing countries.

The Philippines is a middle-income oil importing country. And we hope to be able to benefit from the investment of Saudi petrodollars in our country particularly because we like to think that the Filipinos, our great Filipino workers are contributing to the development, to the further development of the Saudi economy and making a valuable contribution to this economy. You see how good they are. There are more of them in the Philippines. So when you bring your petrodollars to invest in the Philippines, you will also be able to benefit from the competent and hardwork of the great Filipino workers.

Chairman talked about the business ethic and the business environment in both our countries. Both our countries are extremely business-friendly. And it is a good time, as it is a good time for me to come here because of the WTO and the petrodollars, it’s also a good time for you to bring your investments to the Philippines.

The Philippines is on the verge of economic take off. Our momentum is steady despite the hikes in the oil prices because we had been able to work very hard in the last few years to manage our fiscal deficit as a result of which our target for balancing the budget is about two years ahead in accomplishment, two years ahead of our medium-term Philippine development plan. And as a result of that the Philippine peso and the Philippine Stock Exchange are outperforming most Asian currencies and markets. In fact yesterday, our businessmen gave me the good news that yesterday’s stock market increase in the Philippines was the biggest single day increase in the whole history of our country.

So, we are a country poised to absorb Saudi investments. Where? First of all, you are an energy power, so in our energy; second, I’ve seen great interest in our tourism industry; and then there is mining, information technology, agriculture, and banking and finance.

We are promoting fast-growing industries where high-value jobs are most plentiful and which can use our most competitive resource, a resource you are very familiar with, the great Filipino worker. And these resources are very competitive in industries such as information technology and tourism, and this is the reason why we are a very attractive investment site today for information technology and tourism.

Opportunities also lie in the energy sector, particularly we hope that there will be Saudi investment in an oil refinery in Mindanao in Southern Philippines, where half of our ten million Muslims live. Our government formally invited ARAMCO in December of 2005 to set up this oil refinery in Mindanao for the American west coast market as well as for the East Indonesian market. Because East Indonesia is closer to Mindanao than it is to the Indonesian oil fields of Aceh.

The mining sector is also open for business. The country’s total mineral reserves are valued at one trillion dollars making us — with the fifth biggest mineral deposits in the world — number five in gold, number nine in copper, and 20 percent of the world’s nickel deposits.

We also invite Saudi Arabia to explore build-operate-transfer projects, particularly those that would raise the production, processing and logistical capacities of Mindanao’s agricultural industries, especially the Halal food industry. And we’ve talked earlier about tourism because the Philippine tourism industry is just bursting at the seams. Our tourism is booming. We don’t have enough hotel rooms and resort rooms anymore. So, we hope you can come and help us put that up.

We talked about where the tourism industry should be located or the investments with eight major destinations identified for us by a study done by Mckinsey and company where tourist like to go and where surely investments in tourism facilities will be very attractive. One of these areas is in Clark-Subic, the Clark-Subic economic corridor. And I see that some of you already have your brochures on the Clark-Subic area as a gateway.

Banking, I mentioned because we have in our country an Islamic bank, the Al Amanah Bank. But inasmuch as we recognize that we are not so experienced in Islamic banking, we’re very realistic about it and we want to privatize our Al Amanah Bank, and we invite bankers from Saudi Arabia to take a look at that opportunity.

Indeed, with all of these various opportunities, both with Saudi investments in the Philippines, with Philippine companies coming here to participate in your construction and oil boom, with our overseas Filipinos continuing to help the Saudi economy and to help the Philippine economy through your Saudi investments, I would like to say that the Philippines is privileged to be your companion in a journey toward greater peace and prosperity for the whole world including the middle east and southeast Asia.

Today is our third day in Saudi Arabia. And I am very happy to be here in Jeddah where the heart of commerce and industry is.

And tomorrow, when we go back to the Philippines after a trip to the eastern province, I know that we will bring back memories of your hospitality and generosity. But we will bring back memories of your way of life. So many aspects of Arabic culture have found their way into Philippine culture, and that is why we who are cultural brothers or maybe I should call the Philippines your cultural grandchild, should have more economic ties with each others.

We will bring back to the Philippines your dreams and aspirations. The King Abdullah economic city is a great symbol of your dreams and aspirations for continued economic leadership well into the new millennium. And we will bring back with us those memories not only the opportunities that those memories will bring with us but also the memories of a great kingdom moving forward in the new millennium.

As we say in the Philippines, long live Saudi Arabia! Long live Jeddah! Long live Saudi Arabia! Long live Jeddah! Long live the ties between the Philippines and Saudi Arabia!

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Luncheon Meeting with the Jeddah Chamber of Commerce and Industry. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213347/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2783&Itemid=38