Thank you very much, Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas.

And let me greet those on stage with me as part of our delegation here on this state visit: first of all, our senator, Senator Miriam Defensor-Santiago. I extend my greetings to her fellow provincemates here in Saudi Arabia, good evening to all of you.

And from the House of Representatives: our congressman from the First District of Lanao Del Norte, Congressman Tikbong Badelles. To his fellow Bisaya speakers, good evening to all of you; Congressman from Lanao Del Sur, Congressman Benasing Macarambon. And to his Pagariya people, Assalamu Alaikum!; Congressman from the Second District of Lanao Del Norte, Congressman Abdullah Dimaporo; Congressman from Mandaluyong, Congressman Benhur Abalos; and to my fellow Kapampangan, Congresswoman Anna York Bondoc from Pampanga. And to our Cabalens, good evening to you all.

I would like to greet also our governors who are here: first of all, the governor of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, Governor Zaldy Ampatuan; governor from the province of Lanao Del Norte, Governor Angging Dimaporo; governor of the province of Antique, Governor Sally Perez.

We have a whole number of Cabinet members with us: Secretary Peter Favila of Trade and Industry; Secretary Popo Lotilla of Energy; Press Secretary Toting Bunye; you already met earlier Secretary Cerge Remonde, the chairman of our broadcast channels, television channels; the head of my Presidential Adviser for the Peace Process, Jess Dureza; our Acting Secretary of Land Reform, Nasser Pangandaman; our chairman of the TESDA, Chairman Boboy Syjuco; also here is the one who takes care of many of our overseas Filipinos here, our head of OWWA, Nitoy Roque; and the one who welcomed me, but we should be welcoming him, our incoming new Ambassador to Saudi Arabia, if he passes the committee of Senator Santiago in the Commission on Appointments, Ambassador Tony Villamor.

Also here are our officials of Foreign Affairs led by your former ambassador here, Paeng Seguis and… The one who takes care of us in case of danger, Ambassador Roy Cimatu and all the officials of the DFA. Also here is our business delegation from the Philippines. I will not mention all their names but can we ask them to stand and be acknowledged. Members of our embassy, leaders of the Filipino community here in Saudi Arabia and in Riyadh, fellow countrymen, good evening to all of you.

And thank you for waiting for me and as you know, I came to Saudi Arabia as a state visitor of the great king, the Custodian of the Two Mosques.

I was welcomed with warmth and generous hospitality which has the mark of the deep importance given by Saudi Arabia to the Philippines.

The Kingdom has a clout in the world that will stretch forward through the millennium, and to you, more than a million Filipinos in the Kingdom, you have a large contribution to the influence of Saudi Arabia throughout the world.

In my storytelling to the great king of Saudi Arabia and other officials of their government, I always boast about the great Filipino worker, and they also boast about you. They are very happy with the good work of Filipinos here in Saudi Arabia.

Filipino workers play a major role in the economic and infrastructure development of the Kingdom. In every vital activity in this land—producing oil—where are our workers in the oil industry? Thank you—building cities—where are those in our construction industry? Thank you—laying out roads and power lines, taking care of the health of our people—those are the ones wearing white here—there are Filipinos.

I remember how this OFW phenomenon started here in Saudi Arabia. I remember it happened during the first petrodollar boom in 1974, many Filipino construction companies were involved in that boom so of course they brought Filipino workers, and the skill of Filipinos was seen. So after that, it increased and increased, not only Philippine construction companies but also various Arab companies and agencies hired Filipino employees. That’s how you became a million strong.

Our community here is the largest community of overseas contract workers. And you Filipinos are now one of the four largest groups of OFWs in Saudi Arabia along with those from India, Pakistan, and Egypt. But according to the Cabinet in attendance who take care of me on all my visits, the secretary of social welfare, the difference of Filipinos from the other three is that almost all Filipinos here, eight percent are in managerial and highly technical positions. And according to the businessmen with us, our Filipino businessmen this noon, they say, Filipinos are number one in skill and kindness.

If there was a petrodollar boom in 1974, now there is an even bigger petrodollar boom due to the new increase in oil prices, this is a bigger boom than in 1974. And if they boomed before and a lot of construction was done, especially now they have a lot of petrodollars. One proposal I made during my visit is for them to build a refinery, an oil refinery in Mindanao so that our poor people there will have relief. But aside from that, here in Saudi Arabia there is a big increase in opportunities again because they will build five economic zones here in Saudi Arabia starting with the King Abdullah Economic City. And each of these economic cities is larger than neighboring countries next to them, an entire country, each one is larger than this economic zone. So what happened in 1974, the boom will be more than 5 times bigger. And because you have shown your skill over the past thirty years since the 1970s, they said, the head of the Saudi General Investment Authority said that Filipinos are their preferred human resource in this big expansion.

They thank you, I also thank you for your remittances to our country because of you our peso has become very strong. We have a real estate boom because you are buying houses and apartments for your relatives. The stock market has also been infected by the real estate boom. Earlier, a businessman approached me and said, “Congratulations! Mrs. President.” Because in Manila our report today, Monday, is the biggest increase in the stock market in the entire history of the Philippines. And earlier the news from the businessmen here in Saudi Arabia was good. They really want to invest in our country—energy, tourism, information technology, mining, agriculture—and why? Because they saw how skilled you are, they said, there must be more where you come from. They want to invest now because of you. And we are happy that Saudi Arabia's investments in the Philippines will increase.

Saudi Arabia is an important priority of our government. The Philippine government has three major foreign policy concerns here in Saudi Arabia: first, of course, the welfare of the Filipino workers; second, finding relief for the oil crisis that is adversely affecting the world including the low and middle-income oil importing countries like the Philippines; and third, the ongoing peace process in Mindanao. Saudi Arabia is related to our peace process because Saudi Arabia helps our firm determination to shape a just and lasting peace in Mindanao.

In my foreign policy, there are eight points. But I won't tell you all of them, I will only mention two. One is the importance of OIC countries like Saudi Arabia, especially in helping our peace process, and the second is taking care of our Filipinos wherever they are. We recognize the primary role of the great Filipino worker in the kingdom here. And we are here to express how important fair treatment is to you, especially those facing cases in the Saudi courts.

And we would like to assure those few Filipinos who have a problem with the law and their families of full legal support. So earlier I spoke with Nitoy Roque, I said OWWA should shoulder the cost, let's get an Arab lawyer for the problems of our Filipino workers.

Last night I thanked their great king because since the start of this year until now, about four and a half months, they have already pardoned one hundred Filipinos in prison. Then I said last night, I hope, I said, when I return home I can bring fifty more. Earlier, from the dinner with the Crown Prince I came from, the Minister of the Interior approached me. He said, regarding what you said about hoping for fifty more who can come home with me or at the same time, he said, we didn't release fifty, we released 138.

In my visit here to Saudi Arabia, one purpose truly stands out above all else and that is to ensure your safety and well-being here in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

I want to let all of you know that you can rely on my administration – Pat is here, Nitoy is here, our embassy personnel are here – to continue to protect your welfare. Whatever plans we are making for the benefit of the Philippines or for the improvement of our Foreign Affairs, your needs, overseas Filipinos, deserve attention and value.

The agenda of the Filipino people, my agenda here on this state visit, is all for the cause of a strong economy, stable oil prices, lasting peace, and above all the welfare and well-being of our workers in the Philippines and abroad.

So to all of you – the largest overseas workers community in the entire Filipino world, the best overseas workers here in Saudi Arabia, the best Ambassadors of Goodwill so the Saudis were entertained to invest in our country because they saw the advertisement you provide – to all of you, thank you very much for your love for our country and long live you all!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during a Meeting with the Filipino Community in Riyadh. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213816/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2788&Itemid=38