Thank you very much, Ambassador Jun Siazon.

My dear leaders of the Filipino community, thank you very much for coming despite it being a working day. I really know that some of you sacrificed, took the bus from Osaka, flew in from Hokkaido. So thank you very much even though it's a difficult day for us to meet. I am truly grateful for this opportunity to be together again.

First of all, I would like to once again express my great respect for you and your sacrifice and concern, concern for your work, concern for your family, concern for our country.

I have been here many times, and we have met many times. I remember in 2001, eight million Filipinos were abroad. Now in 2007, there are still eight million Filipinos because while some are leaving, others are also returning. But if we talk about remittances, in 2001, the remittances of Filipinos abroad were seven billion dollars while now it has almost doubled to 13 billion U.S. dollars even though the number is the same.

News from those monitoring the economy is that you OFWs are starting to invest your earnings in our country, instead of just using them as remittances to support your families. So as I said before and seems to be happening now, you should no longer be called Overseas Filipino Workers or OFW but OFI or Overseas Filipino Investors. Thank you very much for your investment in our country.

Thank you also to our Filipino sailors in Japan who support our sailors in the Philippines. And hopefully with your support, as Captain Baes said, our Filipino sailors will become maritime officers or managers of ships so that the level will further improve for the family.

What our Filipinos abroad are doing now, doubling what they send back to our country, this is what is called financial freedom. That means not stopping at sending enough funds to support the basic needs of a family.

We see that you consider accumulating enough savings and using this hard-earned money as solid working capital as equally important. And this is the financial freedom of the OFW to become an OFI and use your savings as capital in preparing for your future and your families.

I learned that remittances are increasingly being used for human resource capital through education, and this includes your contributions to the classroom program from citizens abroad. Many thanks to those who donate classrooms.

Your remittances are also invested in health care. This is part of human capital, the health care of your families. But a big change is that you are also using remittances, according to those monitoring, for investment in real estate including buying land and building homes. Did you know that our real estate market, which is very vigorous now, forty percent comes from our overseas Filipino workers or overseas Filipino investors? You have revived our housing and real estate industry.

Those monitoring have also tracked where you are directing your remittances, which you are also placing as financial and capital investments. I even know some overseas Filipinos who are putting money in the stock market, some are buying government bonds and treasury bills. What else, Governor Tetangco of the Central Bank, where else are they putting it? Mutual funds.

So this is a big thing you are doing and as Captain Baes said, hopefully you can find more good places to put your financial instruments.

So yesterday, a securities company, Aizawa, went to me and he established a Philippine Fund for those with capital – of course, his main market is probably the older Japanese who have savings, they have pensions or lump sums and they can no longer work, they can no longer do business because they are old – passive investment. This can be placed in this fund.

And another thing we are seeing is that remittances sent to business ventures such as small or medium-scale enterprises are increasing. It’s even doubling the remittances even if the number of Overseas Filipinos isn’t changing, it’s seen that the culture of remittances is changing.

But here in Japan, while we congratulate and celebrate that the amount sent by the average Filipino to the Philippines is doubling, we also know that many lost their jobs when Japan tightened restrictions on entertainers. That's why, as Captain Baes said, the government opened the National Reintegration Center for OFWs in Intramuros in March, and we put it in Intramuros. Hopefully you, because you are leaders, if you know anyone who is stranded and returning home, please let them know and if you still have contact with them, your friends who have lost their jobs, use this Re-integration Center in Intramuros, to facilitate starting a new life upon returning to the Philippines.

If we think about it, what we really want is the day when going abroad for a job is a career option, not the only choice for a hardworking Filipino.

Therefore, our economic plans are focused on allowing the Philippines to move away from the system where people need to go abroad to find decent employment. That's why we are focused on the economy and developing the regions of our country. From Luzon Urban Beltway from Subic to Metro Manila to Batangas Port, that's where we are offering industries to locate.

In North Luzon, to our fellow Northerners, to the province of Ambassador Siazon and my mother's province of Ilocos – we are putting in investments to have a good agri-business, the same in Mindanao.

And in the Central Philippines, in the area of Senator Miriam Defensor-Santiago, that's where we are developing the tourism of our country. That's why in the area of Senator Miriam Defensor-Santiago, in Iloilo, we have put up – it's already open, ready to operate anytime, a new international airport. That's the kind of investments we are making. Because we need to distribute wealth so that our people can find jobs in their own country. We are creating jobs by identifying priority sectors.

Incidentally, there is another region, this one cuts across the length of all four Super Regions I talked about. From Baguio to Clark-Subic, to Metro Manila, to Cebu, to Davao, that is our cyber corridor where we have a lot of call centers and business process outsourcing. The young people who are already working there tell me, thank you for expanding our business process outsourcing industry because they no longer need to go abroad.

In 2001, when I was a new President, only two thousand people were working in BPO. Now it's 250,000 within six years and has become a two billion-dollar industry.

Captain Baes mentioned the election. In the election last week, Filipinos showed the stability of our politics through a peaceful, fair and free election. The message is that the economy is strong and stable. Politics does not destroy the path we have set for economic reform. The progress of our economy will not be erased. It seems that our economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability. Our economy's performance is the best it has been in decades, but we need to continue it. And as Captain Baes says, one way to continue it is through unity. Above unity, the short answer to how we will continue economic growth is summed up in three words: invest, invest, invest. You are already investing. Thank you for that.

These things that the government is doing, even though many people were angry, we imposed new taxes. Because in the past, our infrastructure was funded by loans. Now we have imposed new taxes, we need to follow the pain of increased taxes with the benefits that come only from meaningful investment in people and projects. Only in that way can we ensure that development is no longer reversed.

So while our economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability with the strongest growth rates, our interest rates, our various measures in decades, we should not rest, but move forward and sustain the momentum. And to make the change permanent, we will make long-overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure, as our overseas Filipino investors are doing, including on the part of the government, the billions of pesos we are now spending on education, health and training. Along with billions on new roads, ports to enhance the Philippines' competitiveness.

When we say we are investing billions in training, it doesn't mean we are the ones training, that the government is training, because there are many private sector training centers or many private sector vocational and technical schools, many private sector marine academies. What we are doing is providing scholarships so that our common Filipino can more easily access better jobs and better income.

These investments we are making in people and infrastructure are attracting investments from the private sector, foreign investments, Filipino investment, and creating more jobs.

That election, the counting is not yet finished for the senators, but for the congressmen and LGUs, the overwhelming majority of those who won are allies of the administration. So we can really call for unity, and we can also continue on the path where we prioritize the people over politics, that was Captain Baes' message, through identifying a strategy that is pro-development, pro-business and pro-investment that helps lift our people out of poverty, and, helps the Philippines finally become a true destination for investments.

These investments that we need to create jobs. Recently, Marubeni and Tokyo Electric decided to invest four billion U.S. dollars in the Philippines. This is the largest Japanese investment in the history of the Philippines. This is a strong endorsement of our economic program.

Once the Japan-Philippines Economic Partnership Agreement is passed in our Senate, and Senator Miriam Defensor-Santiago will be its sponsor, the door for Japanese workers will open even wider for Filipino workers, especially nurses and caregivers, trade and services between the two countries will increase, investments will become easier and more open, and Japan's assistance in technical cooperation and capability-building will increase.

So you are saying Captain Baes that we should coordinate with the host countries, the culture, the language is included in our Japan-Philippines Economic Partnership Agreement. Japanese capital will move more easily, Filipino workers will move more easily. The market will grow, opportunities will grow for businessmen whether Filipino or Japanese.

And for our country, the door of Japan will open further to the products and services of the Philippines. There will be an immediate positive impact on our farmers, fishermen and food processors because bananas, pineapples, crabs, shrimp, sugar, chicken and tuna will reach more easily because the customs duties of Japan will be removed when those products enter. Is that right, Peter? Is that right, because Secretary Favila negotiated that.

There will be immediate and long-term benefits to our industries in the Philippines, because the Philippines will be assured of a regular supply of important materials such as the special steel products of Japan, vehicles and auto parts, and electrical and electronics goods and parts in the factory sector. So if it is easier for them to import these raw materials, the more they can produce, the more they can provide jobs in factories.

And the fabrics and clothing will both have customs duties removed from each other. Aren't clothes expensive here in Japan? Well, clothes originating from the Philippines can now enter freely and without taxes, you know, Peter – once ratified by the Senate.

It is also ensured that, except for sectors that are not yet translated, for example, entertainers who used to be restricted will remain restricted. But in other sectors, there will be no discrimination against services coming from the Philippines. Tourism, cruise travel, air travel, information technology and banking are expected to expand.

In any case, this is currently the strongest relationship between the Philippines and Japan. Many Japanese tourists are visiting the Philippines. The increase in investments in the Philippines from Japan is remarkable. Ah, I mentioned Marubeni and Tokyo Electric, four billion dollars; Sumitomo will invest one billion dollars in our mining, and so on.

And in another notable area, Japan has made an important contribution to peace and stability in Mindanao. Who here is from Mindanao? Okay. Japan, like the Philippines, is pro-peace, democratic, and respects human rights. That is why I expect the laws of Japan to treat Filipino workers allowed to work here well, as well as Japanese ships.

Let us stand together and share the burden, to promote the Philippines as a progressive nation for all Filipinos. I am pleased to see you again. It's a working day so we couldn't invite more Filipinos. But you are the leaders, you just send our continued respect to the workers here in Japan.

Thank you all very much and long live the Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].