Thank you very much, Julius, for your introduction of me. And thank you very much also for your invitation to me here at your meeting.

Let me first greet the various officials – some, because there have been many officials since then. But those who are here, at least on stage – my new party mate, Vice Mayor Herbert Bautista, thank you; Edward Balanag, the Executive Director; Vice Governor Mon Lakbain of Zambales; my friend Bobit Carlos – he’s sitting there – Mayor of Valenzuela; Mayor Eva Guillegue – how is our, what? How are our high-breed rice there now? Very good! We have a project; we have many councilors here but let me greet the president of the Councilors’ League of Palawan, Councilor Rowena Acosta. And my candidate in the last election, Greg Alcera; Assemblyman Pijuan is also here – from Cavite, right?; Also here is – perhaps you will be working with him if we become partners, my Presidential Liaison for Political Affairs, Secretary Joey Rufino.

And if you were the youth of the barangay a generation ago, your equivalent now is the SK. And so your equivalent, Julius’ equivalent, is Richard Nalupta.

To the various people here at your Kabataang Barangay Alumni Association Convention, good afternoon to all of you. And it is a great honor that I am here with you.

You know, this wasn't really in my appointment book. It was a regret from the beginning. Then, I called my Appointment Secretary and I said, I will go to… In fact, my… Usually, my public appointments are from ten o’clock to three o’clock, because from three o’clock to seven o’clock, I do desk work. But this, that’s why my appointments are now full from ten to three. So, my Appointment Secretary said—actually, it wasn’t even scheduled and they already responded by declining the invitation—so, will you agree it will eat up into your desk work time? I said, “yes.”

Many were surprised why—even my Appointments Committee declined this invitation—I still accepted it. And someone even told me, “why did you accept? Don’t you know 95 percent of them are at EDSA 3?” I said, “but I am the president of EDSA 2 and EDSA 3.”

So, if you invite me here, here I am. If you invite me, it means you are ready, open to unity and reconciliation. And I, as the president of EDSA 2 and EDSA 3, president of the entire Philippines, I also give you the olive branch of peace and reconciliation.

Because, it would be a waste of the talent of the Kabataang Barangay Alumni if it were only used for fighting and dividing our country. It is much more important if your talents and skills are used to unite our country. That’s why I am here, first of all, to ask for your help with my government.

I congratulate the leadership and members of the Kabataang Barangay Alumni Association on your successful launch of this “National Congress on Youth Development.” I am pleased to learn that even though we face many challenges now, and even though you are one generation away from being youth leaders, you are still actively helping and strengthening the unity and advancement of our nation.

These few days of the congress can be considered a big step towards a vibrant and strengthened youth sector because in your time, you were truly the real hope of our country. Even now, our youth are truly the hope of our country. So because your aim is youth development, that means that the experiences and wisdom you gained during your time, you want to pass on to the next generation, that is very good. Pass it on also to help the government, not to fight the government.

This congress is a big step towards a more vibrant and empowered youth. The Kabataang Barangay, you who are Kabataang Barangay are no stranger to the field of politics and public service, and because of this exposure you can become beacons for generations to come. That’s why Ritchie and the next generation are here.

This gathering also imparts an abundance of hope, that an immense pool of talent and resolve is on hand as we advance to a more peaceful, progressive and confident future.

From this hope flows the strength to confront and overcome challenges. Hope gives the tenacity of spirit to reach for the best, the noblest, the most sublime of human aspirations.

But hope alone, without the substance of deeds, cannot meaningfully alter or improve the human condition. Hope must equally be transmitted into the realm of decisive action and resolute initiative.

When my administration took the reins of governance more than a year ago, I said that we must conquer poverty within the decade. We have been resolute in achieving this goal, even as the nation has been buffeted by stiff political and economic challenges. And even as the war on terrorism moves forward, the war on poverty must be the overarching war.

I said when I became president, that we should be ambitious for our country. And that we should eradicate the problem of poverty within a decade. And I said in my State of the Nation Address last year, you have alumni there, right? Congressman Erise and Congressman Teodoro. I said that our fight against poverty in my administration’s medium-term Philippine development plan has four parts:

First, regarding the existence of the economic system in the new century. The first way to fight poverty is through employment. The people should have jobs, and to have jobs, there needs to be investment. And to have investment, there needs to be a good macro-economic environment.

Second, because the majority of our poor are in the countryside, we need agricultural modernization founded on social equity. What we did as an experiment in Banay-banay is one of the most important tasks in our medium-term Philippine development plan. And I am pleased to learn that the town mayor at that time, the administration's partner in modernizing agriculture, in the prototype, in the experiment, was none other than a member of the youth barangay.

Third, are the direct programs that help the poor.

And fourth, a measure of morality should exist in our government and in our society.

We have many programs being implemented now to improve the livelihood of our poor countrymen and to help the disadvantaged sectors of society, and part of this for special sectors is the youth.

And what do we want to do for the youth? First of all, education, because we must give the youth knowledge and skills so that as they grow up they become responsible citizens who can support themselves. After that, our goal is for students to have jobs when they graduate, and to provide temporary jobs for young people who are not in school. We also aim to ensure that our youth do not become addicted to drugs or prohibited substances, thus ruining their future.

The necessary education was also mentioned in my State of the Nation Address last year. According to the Department of Education, more than twelve thousand teachers from Regions two, seven, nine, ten, and CARAGA are currently receiving additional training as part of our effort to provide our students with a high level of education. At the same time, a Curriculum Reform Summit has been launched to study and decide on the necessary reforms in the curriculum of our schools.

Because, if we are to be competitive in the twenty-first century, this is the century of information and communication technology. In tertiary education, ICT needs to be learned. and we need many good opportunities awaiting certified programmers. Those who go through a certification program for programmers. It doesn't mean, the computer courses of diploma mills. And in basic education, we need to strengthen science and mathematics. That is our program regarding education.

We are also strengthening the methods for producing low-cost science equipment, because science and math are important, and instructional materials for use by our teachers and students. We are improving the replication and duplication of computer-based teaching modules as instructional materials for science and mathematics, which is our focus now.

Likewise, more than 1.4 billion pesos is ready for the purchase of over thirty-three million books, which is part of our program to achieve a 1:1 student-textbook ratio for those in grades 1 to 4, and 1st and 2nd year high school by June of next year.

In addition, we are preparing a supplemental budget amounting to 1.5 billion pesos for additional teachers and their additional salaries. I am also pleased to say that our congress has approved 1.98 billion pesos for twenty thousand new positions in our public schools in the coming school year. At the same time, we are focusing on the program of having one school in every barangay.

Regarding youth employment, there are programs being implemented now by the Department of Labor and Employment regarding this. First, I will mention the Special Program for the Employment of Students or S-P-E-S.

Currently, more than one hundred and seven thousand job vacancies have already been solicited under this program. And almost one hundred and twenty thousand student and dropout applicants, more than eighty-eight thousand youth have been employed so far.

There is also the Work Appreciation Program or W-A-P. There is also a Career Guidance Program and the Working Youth Center that we established to organize and strengthen the capabilities of youth organizations and their members in various parts of our archipelago.

We are also strengthening programs that help out-of-school youth or O-S-Y. Under “Sulong Dunong para sa Kabataan,” the DSWD also helps O-S-Y through the Weekend Youth Brigade, Education and Support Service, livelihood assistance, practical skills development. We also have an emergency employment program for our O-S-Y managed by the DILG.

And I myself – because I saw these programs for the youth, for out-of-school youth it seems like men are the ones getting opportunities – so what I did was, from Malacañang together with the PNP community relations, we established an emergency employment program for female out-of-school youth in urban areas.

For example, the other day, we started a program for about 373 out-of-school youth there in the Commonwealth Avenue Barangay. The other day, 400 – about 400, I think. That’s right. – more for our out-of-school youth in the West barangay. The other day, for the out-of-school youth of Muntinlupa. Yesterday, for the out-of-school youth of Barangay Balete in Batangas City and also in Rosario Town, Batangas. And just now – I just came from there before I came here – for the launching of out-of-school youth emergency employment programs for the women of… in Nuebe de Pebrero and Pleasant View in Mandaluyong City. I myself am launching this under my direction and I am funding it, just like in places like Quezon City where Mayor Sonny Belmonte adds to it. Oh, aren’t we there, Herbert?

In this way, our out-of-school youth are given immediate employment while helping their community. They have a source of income and are also prevented from getting involved in vices and bad activities.

Often, our youth don’t really want to get involved in vices or corrupt activities. However, due to the lack of opportunities to improve their lives, they are drawn into using illegal drugs.

We all know that the scourge of drugs is one of the biggest challenges facing not only our youth but the entire society. Because of the huge amount of money earned by syndicates and big-time pushers, these syndicates continue to find ways to maintain their organizations.

Last year, I also signed letter of instruction number one which ordered all government agencies to participate in the National Anti-Drug Program of Action or NADPA. It aims to unite the civilian sector and the government in an all-out sustained anti-drug campaign throughout the country.

From January to November of last year, the anti-drug operations conducted by our police have seized drugs and drug paraphernalia worth more than 3.5 billion pesos. Their catch was bigger than ever before. Not because the drug problem is bigger than ever before but because the enforcement is stronger than ever before.

More than one thousand five hundred kilograms of shabu were confiscated by operatives of the PNP and AFP. All of this is just proof that our administration will not stop to ensure the welfare of the people, especially our youth. But I know that we still have a lot to do and I need your help.

You hold in your hands the capability and the knowledge of how best to empower our youth and enable our youth to become productive citizens and responsive leaders.

Together, let us explore the frontiers of reforms so that democracy and its blessings can decisively revitalize our society and create a stronger nation through our youth.

Again, I congratulate you all, and I thank you from the bottom of my heart for agreeing to make me a part of you. Now, I want you to be a part of me.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the National Congress on Youth Development. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225940/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7643&Itemid=38