Good afternoon to everyone.

Congratulations on the signing of this agreement through the National Nutrition Council and the DOH of ARMM. Perhaps you would like to know the contents of this agreement so we know what to expect.

So, the first party, is the NNC; the second party, the DOH of ARMM. And what does it contain? The DOH of ARMM will establish the National Nutrition Council of ARMM. And the DOH of ARMM will implement projects, activities, services regarding promoting good nutrition. In other words, whatever the National Nutrition Council does in our country, that is also what the Regional Nutrition Council will do. And the National Nutrition Council will assist the ARMM Nutrition Council. The funds to be assisted will be placed by the National Nutrition Council in the Development Bank of the Philippines Cotabato Branch, that is separate, a separate account, like a department. And this fund will be used for activities related to nutrition education. And that is the main function of our DOH-ARMM.

The National Nutrition Council, what is its function? The National Nutrition Council will assist the ARMM Nutrition Council. Is this amount correct, Bernie? Through P28 million pesos. This is initial funding and it is for various activities such as training trainers in infant and child feeding and nutrition education for various provincial centers. So, the trainers will be taught what our citizens should eat to reduce hunger. And of course, this nutrition program, what will happen is that it will be run by the various cities and municipalities. That is the first thing to do, that is the first activity and this amount for the first activity is almost P2 million pesos — the training program for trainers, that’s where we will start.

After that, those who will implement the nutrition program in the cities, in the municipalities and in the barangay nutrition scholars will be trained. After that, there will be training on good nutrition for the barangay. And after that, well, the training at the barangay level will continue.

So this is what we will do, that’s why we are grateful that finally the DOH of ARMM will establish a Regional Nutrition Council and the National Nutrition Council will assist the Regional Nutrition Council. So, let's all work together. But I would like to state though that this is only a part of our Anti-Hunger Mitigation program.

There are many reasons why people are hungry. There are many reasons why people are hungry, for example, in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao. One of them is that money may be wasted on things that do not address nutrition. For example, you spend on canned milk or bottled milk, cow’s milk for your babies. But you should breastfeed for at least six months. So, that will greatly reduce expenses and greatly add to nutrition, that is part of the training.

Another very important reason why people in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao may be hungry is perhaps because of the prices of goods. That's why our new Secretary of Trade and Industry, Secretary Jing Lapus, is here, because he needs to look at the prices of goods. Did you know that Secretary Lapus had a good start, on the first day of his work as Secretary of Trade and Industry, he immediately secured $300 million dollars in investment. Hopefully, his first visit here in Mindanao will also be a good start to address the problem of high prices of goods because that is one source of hunger. Although, I asked the Governor earlier, “how are the prices here?” He said it was okay. But that is one thing that Secretary Lapus will validate, especially rice, rice is very important, the price of rice. If the price of rice is high, people get hungry, if the price of rice is low, hunger decreases.

So that's the two purposes of our visit here today in Mindanao. One is to establish the Regional Nutrition Council of ARMM and the second, we will check the prices of goods not only here in the Autonomous Region of Mindanao but also there in Western Mindanao, so even though she is not in ARMM, Governor Aurora Cerilles of Zamboanga del Sur is also here because after this, we will look at the prices of goods in the Zamboanga area.

So to all of you, let's work together, let's fight poverty, let's fight hunger.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the signing of the Memorandum of Agreement on “Forging Alliances with the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) for Nutrition and Hunger-Mitigation” and new town visit. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080233/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27755&Itemid=38