Taking care of the health of our children is part of building our future, as they are the citizens of tomorrow. If we want to have the capacity for global competition, we must ensure that our children are healthy, strong, and intelligent by providing them with proper nutrition and other care.

We also aim to lower the number of mothers dying during childbirth and the number of newborns dying. We support breastfeeding from the moment the baby is born up to its second year.

The National Action Plan for Infants and Child Feeding, launched last year, is a comprehensive program that addresses issues concerning the health of the mother and her child, the economic situation of the family, compliance with the national program of responsible parenthood, and the physical and mental health of the child as it grows.

Newborn screening should also be included in the National Action Plan for Infants.

This October, we celebrate National Newborn Screening Week through Presidential Proclamation 640 which we signed last year.

We are with Secretary Francisco Duque III of the Department of Health and Dr. Carmencita Padilla, geneticist, to discuss newborn screening.

Good afternoon, doctor. What is this newborn screening?

It really is innate. That's true. Because many people think that if something is innate, it can no longer be treated, but that's not the case—there is treatment available if it's addressed early on, which is why it's very important that we address this. And that's why we have a newborn screening week to give attention to this matter. So, to all parents, if your midwife or doctor didn't advise you about this, please remember to request this examination.

Okay, very good. So there is no need to spend extra because it is included in the Philhealth package.

Every day, more than ninety infants are born with a congenital metabolic disorder; every hour, four.

Let us work together to save thirty-three thousand infants from mental retardation and early death due to this disability. Learn about newborn screening from the nearest hospital or health center. Have your baby undergo newborn screening.

Thank you all very much.

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Sama-sama nating pagtulungan iligtas ang tatlumpu’t tatlong libong sanggol mula sa mental retardation at maagang pagkamatay dahil sa kapansanang ito. Alamin ang tungkol sa newborn screening mula sa pinakamalapit na ospital o health center. Ipa-newborn screening si baby.

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006. [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].