Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines On the Golden Anniversary of the Gridiron

[Delivered at the Pandanggo Room, Manila Hotel, September 27, 2006]

THE PRESS AND OUR MORE HOPEFUL FUTURE

To roast the president in the gridiron is indeed a glorious occasion for the press. And I’m sure you would never get bored even if you did it everyday.

Congratulations! For 50 years of keeping up this traditional event.

After the laughter and poking fun, perhaps tomorrow we can see some reasonable headlines in the papers.

Roy is right. You have the power either to make the sun shine, figuratively speaking because the storm is coming tomorrow whatever happens tonight. Or you can have the power to make the stock market go down. That is how powerful the press is.

And as for the killings of journalists, I’m glad that you support the Melo Commission and I hope that you will continue to support the Melo Commission so that it would come out with meaningful results for you.

I’m counting on the press to help our people become more hopeful of their future because indeed there is much to be hopeful for. As our president of National Press Club earlier said, the economy is showing great signs of health, not only the strong peso, not only the good stock market, but the fact that at last our people will be enjoying a per capita income of 1,400 dollars this year.

And if what has been happening during the earlier years of our administration that the poverty level has been going down by one percent point every year, that means that by 2015, we will be able to reduce our poverty level to one-half of what it was in the year 2000 in accordance with our millennium development goals. And we will be able to reach our dream, because right now we’re not third world anymore. At 1,400 dollars, we are now second world—a middle class country. And we’ll be able to achieve if we continue the trajectory of one percent decline in the poverty level, we can reach hopefully first world status by the year 2020.

But much of it depends not only on government officials, not only on the business community that creates jobs, not only on the hardworking Filipinos that create wealth, but also on the powerful media—one of the most powerful media and one of the freest presses in the whole world. Because if the military has the power to topple governments in other countries, in the Philippines that power belongs to the media. You have the power to make or break an economy. Because you are so powerful that your prophecies becomes self-fulfilling. And I hope that the friendship and goodwill of this fine evening will beckon us to gather around the nation’s brighter future.

There is a saying that goes: “Those who can, do; those who cannot… Those who cannot do, teach or criticize.” On my part, I prefer to do the “doing” and I leave you to your good choices.

But let us always uphold fairness and justice, duty and responsibility.

I hear you well when you asked me for things that promote the freedom of the press. I hope you can hear me just as well when I ask you to promote the responsibility of the press.

Maraming salamat and happy golden anniversary to Gridiron!

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].