Thank you very much Congressman Gordon for your introduction. And thank you all, thank you to City Mayor Kate Gordon, and thank you to Tourism Secretary Richard Gordon for welcoming us all here in the very beautiful and excellent city of Olongapo.

Before I greet the others, let me just say that when Kate boasts about Olongapo, she has a reason to, because look at this convention center which was built by the city, but the reason why DBP had no choice but to give them the credit to build it was because the World Bank itself said that they are deserving and creditworthy and a model city.

And earlier, before we came here, some of the Lions also went across the street to their amphitheater, and there they shared school supplies with children entering from various poor barangays. And that also came from the DILG program and Australian financing because it is also known as a reward for the city of Olongapo as one of the most child-friendly cities, a hall of famer.

And before this, we came from the city hospital. I remember the city hospital because when I was – I don’t know, a senator or vice president – I also contributed there because Kate, wherever she goes, contributes to the CDF, it should be for the hospital. She really built it up and we saw that it is a tertiary hospital with state-of-the-art equipment, so the Olongapo City hospital serves not only Olongapo, but also Zambales, Bataan, Pampanga, all of Central Luzon. So Olongapo City, the city of volunteers, Kate has the right to be proud.

Presidential Assistant Rene Diaz is also here, right? There he is! He is helping me to implement the projects here in North Luzon. North Luzon, the development of its parts is what we call ‘W’ because it is shaped like a ‘W’. We are on the left hand of the ‘W’ and this left hand of the ‘W’ from the top to the bottom is a tourism area. Then the bottom shares, like the letter ‘B’ at the bottom of the ‘W’, that is the interface of tourism and industry. So if you look at this left side of the ‘W’ that is from Subic in the south going up – Subic Bay, of course including Olongapo – going up, up to the beaches of Zambales, Pangasinan, Ilocos up to Pagudpud, that is our tourism stretch and all the Lions whose districts or whose clubs are there, a big contribution you can make is to help keep those beaches clean so that tourism in West Luzon will really flourish.

I would also like to greet of course the elder statesmen of the Lions, especially General Pedro Balbanero who spoke earlier. There was another Lion international director like Mr. Enrique Lim in the past; and your new state council chairman Mr. Santiago Morante, thank you also for your welcome remarks; I greet Mr. Jose dela Vega, the convention chairman. This convention is very successful. So many people attended here in this beautiful place. And I am also grateful because you gave… the kiosk, the tourism kiosk there, the cyber kiosk for tourists and I hope that the Lions here will also bring Lions from other countries to see our beautiful tourism here in the Philippines; I also greet Miss Adelia Acasio, the convention coordinator and regional chairperson. Congratulations on bringing our convention participants here; and may I also greet the Commanding General of North Luzon, General Rodolfo Garcia; and Regional Director of the Philippine National Police, General Rey Berroya; district governors of Lions; Lions and Lionesses who are here now; ladies and gentlemen:

I am so honored to be here in Olongapo City and to be here to address the men and women of the Lions Clubs in the Philippines who are gathered here in your 53rd multi-district state convention.

1.3 million members worldwide, said General Balbanero, since your founding in 1917. Imagine if only 10 percent of them you could offer here, that’s 100,000 tourists here in the Philippines. But not only that, 1.3 million members since 1917 that is formidable civic power. And I know from personal experience that here in the Philippines the growth of Lionism has been likewise impressive. Because I remember your help for example when I was having problems with the street children in Metro Manila. The Lions helped not only by volunteering but you also spent. You always contribute to the Streetchildren’s Program when I was Vice President. Aside from the fact that every time there is a Lions convention you have a check for the streetchildren project, I remember a beautiful streetchildren’s home there in Paranaque, near the airport road, it came from the Lions. I remember in 1998, the first Christmas that there was a streetchildren’s project. Of course, the days before Christmas are a vacation, and of course the government employees are on vacation but that’s when the street children come out. Who was on the streets to rescue them, the Lions of Quezon City and Metro Manila.

And having seen first hand how lions has supported the government, gaya ng sabi ni General, “you ask not what your government can do for you but what you can do for your government.” Having seen that, I am confident that your growth rate is directly proportional to the civic-mindedness of your members.

Lionism as conceived by your founder, Melvin Jones is all about elevating your concerns from a purely personal point of view to that which can benefit the community and the world at large. And as I said earlier, I am personally aware of the generosity of the lions clubs. And I never can forget lots of work that I mentioned for my programs when I was vice-president and concurrently Secretary of Social Welfare and Development. The topic – ah there’s one more. I haven’t mentioned yet the Center for Streetchildren Rehabilitation in Mandaluyong City. That could not have been built without the 75,000-dollar grant of the lions clubs international foundation. Because you remember when you had your 50th Anniversary, right? Wasn’t that the time the international would give a contribution and you chose this streetchildren center as the beneficiary which is very good. And therefore let me take advantage of this occasion to formally acknowledge the solid contribution of all of the lions clubs in the Philippines towards improving the lives of the disadvantaged sectors of our society.

Thank you very much and I hope that you are still willing to help with various needs. Because we have to do more for the poor. They lack opportunities for advancement, they are most vulnerable to the shifting tides of socio-economic change. And it’s not only Christian charity that should move us to help the poor, we must look at them as partners in improving our national productivity and growth. But to transform the poor into nation- builders, they must first be provided with the primordial opportunities for survival and growth. They must be provided the basic services with which they may elevate the quality of their lives.

As I mentioned earlier, we see streetchildren, beggars, drug addicts, forsaken elderly citizens and other vulnerable groups almost everyday. These are the disadvantaged sectors that lions clubs assist most. It’s just right that you are here in Olongapo, the city of volunteers. Because the Lions are very strong in volunteerism. The lions are also a constant reminder of our crucial task of fighting poverty remains to be fulfilled.

Poverty is the root of most of our country’s ills. Poverty begets ignorance, social inequity and the despair of those who perennially suffer from injustice. Poverty abets terrorism where terrorism stems from inequity. And conversely, terrorism breeds more poverty because it drives away investments and smothers the spirit of enterprise.

Poverty is a cyclical threat to national stability vicious cycle. Deprived of essential needs, the children of the poor tend to be poorer than their parents. And long-term poverty threatens peace, as our experience has taught us. The spawning grounds of conflict are the most depressed areas of our country.

And I have said on numerous occasions that we must win the war against poverty within the decade. We want to put a full stop to the cycle of want, injustice and conflict. I am campaigning among all sectors, all civic clubs, all local governments, all ethnic communities of the country — join me in this battle against poverty. I know that you were with me when I was vice president, and even more so now that I am president, I expect you.

The day before yesterday — ah, yesterday actually — was the death anniversary of my mother, the late First Lady Evangelina Macapagal. We had a mass at the Heroes Cemetery where she arranged things when she was First Lady. Now she benefited from it because she and my father are buried there. And while the priest, Father Bobby Perez, was telling a story, that his father used to be Executive Secretary of my father, he remembered that my mother arranged the Heroes Cemetery and Luneta not using government funds but funds from volunteer civic organizations. And he mentioned that those who helped the most and were with her — during my mother’s time — was the Lions Club. So from my parents, thank you very much.

My roadmap in the fight against poverty consists of four components: first, an economic philosophy of free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century; second, modernizing agriculture with equity; third, providing a social bias to the marginalized and the disadvantaged sectors to balance our economic growth; and the fourth, the adoption of higher moral standards in government and the whole of society.

We also have under the sectoral and social bias a sectoral anti-poverty program formulated in coordination with the national anti-poverty commission. This is geared towards uplifting the lives of less fortunate Filipinos. And this NAPC program has five core thrusts: asset reform. Meaning, the redistribution of assets to the poor like land reform and other assets for production; fortifying the human capital base of the poor; strengthening the capacity of the poor to engage in productive enterprise; politically empowering the poor through organized consultations; and protecting the underprivileged sectors, such as the children, the youth, the women, the aged against exploitation.

And if I look at these, first is asset reform — distributing properties, land, housing to the poor; second, basic services. In other words education for the poor, medicine for the poor, medical care for the poor; economic empowerment — livelihoods, microfinance, specific jobs for, for example, out-of-school children, that too is economic empowerment; the protection of the exploited and the vulnerable — those are the streetchildren, abused women, abandoned elderly, disabled people with few opportunities; and fifth, capability-building. If we look at all five, the Lions Club has a big role.

The Lions Clubs have projects that provide assistance to the disadvantaged sectors. I kept talking about the streetchildren but you have helped so much the physically disabled as well. Your projects form part of a positive response in aid of our anti-poverty programs, and I thank you for your invaluable help.

I have been informed that your clubs have complained of difficulties in having shipments of goods donated to your projects such as medicines, reading glasses and clothes released by the government. We want to help you facilitate your charitable shipments, but it is both in your interest and the government’s to ensure that the system is not exploited for the benefit of smugglers. Perhaps you can give us more details so we can set up a coordinating system for these matters. I just want to tell you about the policies, those in the law. This is the law. So if you want to change it, find a Congressman who will change the law. But for now, to avoid disappointment, I will say the law. You can accept donations except old clothes as long as you are willing to pay the taxes. I think your problem is the tax and duty free.

Now Lions, rotary, civic club are not listed among those who are allowed to receive, to be consignees who are tax-exempt. So if you want to donate, for example, you donate to the Lions of Olongapo City, donate to Olongapo City because Olongapo City is allowed to receive duty free — cities and provinces. City governments and provincial governments are allowed to receive duty free but not municipalities. If you want to give the municipality — well, like the municipality of Subic in Zambales — it will have to be to the province of Zambales. And you ask them to give it to the municipality of Subic. If you want to have duty free, but if you don’t wanna go through the government, you can go ahead. You just pay taxes. That’s very clear. Why except old clothes? Because there is a law saying old clothes cannot be imported. So there is a law that says old clothes cannot be imported in commercial quantities. So the DSWD follows that law. So if people want to donate old clothes tell them to just sell them. And buy clothes here. So I hope that these laws — they are not rules they are laws — are clarified. Because the times call for selflessness and a genuine desire to see the poor improve their lives.

I recall the words of my father, the late president Diosdado Macapagal, who said: “the chosen leader of the nation is expected to give his best, to work his hardest, and to bear hardship.” Kanina sabi ni Kate,” ma’am, I don’t know where you get your energy.” I get it from what my father said, “the leader is expected to bear hardship.” Pero I don’t know where she gets her energy. Mutual admiration society.

In any case, these words ring true not only for presidents but for every leader who genuinely has the people’s interests at heart including civic leaders. Everyone who subscribes to the vision of the original Lion, Melvin Jones is a leader. And a leader is always a slave to the people.

So let us be united in all our efforts for the good of the community. Only then can we succeed in our fight against poverty. Only then will we be able to build a stable and secure nation for all generations of Filipinos.

I wish to commend every Philippine Lion and lioness for their continued demonstration of selflessness and concern for people. Carry on with a big roar! And carry on with a big heart.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 53rd Multiple District Lions State Convention. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225502/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8282&Itemid=38