Thank you, Ambassador Gaa, for your kind introduction; and thank you for organizing this meeting of the Filipino-American community in Chicago, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio and the other parts of the Midwest.

Consul General Cabrera, thank you for your warm words of welcome. And, of course, to our veterans, happy Veterans’ Day to you!

I‘m very happy also to be here with all of you. Dr. Jose Evangelista and the other leaders of the Filipino-American community here, thank you for being here tonight. And I’d like to also greet the Chicago Committee for Chicago City’s bid for the 2016 Olympics.

I don’t know if you’ve met them earlier but we have here several members of Congress and the Cabinet: We have, to the right of Ambassador Gaa, our Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives, Girlie Villarosa from Mindoro Occidental; to her right is our representative from the BUHAY Party List, Congresswoman Iyay Coscolluela; and to her right is our congressman from Leyte, Martin Romualdez; and to his right is our Press Secretary, Jess Dureza; to the left of Consul General Cabrera is our congresswoman from Manila, Zenaida Angpin; to her left is our cabalen, congressman from Pampanga, Dong Gonzales; and to his left is Secretary Peter Favila.

To all of you, the first thing I want to say is, I am happy that we are together tonight. We have many Kapampangans here, good evening to all of you. I am honored to be with you tonight, my fellow Kapampangans. And I would imagine that we have some Ilocanos here tonight, good evening to all of you, relatives on my mother’s side. And I am sure, well, I know that, for a fact, I saw already one of my cousins from Mindanao, so to our siblings from the Visayas and Mindanao, good evening to all of you. To my colleagues, good evening to all of you.

I’m really very happy to be here with all of you tonight. And, of course, on the election of your senator from Illinois as President of the United States, congratulations! And to our delegation of Ohio on the election of Philippine-American Steve Austria, congratulations also! You have a new congressman and together with Bob Scott, we now have two Filipino-Americans in the U.S. House of Representatives.

We are here on a very quick trip to the United Nations. The King of Saudi Arabia – which, by the way, hosts the second biggest Filipino community abroad next only to the United States — invited us to participate in the United Nations General Assembly Session on a Culture of Peace. This meeting aims to promote interfaith dialogue, which means that we talk to each other whether we are Jews, Muslims, Christians, Hindus, Buddhists or from any other religion to promote understanding and tolerance in the interest of peace.

But, of course, that is for New York. Here, I’m sure you’d like to know about what’s happening at home.

While no one can predict the full impact of the current global financial crisis on the Philippines, our economy is stronger than it has been in generations. Because tough choices were made, we’ve been able to build a firewall around the Philippines, our economy that has slowed down and somewhat softened the effects on the Philippines of the global crisis.

You must have heard of the VAT, the Value-Added Tax, its result has been, on the one hand, more unpopularity for me, but on the other, to save the day for our country now that there is a global economic crisis. That was designed to address several historic challenges: first, it enabled us to have more investments in infrastructure and in people so that we can create an

environment in which businesses feel confident to expand and give more jobs; second, it has provided money to advance our pro-poor agenda; and third, it has provided revenues to pay down our national debt and shore up our fiscal independence.

On that first use of VAT – infrastructure. We are investing in modernizing infrastructure like roads and bridges on an unprecedented scale. For instance, your Fil-Am from San Francisco, Lupita Kashiwahara, who is with us tonight, told me that it took her only an hour and a half from Clark to Ayala, Alabang using the North Luzon-Clark Expressway. And Carissa Coscolluela, who was working in Subic for a long time before she became congresswoman, used to have to travel three hours to Subic. Now that trip has been cut in half because of our expressway. And next time you go to the Philippines, we invite you not only to travel to Clark, to Subic, to Baguio on this nice new expressway but also you can travel by car from Aparri to Sulu through our Roll-on/Roll-off Ferry Nautical Highway System.

You, I understand that you had a presentation, a video presentation about tourism in the Philippines. And, in fact, that is one of our biggest dollar-earners and employers today. So, next time you go to the Philippines, you can also visit the different resorts that we now have like Boracay, Cebu, Bohol, Palawan; or see for real the Apo Island that is featured in the Shed Aquarium of Chicago. Actually, there are two Apo Islands, and both of them have beautiful reefs. The one that I think is depicted here in Chicago is the Apo Island in Negros Oriental. But there is also another Apo Island in the Apo Reef in the province of Congresswoman Girlie Villarosa and is really a contest on which of the two is the more beautiful reef. But there’s so many of them, you should go and tell us yourselves which one is more beautiful for you.

The reason why we are so strong in tourism is not only because we have so many beautiful beaches, so many beautiful reefs, so many beautiful mountain vistas but also because aside from our beautiful beaches, we have the beautiful smiles of our people, and you bring those beautiful smiles here also to the mid-west United States.

Our strongest advantage indeed is our people, and that is also opening doors for us in medical tourism and retirement villages. So, I hope that next time you have a general check up, you will do it in the Philippines. I think, it will cost you less. Or when it’s time for you to retire, instead of going to an old age care center here in the United States, you can also do it right in the Philippines. These are all made possible because we have provided the infrastructure for private investors to put up these facilities that serve you and other people all over the world.

In our pro-poor agenda, we are investing in expanded education, healthcare, and other social services.

But of course we know that the relative strength and resilience of our people and our economy is still no consolation to a Filipino who is paying higher prices for basic commodities. We are aware of the pressures your families back home face from inflation. Prior to the global economic crisis, our inflation in the Philippines was only 2.8 percent and then it went up to 12 percent, but, thank goodness, it’s going down again. Nonetheless, it‘s still not back to 2.8 percent. So, we know that your relatives back home are as concerned as you are here about job security, and they are as concerned as you are here about the buying power of wages and the remittances that you send them. We are concerned as well. That is why we are working hard to keep the prices of rice, food and fuel down and to increase the number of jobs through investments.

In a time of global tensions and economic uncertainty, the U.S. and the Philippines remain steadfast allies and friends.

The Philippines will continue to be friends and allies with the administration of President-elect Obama, just as we have under President Bush. Before the election, I received a letter from Senator Obama which reassured us of a strong U.S.-Philippine relation.

In his letter, he acknowledged the long history and alliance that has bound our two countries together for decades. He recalled that we fought together against fascism in World War II and stood up successfully against a common adversary during the cold war. And that today we find ourselves shoulder-to-shoulder in a common struggle against terrorism and extremism. And he enumerated several issues that are of future concern to us: climate change, food security, poverty reduction, the future of ASEAN, human rights in Burma, and defense reform. So these are issues that he recognizes as the Philippines and the U.S. sharing common interests, just as we share a common faith in democracy.

And now that it’s Veterans’ Day, I should also recall that when I spoke with him last June, Senator Obama expressed his support for Veterans’ Equity. But I think we should not wait for the bill to be refiled in the next Congress. There’s still something we can do in this present Congress. So, on this day, Veterans’ Day, I gave my instructions to Ambassador Willy Gaa — and let’s all do it, Filipino-Americans here in the United States — let us urge the U.S. Congress to act now to organize the Bicameral Committee to reconcile Senate Bill 1315 and House Bill 6897 so it can become a Veterans’ Equity Law.

So, I thank you for your plaque, our veterans. And let us continue to work for Veterans’ Equity. You see, this is the first time in the history of our advocacy that the bill finally passed both Houses of Congress. Let’s not waste that and have to go back to first base again in the next Congress. We’ve got to convince them that this is the time to have a Bicameral Conference Committee.

Yes, the two versions are very different, but that’s the way it is in all bicameral democracies. Our congressmen and congresswomen can tell you, in the Philippines, very often on a specific subject matter the bill passed by the House, the bill passed by the Senate are as different as night and day. But, that’s the reason why our institutions provide for a Bicameral Conference Committee to reconcile the conflicting provisions and that should be our mission for this coming month and the next month. So, let’s all work for that.

Senator Obama also proudly made special mention of you, his Filipino-American constituents. And in his letter, he wrote that the special bond of the Philippines with the U.S. is enriched by the vibrant and successful Filipino-American community that has made such enormous contributions to this country. Indeed, that is so true. You, our Filipino-Americans, especially here in the Midwest, in Chicago and surrounding areas, are successful in your chosen professions. And you are successful in your chosen businesses when you choose to be entrepreneurs in restaurants, in forwarding, in remittance businesses, whatever. And as a recognition of how important you are to the community, there are Philippine landmarks and community centers in strategic locations all around Chicago and the nearby states. These are evidence that indeed you are honored by America. Of course, you are honored by the Philippines as well.

Our overseas Filipinos are honored by our government and our people for your sacrifice and dedication to your work, your family and your nation. We welcome your contribution. You know, 10 percent of Filipinos live abroad, and that includes the four million Fil-Ams here in the United States.

In New Zealand, they were telling me that 25 percent of the New Zealanders also live abroad. But the difference is that, mom and pop back home in New Zealand send additional allowance to their yuppies who are working abroad. In your case, even if your whole family is already here, you still send money back to grandchildren, nieces, nephews, communities, so indeed, you really never left the Philippines. In your heart, you are truly Filipino as you are American.

But we long for the day when going abroad for a job is a career option, not the only choice for a Filipino worker. That is why we remain stubbornly focused on the economy. And so I thank you all, our beloved Filipino-Americans, because you make us proud, you have a tremendous contribution to the American economy and the American society. And therefore, it’s not only Willy Gaa who is our ambassador to the United States. It’s each and every one of you, four million Fil-Ams who are living here and giving such a good name to what you call the Filipino. Thank you so much for that.

So, in conclusion, for your concern for work, family and country, and for your contribution to our economy, thank you very much and long live the Filipino-American!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Thank you, thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Meeting with the Filipino-American elected officials and community leaders. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134727/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6071&Itemid=38