Thank you very much, CHED Chairman Carlito Puno.

President Sangalang and Mrs. Sangalang and the other officials of Cavite State University; Governor Maliksi; Vice Governor Remulla and the other officials of the province of Cavite; Former Prime Minister Virata; other officials of CHED and the educational institutions of our country. A special greeting to the president of the Presbeterian University of Korea, Dr. So Yang Kim. And of course, our graduates this afternoon and especially their parents. Congratulations to all of you!

And happy 100th anniversary to your university.

This is the third time I have visited you, the second as president. And I am pleased to greet you again, especially the graduates today and their parents.

Graduates, you are now part of the group we call the great Filipino worker. And I expect you to succeed in finding a job. Isn't that the main goal of our graduates? In order for this to happen, I expect that you have adapted what you finished or what you studied. And this is a lesson to our high school graduating students, you should adapt your studies to the jobs we see that are looking for people to work there. If not, we should review the courses offered by Cavite State University.

I looked earlier when I was reading the graduating students of different courses and by far the largest was the associate in health sciences. So I asked the faculty officials here, what is the content of the associate in health sciences. And I heard something good, it seems your education system is ladderized. So those who pass the special examinations can continue to nursing which is in high demand all over the world.

According to the news, the Filipino nurse is the most sought-after nurse in the world. And in case there are those who are not lucky enough to enter nursing school or continue or pass the board, you already have an associate degree for, for example, a care giver or nursing aide. And we also expect many opportunities there.

For example, in Japan. We are having negotiations with them for the first time in history they will open up to care givers and nursing aides from the Philippines. We are doing these things so that you have jobs. In fact, this coming Tuesday — because I guess you are graduating now. Friday, you will celebrate this weekend. Monday you will start looking for a job. If any of you feel like you are failing or maybe you don't know where you are going — on Tuesday, a jobs fair will be set up by the Department of Labor here at Cavite State University.

Why have I been to Cavite State University so many times? Because you are in the middle of a very important place, region in our country. You are in Calabarzon. There are many factories here and I expect you to find jobs, those who did not study nursing or health sciences. Others, I expect you to find jobs here in their factories. And I saw in your studies there are different courses that seem to really fit what the factories are looking for. Those who graduate with engineering, although the engineering course is very difficult, have an advantage here in Calabarzon.

But sometimes people tell me that the factories, there are factories there that are not just looking for engineers, they are looking for specialized types of engineers. So as I understand it, CHED — is this true, Dr. Puno? — will provide several million pesos, fifty million pesos to improve the science and engineering laboratories here at Cavite State University. I hope it can be used to provide your engineering course, as I was saying, I hope your university can use these funds to further improve your engineering that is suitable for the very specific requirements of the identified factories here in Calabarzon.

And if there are engineering graduates who cannot immediately get a job because the factory they went to requires more specialization, I also instruct CHED to provide scholarships to students who need further study, the additional specialization that factories are looking for. But so that this scholarship is not wasted, we should already know, Dr. Puno, which factory is looking for what specialist so that you are sure to have a destination after your additional studies.

I also understand that DOST will help Cavite State University improve your research capabilities, especially in agricultural technology. I also saw in the graduating students different specific agricultural technologies that you are studying. And this help in your research is in line with our policy that agricultural research should be done by state colleges and universities. And I hope Cavite State University will use this especially in two things: how to make our coffee in Cavite more competitive, and how to ensure the standards of virgin coconut oil which is very marketable all over the world and where it can provide jobs for perhaps a million people because we have so many coconuts in our country here in Southern Tagalog. This help in your research on coffee is also an addition to the help coming from the Department of Agriculture for you.

All of this help in engineering specialty scholarships and agricultural research is part of your dividend from the difficult economic and tax reforms we made last year so that we have more capacity to fund the services needed for the success of the people and invest in more jobs, especially in Calabarzon.

So why am I boldly telling Dr. Puno to give a scholarship to those who did not pass because they need additional… Entered additional studies for specialization, because of our tax reform, I was able to provide 500 million pesos to CHED for additional scholarships. Education is always at the center of building a strong nation, which we started here in Cavite in 1898.

And you Caviteños, we should be proud of what General Emilio Aguinaldo did more than 100 years ago. But we still have a lot to do to ensure that all graduates have jobs and leave behind the old economy and the old politics of demolition.

Over the past five years of my administration, for example, in the call center industry alone — call centers and business process outsourcing — we have created more than one hundred thousand good jobs. These businesses are still looking for another one hundred thousand call center and outsourcing agents here, especially in Manila, Clark, Cebu and Calabarzon. But for every one hundred who apply, only eight are hired because there is still a lack of English proficiency skills when speaking to Americans on the phone or over the internet.

Therefore, I am also directing the Cavite State University, if you don’t have one yet — I think you don’t — to establish what we call a call center finishing school. And TESDA can help you with this. Dr. Puno can also provide scholarships if you establish a call center finishing school. And TESDA can connect you to those call center and business process outsourcing companies. Imagine, the starting salary is fifteen thousand pesos. If you speak two languages, thirty thousand pesos. And of course, that is the lowest entry level in that industry. There… The highest end is software development. I have already allocated funds to TESDA to help with what we call a call center finishing school. So the Cavite State University should offer this course.

It’s a shame, the 92 percent who are not accepted in call centers, they are looking for 100,000 more. That’s why English is very important. I am directing the Cavite State University this summer, to give discounts to teachers who teach in different schools in Cavite to study math, science and English. Is that possible, Dr. Sangalang?

Therefore, I thank and once again salute our graduates, their parents, their teachers, and above all, what I expect, my best wishes for Cavite State University on your 100th anniversary is that sooner or later, the sooner the better, the 2006 batch will also have a 100 percent hiring rate of our graduates.

Thank you very much.

Congratulations to all of you!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 79th Commencement Exercises of Cavite State University (CvSU) and in Celebration of its Centennial Anniversary. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412214115/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2436&Itemid=38