HELPING TO ACHIEVE ONE PHILIPPINES

First of all, I want to thank you also for participating in governance. I want to thank you for participating in the crafting of the Philippine export development plan for 2005-2007. I want to thank you also for participating in the export development council through which I’m able to learn of your issues and concerns. And I am thanking you for inviting me to be here with you today once again in our joint decision-making. Thank you very much for your support.

Peter has mentioned some of the issues — issues that we’re seeking to address in the export plan; issues we’ve talked about in our export development council meetings; issues that are being taken up in this Congress. And I know that some of these issues especially the ones that Peter mentioned are urgent.

So, I’m instructing Peter to make sure that the different departments act on them as soon as possible for quick wins within the next six months.

For one, we must address our small and medium enterprises need for financing. Well, I see Mel Salonzo here in SB Corporation. I suppose she will be the point person for the SME financing.

And as Peter said, we need more improvements in our education curricula to fit the needs of our investors. Education is the biggest single investment we must make in our nation. This includes more investment in technical training and vocational schools. And it means maintaining and enhancing our competitive advantage in English proficiency. We cannot be — and maybe shouldn’t be the low- cost provider of labor in the world — but we can be the best-priced English-speaking nation in the world. And we cannot let that advantage slip.

When we talk about education… Well, that’s what the reason why one of the main reforms we are making in education is that were strengthening math, science and English. And I have asked our Cabinet members — and I’ll ask Peter to ensure that this happens — that if we’re gonna talk about additional compensation for teachers, we should make it based on an incentive for teachers who will take up more studies in Math, Science and English. They are the ones who are going to get the incentives. That way we will improve education in this area.

And as far as VocTech training is concerned, it you remember in my State of the Nation Address I said, every Filipinos dream is to have a college education. But what you need are VocTech graduates. So therefore, we have put in a system, a ladderized education system, so that VocTech units can be credited for a college education, then you will have your skilled manpower and the families will have their great Filipino dream.

The other day, I was at a meeting or a dinner. I had a dinner with the members and officers of the fire brigade in the Chinese community. And of course these are businessmen, some of them exporters and they were telling me also… As one of the exporters was telling me about her woes. She said that she’s becoming very uncompetitive — she is exporting plastics — because there are so many fees being collected: transport fees, export fees. I was surprised to hear about that because I remember when I was in the Department of Trade and Industry, Lenny and some of you were there with us at that time. Remember we put up that export documentation center where the exporters could export documents in half an hour? Yeah. Remember we had that? It’s still there. But did we have all those fees that they are talking about now?

Great! So, I asked her, “you know there is an Exporters’ Congress? Are you joining? She said, “no, because I’m not a leader of the, you know, association and stuff like that.” But I hope, therefore, that I mean, at least I got it from somebody on the ground, so I’m looking forward to this issue being also addressed. So, thank you, Peter for telling me that we are going to reduce that.

Indeed, now is the time for government and business to close ranks. To enforce common solutions not only to… How to make our exports more competitive but solutions to the oil crisis and push the economy for final take off. As you know, we have set the course of economic reform and Gary Teves will make sure that we will not alter direction. We may hit rough seas but we will hold a steady course.

We have today and we’ll nave tomorrow a fiscally responsive budget. Imagine we are 35 billion pesos below the deficit ceiling. So, we will have a fiscally responsible budget that pays down our debt, invest in our people and lives within its means. Our budget mess and economic woes go back to decades ago when we acquired the habit of borrowing ourselves into generations of debt. Young people today are condemned for actions of another generation. And I will not pass on our debts to a new generation of Filipinos.

That’s why I thank Louie and Junie and their colleagues the passage of the revenue legislation by Congress is the cornerstone of our economic recovery plan. It is morally and economically correct. The benefits of new revenue are vast. They allow the nation to pay off our debts. They allow our nation to invest in social welfare. They allow our nation to build up the vital infrastructure you need to create jobs for the next generation of Filipinos. Without these new revenues, we will continue to lag behind the region and the world. Revenue generation is an investment that’s long overdue. To do anything less than forge ahead and make the investments we need and the nation would be a major setback for our country.

People who oppose new revenues oppose moving the nation forward and creating one united and modern Philippines.

The real issue today affecting our people is not new revenues but the global problem. The issue affecting today our people is the global price of oil. The rise in oil prices is a global problem that’s affecting consumers in developed and developing countries alike. Of course, that reality provides little comfort for those here in the Philippines faced by these global challenges in their homes and villages. Forceful and drastic steps may be needed to prevent a worse case scenario and we will continue to need full public understanding and cooperation.

The government has taken action to provide price relief to our poorest people with basic fuel and our most vital industries such as transportation which uses a 58 percent of our fuel to minimize cost to owners, employees and commuters. There are gasoline stations pumping cheaper and more efficient fuel and there will be more in the next few weeks. And there are additives now in the market, because we encourage this investment three years ago, that make each full tank go a longer way and thus save on fuel cost.

On the part of government, I’ve mandated the agencies to lower fuel energy used by at least 10 percent. And my Cabinet members, especially Vice President De Castro and Peter Favila, Secretary of Trade, are tasked with making spot checks to ensure there’s no price gouging going on.

To lead by example on the part of government, I take this opportunity in addition, to direct the government agencies, GOCCs and state universities and colleges to enforce the following measures:

First, force a ration of fuel for all government vehicles.

Two, the 10 percent mandatory savings on electricity and fuel cost that I announced earlier is only the acceptable floor for the effort, much greater than 10 percent should be the working target.

Three, public officials should stop using gas-guzzling vehicles. I asked my aides today, “are we using a gas-guzzling vehicle?” They said, your back up car is one. Okay, we will have to look for another back up car then, I said.

Fourth, accelerate the shift of government fuel to use bio-diesel or ethanol or compressed natural gas.

Fifth, open up the investment arena, Peter, for geothermal energy as soon as possible.

Today, I asked business to respond by providing transportation subsidies to workers. I don’t know how you’ll do it? Maybe buses, car pools, whatever it is. Eliminating air-conditioning and unnecessary energy usage until prices come back down.

I would also like to consult you again, because we should be together in policy decision-making, regarding the suggestion of returning all government offices except those in service frontlines to the four-day work week without extending work hours on the remaining regular work days.

Well, is that the response to my consultation?

We did it last summer, it was controversial. We saved money but some said that what we saved was not worth the inconvenience. But of course the price of oil then was not as high as it is now. So, it’s time to examine now whether what we saved will already be worth the inconvenience, and I ask you the private sector to be the one to advise us on that.

And I ask our people to respond through increase conservation and decrease the use of unnecessary travel and energy use.

And today, may I call on Congress again to pass new energy conservation legislation to decrease our reliance on oil and increase our self reliance on ethanol, bio-diesel, solar, wind and natural gas from here at home.

There are those who seem to think that the answer to everything is to raise their voice, shake their fist and do nothing at all. There are those for whom it’s all politics all the time. No plan, just rhetoric. If we could harness all their hot air, we would have no energy problem at all.

But let’s look at the long pull.

Our administration has the lowest inflation rates in 40 years. Right, Peter? Gary? The highest number of jobs generated in the last 20 years.

We had the highest income growth rate for the poorest sectors and the most equitable income distribution profile in 20 years. We are pulling up the poor without tearing the rich down.

Our stock market has been number three in Asia through half of this year.

We have a political firewall protection that our nation built on a military and middle class uncompromisingly loyal to the Constitution and the rule of law.

And today I also want to pay homage to our greatest export. Most of you here are commodities exporters or manufacturing exporters or service exporters. One of the things that Peter mentioned is about how much we need agriculture and DENR. So, I’d like to announce that I’ve asked Secretary Ermita, but maybe Peter Favila should do this executive order because he had mentioned it. I want to cluster DENR, DAR and D.A. into one cluster, and Mike Defensor being the most senior of the three Cabinet secretaries that are there, I will make him the chairman of that cluster. The idea is to make agri-business an important source of export.

But while I thank you all for exporting commodities, manufacturers and services, our greatest export — and I must pay homage to them also — are our overseas Filipinos who are eight million strong and are the backbone of the new global workforce. They’ve given us from latest figures a 30 percent increase in our remittances this year. A few couple of months ago, I was praising them for the 19 percent but the latest figure is a 30 percent increase. And I thank them for that.

But of course, I certainly hope for the day when we have the economic vitality and the opportunity here to beep our best and brightest in our shores. This reality underscores the challenge of two Philippines — one that works, one that doesn’t; one that is poised for economic take off, one that’s burdened by the weight of a political system that doesn’t work; one that exports in increasing numbers — and I thank you for challenging yourselves to produce 50 billion dollars in exports next year and generate more jobs — the other one, the political system that’s a hindrance to our national progress.

I want one Philippines, where the economy, social justice and the political system works for the people at every level; where good government begins at the people’s doorstep in the barangay and does not end before the closed door of a bureaucrat in Metro Manila.

I want you to help me achieve that one Philippines.

And I cannot miss the chance to talk about one export that has risen to the top of her game and does the Philippines proud — Cristeta Comerford, who is now the most visible chef in the world as the new Executive Chef for the White House in Washington, DC.

Congratulations, Cristeta! But you are just the epitome… You are the epitome today of the great work that all our exporters have been doing this many several years.

To all of you exporters, congratulations!

Thank you all very much.

Source : Adamson University Library