Thank you very much Secretary Puno for your introduction.

Tikas pahinga.

Vice President de Castro, members of the Diplomatic Corps, Dr. Cojuangco, Police Chief Superintendent Abarzosa, PNP Chief General Versoza, Head of our Bureau of Jail Mangement and Penology Dian, Acting Chief of the Bureau of Fire Protection Bandilla, Mayor Tolentino and other local government officials, other national government officials, PNP ’Kaisang-Bisig’ Class of 2009:

Congratulations! Especially to Cadet Roan Marie Bascugin, class valedictorian, congratulations! (Applause)

I proudly recognize the women among our valedictorian this year. (applause)

To the parents, relatives and friends of the graduates, congratulations as well! (Applause) Because of your efforts, your son, sibling, friend has graduated from the Academy. And special congratulations to the father of Cadet Roan Marie Bascugin, Police Superintendent Bascugin. (applause) This is truly the 30th Commencement Exercises because the father of Marie Bascugin is Class ’84 of the PNPA. (Applause) So these are second-generation graduates today.

The name you chose, ‘Kaisang-Bisig’ (United Arms), conveys the unity needed for the peace and development that can only be achieved through the cooperation of our police, firefighters, and jail officers.

And together with Secretary Puno who inducted you, who received you into the service of the Department of Interior and Local Government, I welcome you, the country’s newest police, fire and jail inspectors, to permanent government service. (Applause)

The word ‘permanent’ used by Secretary [name] is very meaningful in these times around the world. And it’s good that for now there are still vacancies waiting for qualified applicants in the police sector, the military and education.

We must continue to focus here at home on creating jobs as well as keeping prices low. Thankfully, the people were able to cope with the prices of food commodities, which greatly reduced the hunger rate in our country this January. (Applause) But the government must provide incentives to help the private sector to keep and create jobs. The government must also continue to come to the rescue of the poorest among us with targeted subsidies of food, fuel and rice.

How do we fund all these? The answer is: “Cut government waste.”

In challenging economic times, the government must tighten its belt and live within its means, just like the average Filipino household. To that end, the government is taking a series of actions to stop unnecessary and wasteful spending. The taxpayers deserve no less from their government and public servants. That is why I have ordered belt-tightening measures in all government agencies, including the DILG, PNP, BJMP, BFP and PNPA. It’s a good thing we already raised the salaries of the police. Over the past eight years, the salaries or allowances of our police officers have been raised five times. (Applause)

Now that we need to save, I signed an Executive Order to reduce the Maintenance, Overhead and Operating budgets of government agencies by 1.5 percent. This will save 7 billion pesos.

I have directed electricity and fuel saving measures. Our targets: Bring down consumption by 25 percent of fossil fuels; reduce electric consumption by at least 10 percent; turn off airconditioners at 4:30 except those with 24-hour work.

I also ordered that all agencies use fluorescent bulbs instead of incandescent ones so that we can save on imported electricity; and convert 20 percent of our government vehicles in major cities to non-fossil fuels. And we should start doing this now, Ronnie, with our police vehicles.

Government vehicles not on official trip, including police cars and fire trucks should be garaged in the agency office and the keys kept by the guards during weekends and holidays. Government vehicles used by officials below Cabinet rank may not have security plates unless there is imminent danger to the lives of the officials involved.

This coming Independence Day, we will forego the annual parade which costs 30 million pesos. Instead, we will hold a mega-jobs fair so that our 45,000 workers displaced by the global crisis can find employment and livelihood.

The government, including the DILG, PNP, BJMP and BFP and PNPA, must pour all savings and revenue into programs that help the poor and the middle class.

Savings from MOOE shall be allocated to emergency employment for the next six months. Secretary Puno has been designated as Emergency Employment Champion for the Province of Rizal, while Secretary Jun Ebdane of Public Works has been designated as Emergency Employment Officer for the Province of Cavite; and in both cases, in fact in all cases, with priority given to displaced workers in the export industry.

Helping the poor and the middle-class also includes more and more investments in education, healthcare and infrastructure. Kaya sa edukasyon kasama na doon ang PNPA. Thus, I directed the Secretary of Interior and Local Government to provide more slots for PNPA next school year. (Applause)

This class of yours — I think, 315 or 14 of you started — and President Cojuangco said next year 380 can be admitted. I told Secretary Puno to increase that and accept 400. (Applause)

I also ordered the upgrade of the PNP hospital and clinics — do you have a clinic here? Or, let's also upgrade the clinic here. Let's make it a primary hospital if it's just a clinic (applause), so that we can also serve the surrounding community. And not just here — I told Ronnie that a long time ago — that this should also be done in far-flung and poor provinces.

Working on infrastructure also means more road repair, where we can use OYSTER (Out-of-School Youth Serving Towards Economic Resiliency) and this is important for you because the recruitment officer should be the chief of the police station.

And all agencies must support programs for providing meals for our children in school and job and training opportunities for our young graduates.

What happened earlier when we were seated and Ronnie said he’s accepting you in the permanent service, Vice President Kabayan said that’s also a job. So you are lucky graduates because there is already a job waiting for you. (Applause) So in return, I am instructing all police camps, including the PNPA, to spend also part of your savings for providing breakfast to the day care, preschool and Grade 1 children in the school nearest your camp for the future of the next generation.

We must tackle many challenges at once to keep our economy and way of life going strong. On the part of government, we must live within our means and run a lean, efficient government. This includes continued fiscal prudence on the part of every agency including PNPA as our national government officials and economic managers undertake efforts to work towards a balanced budget. All the while, we must also simultaneously invest in key programs for our people, and certainly one of these key programs is public safety.

I am happy that the decline in our various crime rates has been continuous. For example, there has been a significant decrease in bank robberies and kidnapping incidents, isn't that right General Versoza? That's right. But there are still challenges we have to address. We must bring political killings to zero, including assassinations of government officials and media personalities.

This morning I talked with General Versoza and I said that Davao broadcaster Elgin Damasco should be offered police protection, and the texts threatening him should be investigated.

So your predecessors, Class 2009, have done a lot, and your class still has a lot to do when you enter the police, jail management and fire protection.

Our people have given you the rare opportunity to develop your potential. Go now and give back what you received by keeping the people safe. And as you keep the people safe, you will be able to carry out through your careers your theme today of, “Justice, Integrity and Service: Essential Values Towards a Strong and Globally Competitive Republic.”

To all of you, congratulations! Good luck! And thank you. (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the 30th Commencement Exercises of the Philippine National Police Academy (PNPA) “Kaisang-Bisig” Class of 2009. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412104248/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=22670&Itemid=38