Thank you very much Secretary Dinky Soliman for your invitation and for introducing me. And thank you very much to Secretary Roy Golez for your help in organizing this TODA summit.

Our Mayor of Quezon City, who is also the mayor where one in every four tricycle drivers work, Quezon City Mayor Sonny Belmonte; and here also is the Congresswoman of the 4th district of Quezon City, Nanette Daza; and here also is the vice mayor of Quezon City, Herbert Bautista; and I also want to greet Mr. Adolfo Quiming, the overall chairman of the NCR – TODA Council who spoke earlier; and all the different TODA leaders who were introduced earlier and simultaneously gave me this resolution; I also want to greet Ben Abalos, the Chairman of Metro Manila; and all of you tricycle drivers:

Good afternoon to all of you.

I am happy to be with you at this meeting. The tricycle drivers, the tricycles themselves are partners of my administration towards the progress of our nation.

I am pleased to learn that this meeting was formed due to the strong desire of the TODA leadership to strengthen your participation in honest governance and discussion of social issues.

When I became president, I said that one of my basic beliefs is that we should have a new politics. The old politics is the politics of personality and patronage. The new politics should be the politics of program and party and organized consultation with the people. What we are doing now is organized consultation with the tricycle drivers. So this is part of the new politics that we aspire to.

And also part of this organized consultation is the organized agenda that you gave me. This workshop output and the TODA scholars mentioned by Mr. Quiming, those we enrolled in GMA scholars for TODA in the work of… Organized by Dinky Soliman, this proves the new direction you are taking now. First of all, you are coming together on policies that should happen. And secondly, you want to study to finally improve your lives and capabilities. So this scholarship, I am happy and it is a great honor to distribute to you GMA scholars for TODA. May you continue to strengthen and be a strong pillar of our society in our continued facing of the challenges of modern times.

The tricycle is an example of the saying “small is beautiful.” because isn't the tricycle small, as small as me. Even Dinky, we are the same. But your sector contributes a lot not only to our national economy but also to the betterment of the welfare of our citizens.

All of you have become part of the daily lives of many of our countrymen — in their commute to the office, to school, delivering goods to and from the market, even in times of emergency even late at night. Here we can see how important the service you provide to the public is.

I remember once when I was still a senator, I reached… I was going to that… To an island in Romblon, the one they call the ‘Philippine Bermuda Triangle.’ the weather turned bad, I landed on mainland Romblon. There were no telephones so no one knew where I landed, so no one met me. So I had to find where to go to another town port, no planes, no ships, no jeeps, no cars, but in that remote place there was a tricycle so that's what I used.

Sometimes I went to the island of Cagayancillo. You know Tubbataha, you saw me diving in Tubbataha, Tubbataha is part of the town of Cagayancillo, in the middle of the Sulu Sea, in the middle of nowhere. But when I landed there by helicopter there was a tricycle again.

So because of you, passengers can rely on reaching their destination, whether it is raining or stormy you are still there.

So through this summit, I hope that we are truly partners to achieve national stability and progress. I need you.

The tricycle driver sector is found, as I explained earlier, for example, in almost every corner of our country, and your total number is now reaching eight hundred thousand people. Because of this, your participation and unity in our programs to fight poverty and uplift the lives of every Filipino, especially the poor here in the city like Quezon City where one-fourth of the tricycle driver is here in Quezon City, is even more important. Also in Caloocan, the number two with the most tricycle drivers, the most dense. Even in the countryside like the remote areas of Romblon or Cagayancillo or Batanes.

When I assumed the presidency, I said that we must win against poverty within this decade. After now, one and a half years of my administration, I can say that we are on the right track. because of the implementation of the correct policies, our economy is progressing even though many and larger economies have experienced a slowdown. The recorded growth of our economy last year was one of the highest when we compare it to our neighboring countries in Southeast Asia and even the rich countries of the world.

For example, we created more than one and a half million jobs last year, but we still need to find jobs for four million Filipinos.

And the highest unemployment rate in the entire Philippines is right here in Metro Manila. So that is our challenge – to find jobs for our citizens in Metro Manila.

And there are also those who say, “the price of goods is constantly increasing.” Those who say this do not respect the concern of tricycle drivers. But I, I want to thank you because since I became president, you have not increased fares. So, we can say that and because of your concern, we can say that the price of basic goods is still the same, such as rice, galunggong (round scad), medicine, fares. We have even halved the price of common medicines bought by the poor. These medicines can be found in the pharmacies of government hospitals. But perhaps Dinky, Roy, because TODA is large, maybe we can create a TODA cooperative pharmacy that will sell… That will sell medicine at half the price, if the TODA itself imports the medicine through the Philippine International Trading Corporation.

Of the objectives I declared in my State of the Nation Address last year, thirty-five have been completed and only twelve are currently being implemented.

This includes the security of land for one hundred and fifty thousand urban poor families. More than thirty-four – hopefully, those who have obtained rights – those squatters who have obtained the right to buy their own land, that’s 150,000 families. Hopefully, some families of TODA are included in those. And more than thirty-four thousand workers have been given financial assistance for housing. But I want to increase this to one hundred thousand in the next three months. Perhaps TODA can help build a housing program for tricycle drivers.

And I also hope that many tricycle drivers are included in the half a million urban poor families we have reached with health insurance coverage. Because now, almost one and a half million Filipinos have health insurance. And I know how expensive it is to get sick, so it is important to have someone to pay for your medical expenses when you get sick, especially like you tricycle drivers who may have accidents while driving, and the answer to this is the Philippine Health Insurance.

Our efforts continue to address the needs of our citizens.

Regarding the issues you presented to me today, probably – I haven’t read them yet, they were just given to me now. I was hoping to read them quickly but Dinky already introduced me – but probably some of these are already covered by the programs I mentioned. And you can be sure that I will strive to address most, if not all, of your requests.

We will study these and submit them to the relevant government agencies, to make the response more effective. Well, Roy Golez, our National Security Adviser, is here, you are used to talking to him, so he will talk to you and then he will pass it on to the appropriate personnel of Secretary Bebot Alvarez of DOTC. But I also rely on your help to quickly resolve these issues.

Your successes in the past should serve as inspiration to all your members to make your organization even stronger and more prosperous.

In this day and age, our society needs organizations like yours that are willing to intervene and work with the government through effective communication and cooperation. You are part of the great Filipino working class.

You are the true partners of the government in promoting our economy, strengthening our democracy, and enhancing the ability of Filipinos to compete with anyone in the world.

I once again congratulate TODAPHIL and all your members, especially your handsome and hardworking leaders who are seated here, on the successful holding of this summit.

Long live TODA!

Thank you all very much!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech During the First Tricycle Operators and Drivers Association of the Philippines (TODAPHIL) Summit 2002. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225235/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8343&Itemid=38