Thank you very much Secretary Cerge Remonde. (laughter)

First of all, I congratulate Joey Concepcion, our consultant on entrepreneurship, because the work we need in planning and programming for entrepreneurship, the advocacy, is a big part of it and there is nothing more that Cerge Remonde needs to do because Joey Concepcion is already doing it. Congratulations! (applause)

I’d also like to greet the Countryhead of Citigroup Sanjeev Bora because Citibank is one of the banks that lend to the microfinance institutions who in turn lend money to our micro-entrepreneurs.

I understand from Sanjeev that one of his… One of the conduits is based in San Pablo, one of the dozens or so very successful microfinance institutions.

I’d like to greet the Chairman of the People Credit and Finance Corporation, Egay Generoso. (applause) This is the corporation that was created under the Anti-poverty Law, which I was the principal author of in the senate, and the real job of the PCFC is to grow micro-finance through micro-finance institutions. And so we will also greet Nestro Custodio, the General Manager of the Rural Bank of Bulacan because he is one of the conduits for the PCFC’s funds, and this is what reached our recipients of checks earlier.

Similarly with the National Livelihood Support Fund. This National Livelihood Support Fund is the former KKK – movement… What was it? Anyway, it was about… Livelihood and development. And we made it the National Livelihood Support Fund so it is a long-standing institution and likewise… Before there wasn’t really micro-finance, but now that they have capital, they also channel their funds through conduit micro-finance institutions like the Rural Bank of Bulacan.

But now we are combining them, Egay, right? The NLSF and the PCFC. There have been problems for a long time because one is corporate and the salaries are corporate, the other is a bureau and the salaries are bureau-level. So, you can imagine who has the higher salary between the two. They have that kind of problem. But we are fixing that. In other words, no one’s salary will be lowered with our combination of the two.

And I also want to greet the various winners. Congratulations to our micro-entrepreneurs of the year awards. You are an inspiration to so many Filipinos who want to become entrepreneurs.

And Joey was telling me some of your stories that came out in the video yesterday at the Central Bank.

Our awardees bravely wrestled all kinds of trials and challenges to get to where they are now. There are those whose families are falling apart. There are those whose children almost died and had no more funds for expenses. They prayed to the Lord and their business grew. And we can still produce more entrepreneurs of their caliber – innovative and daring.

Congratulations also to Joey Concepcion, Citigroup, PCFC, NLSF, our micro-finance institutions like the Rural Bank of Bulacan, the Micro-SMED Council of the Philippines headed by Cerge Remonde, because of your glowing example of civic leadership. And thank you also to the Central Bank where your program was held yesterday. I was supposed to attend there, but Tuesday is Cabinet Day. But I was pleased when Joey said that even if I couldn't attend yesterday, you could come today. And I said that was perfect because we really want to highlight the importance of micro-finance to our economy.

So we also congratulate those who received checks from the Rural Bank of Bulacan where the capital passed through the Rural Bank and came from PCFC and NLSF and almost all of you are on your second or third borrowing, so your initial capital, which was very small before, you have been increasing and increasing it, and some of you are about to become small enterprises if not already from micro-enterprises.

The current benign, stable growth conditions are likely to spark a wave of entrepreneurial activity in the Philippines. And those who are here and went up on stage, these are signs that this is indeed happening.

We need a very vigorous middle class if we are to reach the door of the first world within these twenty years, that is our aspiration. And this system that was built, first of all, spread on its own but was strengthened by the Anti-poverty Law, in some areas, in many key areas we have promoted a new entrepreneurial class. And one of these is micro-finance.

This micro-finance, this PCFC started in 2001. Although there were already some micro-finance before that, the PCFC started in 2001. Our government's dedicated micro-finance program started in 2001. And since then, this system together with PCFC, NLSF, Citigroup, the micro-finance institutions like Negros women for tomorrow, the Rural Bank of Bulacan, the card and other like the ones I'm saying a dozen very successful MFIs, this whole system has lent more than 80 billion pesos in the past six years to low and middle income men and women who want to start their businesses.

I mentioned men and women, because this micro-finance started in Bangladesh, Dr. Yunus, it started his sole beneficiary was the incomeless assetless rural women. But of course, we adjust the system to our own system. And as Joey said earlier, it is admirable that among our nine awardees, three are men. And that is something that is very remarkable in the Philippines. A new development because in the past, women were really the best in micro-enterprise and the best at paying off debts.

Well, this more than 80 billion pesos that the whole micro-finance system – government and non-government – has lent has generated 1.82 new jobs in the last six years. In addition, our Central Bank, who is much to be admired also for what it has been doing, not only with ordinary micro-entrepreneurs but also it has created a series of investment incentives and programs for foreign remittances, the money of OFWs because the peso is strengthening. If the peso doesn't strengthen, the price of goods would increase too much because the price of oil is high worldwide. But of course, there are disadvantages for dollar earners like OFWs, so their remittances should be increased through being converted into capital and not just for consumption. And the Central Bank has that program of transforming remittances into investment for capital enterprises.

Regarding SMEs, where our successful entrepreneurs will no longer be micro-entrepreneurs but small enterprises. They no longer need to borrow from micro-finance institutions but directly from rural banks, even if they are not micro-finance institutions, or from savings banks. This small and medium enterprise system, more than P100 billion has been released to SME accounts under the Sulong Program which was started in 2004 and that has supported 1.71 million jobs of which half-a-million are new jobs.

We want the benign, stable growth conditions to continue.

When I came here, Countryhead Sanjeev Bora said, tough day today.

We express our condolences and pray for those who died and were injured, including some legislators, in the explosion in Batasan last night. While the police are investigating and security is being strengthened throughout the country, we appeal to avoid speculation, accusations and rumors that may create chaos, fear and discord and further worsen the condition of businesses. Instead of blaming each other, we need to unite, be vigilant against other threats that may be looming over our well-being.

No words can express our disgust at this violence. But we will not be intimidated by those who planned it. Because we want our good and stable economic progress to continue, both in large businesses like Citibank or small businesses like our micro-entrepreneurs who have succeeded and received loan renewals today.

The rule of law must prevail. No person is above the law. Justice must be served and the law upheld.

We are creating by executive order a task force against political violence to be headed by the Department of National Defense with the following as members: Department of Justice, Department of Interior and Local Government, Office of the Adviser on the Peace Process, Armed Forces of the Philippines, Philippine National Police, National Bureau of Investigation, Department of Social Welfare and Development and the Public Information Agency working with the Judiciary, the Council on Values Formation, the Union of Local Authorities of the Philippines and non-government organizations.

The mandate of this task force shall be to harness and mobilize government agencies, political groups, the religious, civil society, sectoral organizations and the public for the prevention, investigation, prosecution and punishment of political violence. The care and protection of people and communities victimized and threatened by violence, and the promotion of a culture opposed to violence and for the advancement of reconciliation and peace.

If this task force becomes as effective as our Go Negosyo partnership of the government, NGOs and small entrepreneurs, we will truly resolve the problem of political killings just as we resolved a large part of poverty due to our micro-entrepreneur and micro-finance system.

I believe that you, micro-entrepreneurs, and those who lend and provide technical assistance like Citibank are a reason why self-rated poverty has decreased. The lowest in our administration compared to other administrations.

And so, I thank you for all being here because with your support, we will make this an era of peace, re-assurance, stability and prosperity.

Once again, congratulations to those who were newly loaned to and the award winners. (applause)

Thank you very much to all of you. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech During the Presentation of the Awardees of the Microentrepreneurs of the Year Awards. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135929/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2280&Itemid=38