EDUCATION FOR A STRONG REPUBLIC

I won't beat around the bush, I will just say a few words because we are all tired of long speeches. We want, we are looking for words. Not words, we are looking for words that are short but work that is long and good.

So, let's proceed directly to the launch of this program, “Safe 4 SR – Safe for Sure.” What we are launching today is a program to help those who are forced to stop studying, just when they are about to finish, due to lack of money.

In my going around the country with people, I have found that many students and their families spend time and money for three or four years of college, only to run out of resources on the final lap. Many times I have encountered students who cannot get a clearance for graduation or take a final exam because their debt from their first year has not yet been paid or they ran out of money in the last leg, because for the ordinary Filipino, basic family needs like food must be met first. That's why many have difficulty funding their college education, especially when the family's funds are running low.

I understand this problem because this is the story of my father, former President Diosdado Macapagal, who started his law school, then couldn't continue because he got sick, couldn't work anymore, couldn't be a working student. The doctor told him because he had tuberculosis: “either you stop working or you stop studying.” but if he had to stop working, he had to stop studying, because he had no more money. Fortunately, Don Honorio Ventura continued his final needs. And because he was able to continue with the help of a kind person, he became a Bar topnotcher, achieving his success through his perseverance to finish his studies despite their poverty. But you, the students who have already started but cannot finish because you have run out of funds like what happened to my father, not all of you will find a Don Honorio Ventura individual, so I decided to act to solve the problem of the Diosdado Macapagals of the current generation.

I learned that we have four hundred thousand scholarship programs in our country but it is not enough. I found out that the scholarship and student loan programs of CHED do not reach all those we want to help. This reaches 20 percent of students in private schools but the students in private schools are also few compared to the students in our entire country. And not only that, that scholarship, even if it reaches four hundred thousand students, their provision is not enough to cover the whole cost of college education. Now, the 2004 budget will give the biggest funding support to education and scholarship in our history.

This is what we are launching today, an interest-free student loan program that we are offering today. Those who are lacking in their 3rd year, 4th year and graduating college students will no longer worry about where to get funds for your studies. You can borrow up to 8,000 pesos per semester. It will be paid, two years after graduation. If you borrow less than 4,000, it will be paid within five years. If you borrow more, beyond 4,000, you will pay it within ten years.

That is really ‘Study Now, Pay Later’ get your degree, get a job, and then repay your loan.

This is our fight for education for the average Filipino. I hope that some of you who are lacking funds to continue will be able to finish because of this. And I hope that some of these students will become the next presidents of the Republic of the Philippines in your generation.

Congratulations, thank you very much to all of you.

Source : Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2004 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].