Cory Aquino, you are here in our prayer. To all of you, fellow mothers, good afternoon. To all of you, how are you? May the Lord guide us.

We have gathered here today, we mothers and Filipino women under the leadership of our beloved former President, Tita Cory Aquino to pray, as her prayer says, “prayer for peaceful and credible election”. A prayer for a peaceful and credible election.

Only one week left and thousands of positions throughout the government will be chosen by voters. We mothers, we who give and nurture life, should lead in praying for a peaceful and credible election. Because of this, we are the ones who bring forth and nurture the future, so as Kris said, her son Josh, we have an interest in the future of our children, we should lead in good prayers for a good election. Instead of anger or heated emotions, we have calmness and clarity of mind to solve any problem.

We women have proven that if we are entrusted with the management of the country, our economy and society will run smoothly. Here is a great example, our role model in good governance of women, Tita Cory Aquino, our role model. President Aquino is not only a monument of courage and bravery, she also ensured the order of the election that chose her successor in 1992. And now I urge that not only Tita Cory be the symbol of a peaceful and credible election, but all of you and the different sectors of our society and government who helped to ensure a peaceful and credible election.

Let us pray for the role of volunteers, for example like NAMFREL and the help of various NGOs who pledge to ensure a clean election and also want to show the world that democracy in the Philippines is strong and stable. This is why we invited foreign observers to witness the election on May 10 and some of them came from the United States, they arrived last week to prepare for what they will do.

Today, I have instructed the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Delia Albert, who is also a mother, to also invite observers from the European Union and ASEAN as individuals or through their organization.

I challenge the opposition to join me in this invitation to the democratic countries of the world to witness our election so that the rumors about fraud and cheating will be proven false.

Throughout the campaign period, I endured insults and criticisms against me, to avoid any disturbance and to maintain the high level of our campaign and focus on the issue, on qualifications, on experience, on the future. But, I will never allow blatant violence to happen. I am reconstituting the Presidential Commission on Human Rights under the leadership of the Secretary of Justice, Mercy Gutierrez, who is also a mother, to thoroughly investigate the reported killings and abductions of members of some parties.

On the other hand, I assure you that terrorists will not overcome the strict security measures being implemented by the authorities. The people should remain calm but alert towards a peaceful and successful implementation of democracy.

We did not fight against the dictatorship and we did not march in two Edsa only to surrender our rights to those who spread terror or undermine trust in the election and democracy. There is no greater victory than the victory of the true decision of the people.

May the Lord guide us all so that we can ensure that the true voice of the people prevails in the coming election. Fellow mothers, let us pray, fellow mothers thank you for being interested in the future of our children, of our country. Mothers, let us pray for the future of our children, let us pray for a peaceful and credible election.

Thank you very much and may we all live long.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech at the Gathering of Mothers for Clean and Honest Elections. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133556/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5674&Itemid=38