Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the closing program of the Strategic Conference on Social Welfare and Protection

[Delivered at the Heroes Hall, Malacañang, July 7, 2009]

Thank you very much Secretary Cabral.

This document that’s handed over to me by Secretary Romy Neri is the result of what I announced in my State of the Nation Address last year that we are integrating the programs of DSWD, DOH, GSIS, SSS, and other Anti-Poverty agencies.

And this is one reason why I accepted the invitation of Brazillian President Lula da Silva to make a State Visit, where Espie Cabral was one of the members of my official party, because we wanted to study Brazil’s exemplary social protection program. The World Bank and others say that Brazil’s social protection program especially ’Bolsa Familia’ program had immediate and significant effects on the living conditions of its poor population, without discouraging work and job search. In fact, Brazil has already reached the Millennium Goal of reducing extreme poverty by half for 2015. So, it is indeed a model that we should study.

Brazil’s Ministry of Social Development and Fight Against Hunger was created in January 2004 to coordinate social assistance, food and nutrition security, and income transfer action. They have a single system of social assistance and food and nutrition security.

Similarly in our country, as a result of the work in progress then of what is this document now, we tasked the Secretary of Social Welfare and Development to coordinate the programs that were set forth in this document, in this plan whose crafting was headed by Romy Neri. And these programs are implemented not only by DSWD but also by SSS, GSIS, PhilHealth, DOH and the Nutrition Council, TESDA, DepEd, CHED, PAG-IBIG, NHA, Micro SMED Council, Department of Energy and others.

Brazil’s system of social assistance includes continuous benefit for aging and disabled people, fight against sexual abuse, violence and exploitation for child nd adolescent victims, and its flagship or its most popular smarky project — the ‘Bolsa Familia’ Program.

Similarly in the Philippines, SSS and GSIS provide pensions for aging people. Employers, in fact, we should thank for they have funded the two increases in SSS benefits since 2005. And GSIS pensions have been indexed to inflation and have increased every year since 2001. The elderly who are not covered by SSS and GSIS were given a one-time 500-peso medical assistance last year when we had a big increase in our VAT collections. Senior citizens enjoy 20 percent discount on food, transportation and recreational services. And Vice President de Castro was the author of that Senior Citizens Act when he was a senator.

Benefits for disabled people include mandatory 20 percent on discounts on medicines for the aged, medical and dental services, transportation fare for domestic air and sea travel and public utility, and educational assistance. The PNR, in fact, offers 50 percent for train rides.

Educational skills training opportunities are available to persons with disabilities. We facilitate their mobility by requiring public places and buildings to have access ramps, and mass transport facilities to reserve places with special fittings for them. Businesses are encouraged to hire qualified PWDs. In the Office of the President, I am proud of the PWDs that we have had with us for the last eight years.

In our fight against sexual violence, abuse and exploitation of children and adolescents, the DSWD provides community based services and operates residential and non-residential centers and institutions for the disadvantaged, including children, youth and women. Community based services cover such activities as adoption; foster and legal guardianship; travel clearances; counseling; educational support and legal assistance. Financial, transportation and medical assistance may also be offered to the disadvantaged during crisis situations.

A landmark in our campaign against the exploitation of women and children as the passage of our Anti-Trafficking of Human Persons Act. Putting emphasis on prevention, we are now more strict in the enforcement of the law at exit points, particularly at our international airports.

Two years ago — was it two years? — we’ve introduced a program similar to Bolsa Familia called Pantawid Pamilya.

Brazil’s Bolsa Familia Program is a direct conditional cash transfer created in 2003 by Federal Law, whereas, our Pantawid Pamilya is still an administrative program. But I am glad that I have brought with me to Brazil a congressional delegation and they have committed to sponsor a bill to institutionalize our pantawid Pamilya into a “Bulsa Pamilya” Program. Because if that Brazilian’s program is Bolsa Familia, why we also have Bulsa Pamilya.

The three dimensions of the Brazilian Bolsa Familia Program are relief, conditionalities, and third, capacity development. Relief we know the income transfer to the beneficiary families. In Brazil it consists of three components:

There’s a basic of 30 dollars paid to families whose monthly per capita income iis 35 dollars. In the Philippines our basic benefit is 500 pesos.

And then in Brazil there’s a variable benefit, two variable benefits, in fact, 10 pesos is paid to families even if their income is 70 dollars not 35 if they have adolescent children. And under 15, with a maximum of three benefits per family plus youth, and benefit of 15 dollars if they have adolescents age 16 and 17, that’s because they have a lot of I think exploitation of teenagers with a maximum benefit of two benefits per family.

In the Philippines, we have one variable benefit. That’s 300 pesos per month per child age 3 to 14, with maximum benefits of 1,400 pesos per month per family.

Now in Brazil, to be registered, a family has to answer a questionnaire. Then the Federal Government analyses the information and identifies the families that should enter the program. Then the benefits are paid by the Federal Government directly to the families who draw them monthly from banks and other establishments using a magnetic card.

In the Philippines, it’s very similar, the benefits are also withdrawn from the ATM service of the Land Bank unless other arrangements need to be made. For instance, in Siargao Island there’s no Land Bank branch, so to get the ATM money from Surigao City they end up spending their whole month stifend. So, now there’s another arrangement for them in Siargao Island itself.

And in the Philippines, the way that Espie chose the beneficiaries, they’re selected from: First, the poorest provinces listed in the 2006 Family Income and Expenditure Survey; second, the poorest municipalities in those poorest provinces according to the National Statistical Coordination Board Small Area Estimates of 2003; and in addition, 15 highly urbanized cities with large pockets of poverty; and fourth, results of a household survey where families are ranked according to their socio-economic status through a Proxy Means Test like the way their house looks or appliances they have and so on.

Now, in Brazil, upon entering the Bolsa Familia Program, the family is committed to comply with conditions to keep children and adolescents of school age in school, and to fulfill a vaccination schedule for children 0-6 years, and pre-natal and post-natal care for pregnant women and breastfeeding mothers. And that’s very similar to our Pantawid Pamilya.

In Brazil, however, the program has a capacity development component among the families, by means of separate but complementary actions from the three governmental levels — Federal, State and Provincial. The Single Registry data, because they only have one master list, enables identification of the characteristics of the families, and it orients the delivery of public services according to their profile, and this contributes to their autonomy and emancipation. And President Lula told me or the Governor of Recife told me that there are those who, in fact a lot, have already graduated from that program.

Some of these capacity building programs include literacy courses, popular housing is what they call it and we call it social housing, access to electric energy, inclusion in banking or microcredit, and work and income opportunities, particularly in civil construction, which we call public works, in partnership with private companies and for the 26 capitals and the Federal District, tourism as well. And what they do first is to train the members of the beneficiary families for this occupations.

And that is something that can enrich our Pantawid Pamilya Program. In other words, and that’s why I asked the several Cabinet members to come and join us today, Pantawid Pamilya families should also have access to adult literacy courses — who does this, is it DepEd?; social housing under PAG-IBIG for those who are members and National Housing Authority for those who are not members of PAG-IBIG; microcredit through the Micro SMED Council of Peter Favila — I’m looking for him — and which is chaired by the Secretary of Trade and Industry; and training scholarship of TESDA for tourism skills for NCR and Central Philippines and company-specified courses for the Luzon Urban Beltway, and construction skills for the rest of the country. And the DOE’s Barangay Electrification program should also form part of the Pantawid Pamilya.

Now by itself, even in Brazil, the Bolsa Familia is not a self-sufficient strategy to reduce poverty and inequality. It is in fact, part of a broader social protection and promotion network in Brazil. Such should also be the case in the Philippines, which is why we asked Romy Neri to lead in putting this document together.

The Brazilian National System on Food and Nutrition Security was also implemented by Federal Law in 2006. For our part, we also have a Hunger Mitigation Program coordinated by the National Nutrition Council, which is under the DOH’s oversight. And the survey say that this program has been successful in bringing down hunger. But we can still improve in this program just a little bit more, as I said in my SONA last year, by having a massive schoolfeeding program worth 10 pesos per child in our poorest and most food poor provinces, namely: Tawi-Tawi, Zambo Norte, Maguindanao, Apayao, Surigao del Norte and Sur, Dinagat, Lanao Sur, Northern Samar, Masbate, Abra, Misamis Occidental, Agusan Sur and Kalinga. And we should make this Hunger Mitigation Program also part of our Integrated Social Welfare Program. Tise Integrated Social Welfare Program should also include SSS and GSIS salary loans, health insurance, and scholarships such as the “One Town, One Scholar” Program.

We are proud that aside from offering free basic education, college scholarship funds have doubled, while private high school scholarship funds have almost tripled to almost 700,000 slots this schoolyear from less than 300,000 slots when we started in 2001.

And since 2001, we have passed nine very good laws protecting the most vulnerable members of our society, those who are intended beneficiaries of our social services. This include as I mentioned Noli’s law on Senior Citizens, which we added to during our administration; what we mentioned earlier, the Trafficking of Persons, the Magna Carta for the Disabled, the Anti-Violence Against Women and Children.

And now that the Integrated Social Welfare and Protection Program is under way — and that is what your meeting is all about — I have been meeting with teachers now and other educators. I formed a Task Force for Education composed of heads of public and private agencies, it was headed by Romy Neri when he was the head of CHED, now headed by Father Bienvenido Nebres, president of Ateneo University. So, Romy started the study also and it includes business and professionals to get a first-hand look at the improvements we need to make. I have listened to what they have to say and therefore these fine public servants and stockholders what they have to say.

And I am glad they have produced the Philippine Main Education Highway which maps out the reforms and interventions needed to ensure that the Filipino family’s investments are properly translated into best results. The successful completion of each stage of the Education Highway — early childhood, elementary school, high school, college or vocational and technical education, and for some even post-graduate education is a means to a productive and well-paying job and a good future.

So, these are the two programs that are really important for us to integrate. One is a Social Welfare and Protection Program, where although there are many departments involved, many agencies involved we have asked Romy to put them together first and enumeration of what they’re doing and then filling in the gaps and how to consolidate now that we implemented, being implemented at the direction of the DSWD, and the second other integration is the integration of our educational system.

So, I thank everybody involved in putting together these two very important plans, and I wish the best to all those who are in charge of implementing our Integrated Social Welfare and Protection Program.

Maraming salamat and Good luck to all of us!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the closing program of the Strategic Conference on Social Welfare and Protection. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412101139/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25552&Itemid=38