Happy Masskara to all of you!

The Masskara Festival began in the mid-1980s, when the price of sugar fell. The people of Negros were looking for an opportunity to come together to unite in hardship.

Before I entered politics, we would come to Masskara because my husband's family was involved in the sugar industry and owned a house in Bacolod. That's why I know the situation of the industry.

Therefore, when I became President in 2001, I issued orders for a comprehensive plan to save the sugar industry, including P 278 million from the sugar ACEF.

Now, the operation of sugar production in well-managed plants is good again.

This time, the government is averting the effects of an economic slowdown brought about by the volatile global economic situation. This is a global phenomenon. These global forces are causing real difficulties for countries around the world. We have been working hard on all fronts to manage inflationary pressures, provide a safety net to those hit hardest by these global developments and deliver the growth that will continue to generate jobs, and the tax revenues we need to invest in our nation’s future.

Food stability and security is a major priority for the government. We have been working hard to make sure that food supplies remain stable and to put food on the table.

We have increased and stabilized the supply of rice and delivered targeted subsidies to the poor; we have reached out to neighbors like Vietnam and others in ASEAN and elsewhere to ensure a stable supply and affordable prices.

While the situation has been stable, we will not be complacent. We will continue to monitor the global situation.

On the same token, we are working hard to strengthen the banking system, improve our fiscal health, encourage investment to sustain our economic growth momentum and to insulate our economy from volatility in world markets.

Economic diversification is behind your return to progress. Together with Bacolod in Central Philippines, where, as I said in my State of the Nation Address, we prioritized infrastructure to attract tourists. Bacolod also benefited from the infrastructure of the Cyber Corridor for ICT and call centers and outsourcing.

The new Silay airport was completed last January. Earlier, we broke ground on a new road to make the airport closer to Bacolod.

The RORO (Roll-on/Roll-off) ferries go not only to Iloilo but many RORO ports are now connected along the Western Nautical Highway all the way to Luzon and to the south of Mindanao.

In the call center industry, from here, we will proceed with the inauguration of Convergy’s Bacolod, its ninth Philippine branch.

When your economy rose, because of this, the rebellion that grew in the eighties diminished.

The Communist rebels used to impede the progress and development of a number of rural areas and even marched in the center of Bacolod. They are responsible for a wide range of human rights abuses. Bacolod will become a tourism and call center destination because we are succeeding in putting a stop to their ideological nonsense and their criminal acts.

Against the gale force winds of the global economy, we remain bullish on Bacolod. We remain optimistic about your future. Once again, a happy Masskara Festival!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Opening of the Masskara Festival. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135209/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1763&Itemid=38