Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Arrival Ceremonies after an Official Visit to Bangkok, Thailand

[Delivered at the NAIA Terminal 1, Pasay City, May 9, 2002]

Mr. Vice President, Mr. Senate President, Mr. Speaker, members of the Cabinet, the Charge d’ Affaires of the Thai Embassy, General Villanueva and the major service commanders of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, Ladies and Gentlemen.

My overnight trip to Malaysia and Thailand have been fruitful and rewarding. We have brought the Malaysian and Thai peoples closer to our own in terms of greater security, progress and social advancement.

As our political and economic stability continues to be proven and reinforced by recent events, there is no better time for fresh diplomatic initiatives in the fight against terrorism and poverty. Prime Minister Mahathir and Prime Minister Thaksin are among our close allies.

In Malaysia, I keynoted the 35th International General Meeting of the Pacific Basin Economic Council which Malaysia hosted. The PBEC is an association of senior business leaders from around the pacific basin region. It represents over 1,000 companies in 20 economies in the region. This account for over U.S. 4 trillion dollars in global sales and employ over 10 million people.

I presented before this forum our position on liberalized and equitable trade. I touched upon the relationships of the war against terrorism and the war against poverty in the light of our own experience. I dwelt upon mechanisms to temper protectionism pursuant to our national interests. I sought investments that could pay premium social dividends for our people.

Prime Minister Mahathir and I witnessed the signing of the trilateral agreement against terrorism and transnational crime in Kuala Lumpur — where in the media, I acknowledged that the whole idea came from Speaker Joe de Venecia — Prime Minister Thaksin has pledged to sign shortly. We will soon have their quadrilateral agreement to constrict terrorists and further insulate the regional neighborhood from evildoers.

Prime Minister Mahathir chipped in another big stake in the Mindanao peace process. In Kuala Lumpur, the government and the MILF signed an agreement setting forth the parameters of a stepped up rehabilitation and development effort in the former conflict-affected areas. The MILF will work with the ARMM in pursuit of the program. In areas outside ARMM, the government agencies will work the rehabilitation into their existing priorities and programs.

The GRO-MILF agreement paves the way for the participation of the Islamic Development Bank in the rehabilitation and development effort. In Kuala Lumpur, I was also informed by officials of Maybank, a giant in Malaysia, of its plans to support development thrust in Southern Philippines.

In Bangkok, aside from committing to sign the trilateral agreement against terrorism, Prime Minister Thaksin agreed to expand our cooperation in tourism. This was a very kind and generous offer considering that Thailand is the pillar of tourism in Southeast Asia — it probably has about 20 or 25 percent share in the entire tourism of Asia. So, under this agreement, we shall now engage in joint advertising of Thai and Philippine destinations. This synergy will bring jobs and income to many of our people.

We have also agreed to expand accounting trade arrangements. I have designated the Land Bank of the Philippines to be our official clearinghouse for such arrangements, the first of which will be the payment of imported rice from Thailand with a corresponding export of fertilizer to that country.

Among the investments and partnerships that were firmed up in Bangkok were the following:

* The Ban Pong group of Thailand and the National Federation of Sugarcane Planters of the Philippines will establish a joint venture company — Asian Sugar Alliance, Inc. — to construct, own, and operate and manage a sugar mill in Mabinay, Negros Oriental. The project will have a total cost of 16 million dollars.

* The Thai travel agents association and the Philippine Tour Operators Association will conduct joint programs for the development of extension and joint destination holiday packages under the twinning program of the Tourism Authority of Thailand and the Department of Tourism of the Philippines.

* Boon Tawd Trading Co. Ltd. of Thailand will distribute in Thailand alcoholic spirits produced by the pPhilippines’ La Tondena Distillers.

* Horwath Consulting Services of Thailand will outsource I.T. requirements from information technology solutions of the Philippines, which is located at the Eastwood I.T. Park in Quezon City.

* Corporate Vision Asia of Thailand will resell in Thailand the wireless communications software products of the DFNN group of companies in the Philippines.

* The Thai-Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce and Industry will promote commercial and industrial links between our two countries. The Thai-Chinese Chamber of Commerce will soon send a business delegation to the Philippines.

I also conferred with the Thai food Giant Charoen Pokphand to interest them once again in the Philippines after a disappointment they felt many years ago about our then restrictive investment laws, which at that time led them to invest in China instead of the Philippines. The Bangkok Bank also called on me and accepted our suggestion to transfer to their Philippine operations their successful technology of mobilizing credit for small-and-medium sized enterprises — something which many of our Philippine banks are not interested in doing.

In stressing the need for increased peace and security in the region, I called for enhanced cooperation between the military and police authorities of the two countries — Thailand and the Philippines. Prime Minister Thaksin and I — in his visit last October — signed an agreement on the transfer of sentenced persons. This time, he and I witnessed the exchange of instruments of ratification of the treaty on this transfer of sentenced persons. This will be an added deterrent to transnational crime.

I also spoke to the Philippine-Thai Business Council, the Filipino community in Thailand, and to the faculty of Chulalongkorn University, where I received an honorary doctorate in political science. I carried common themes — tourism, trade, investment, the fight against terrorism, ASEAN solidarity — in these gatherings.

And, most of all, the highlight of my trip to Thailand was my visit to their Majesties the King and Queen of Thailand. It was a wonderful meeting that lasted for more than an hour, filled with wonderful memories of their visit to the Philippines when my father was president, and the many times that the king and my father interacted with each other in various bilateral and multilateral meetings. The king remembered very well his trip to the Philippines. He remembered his trip to Baguio. He remembered his trip to the rice terraces. We talked about the rice terraces, about their being a national heritage recognized by UNESCO. But i also told him about how the young people now are no longer interested in working so hard to preserve the rice terraces because there are other better ways, more lucrative ways to produce rice, or there are other better ways to make a living. The king informed me about a technology that they are doing in the mountains of Thailand. They are also building rice terraces but with modern technology. And he is willing and very much able, and very much enthusiastic about transferring that technology to the Philippines. So one of the things that the embassy will be doing — now that I have left Thailand to come back here — will be to go to the various experimental stations so that we can save our rice terraces through modern technology. And at the same time, spread this technology to other mountain areas where the poor people need to produce rice at a surplus or enough rice that they can eat on their own.

In times of challenge and opportunity, there is nothing more natural or easier than to look to our neighbors for mutually beneficial arrangements. In this spirit, I went to Malaysia and Thailand to reaffirm close ties and inject vigor into our mutual undertakings. My trip was short, but I have faith that it built new bridges to greater peace, progress and prosperity for the Filipino, Malaysian and Thai peoples.

Tomorrow is another day. I thank you all for staying up so late at night just to meet me here tonight, this morning. Tomorrow is another day, and I shall keep on going with the job of leadership. From the capitals of the ASEAN region, I shall again forge into our country’s regional centers and find the commonalities we can muster to uplift our people from poverty. My spirits are reinforced by the genuine empathy and concern of our neighbors.

I would like to thank Prime Minister Mahathir and Prime Minister Thaksin, and especially the King of Thailand, and all the peoples of Malaysia and Thailand for their abiding kindness, hospitality and genuine sense of solidarity with our nation and people.

And to you, my countrymen and countrywomen, thank you for your prayers and thank you for your support

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Arrival Ceremonies after an Official Visit to Bangkok, Thailand. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225611/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8288&Itemid=38