BRIGHT FILIPINOS AT THE END OF RAINBOW

I am pleased that we are giving Bright Child a good launching. We have been maturing this for a long time when I was vice president and DSWD secretary—I started the project with UNICEF—Child 21—our Long-Term Development Plan for Children. And even then, I asked Lina Laygo, my predecessor as DSWD, to be the project manager. She started it, she made the plan from conceptualization and until now as chairman of the Council for the Welfare of Children. She is in charge of executing her plan. That’s why continuity is needed if we want our plans to bear fruit.

I am pleased with her Child 21 because what is our plan for children for the 21st century? Part of the result of her study is to call the program Bright Child, meaning we want our children to grow up intelligent.

So, what is needed for our children to be intelligent? That’s what is being developed within the Long-Term Development Plan for Children. This plan is from pre-natal—because the soul begins at conception. That’s already a child in the womb—up to 17 years old. So we have some 17-year-olds here, right? Where are you? 17 years old. There you are, hello! You are included. When they are 18 years old, they are already adults. So, the Bright Child is the child from conception up to 17 years old.

So, what is needed? Pre-natal care, proper delivery, post-natal care, exclusive breastfeeding up to six months and hopefully continuing breastfeeding up to two years old. Then, because many of our families are hungry, to reduce hunger, we had… Part of this Bright Child Project is what I mentioned in my State of the Nation Address—the healthy start. A vigorous beginning, healthy start because the public life of the child begins when he/she is studying—preschool, nursery. Healthy start because when he/she wakes up in the morning and goes to school, he/she is given a nutritious breakfast. Healthy start for the day and healthy start in public life. That’s why I chose the name healthy start nutrition program for the preschool day care and grade one. And I expect, I told Lina, let’s make sure that at least in Metro Manila we can complete this.

There are local governments that already have their own feeding programs in their schools. So we will not enter those schools, it will be community-based. But there are local governments that do not yet have a complete healthy start nutrition program, that’s where we will come in because of course it’s more convenient for the agencies to have the feeding done in one place—in the school.

So, that is an important part. On August 1, we are also going to have the launching of the breastfeeding campaign, because we want to promote exclusive breastfeeding up to the age of six months.

So, these activities are to have intelligent children, intelligent kids. And this continues until education. Bright Child must have a good basic education so we will spend on math, science and English.

I told Bobit Tiglao to take care of it with the Department of Education on how we can give incentive compensation to teachers who will be trained in math, science and English because that is what is needed in the 21st century. So, that’s grade school, high school. And we expect that the children will have a good education.

That’s why we also built 30,000 classrooms during the last four years because we want enough classrooms. We are striving to close the classroom gap for the next five years. We are striving that when schools do double shift, two half-day shifts, there will be enough schoolbuildings for grade school. That means the student classroom ratio is 50 students to one classroom—two shifts. And we plan to close the classroom gap in the next five years.

In high school, because there are so many private high schools that lack students since we established the public school system, our program is not to build more public high schools but a voucher so that the children can use the voucher to choose where they want to study, even in private school. It will be cheaper for our government. So, these are our important things to do.

In health, in addition to the feeding program, in addition to post-natal care, breastfeeding, we also want the whole family to have access to health care. That’s why I told Pingcoy Duque that the health care program he started, Philhealth, should be continued.

During my four years as president, 69 million of our people were enrolled in Philhealth. And of those 60 million, three-fifths of that are children from one to 17 years old, two-thirds of that of the 69 million. And of those 69 million, 30 million are indigent whose premiums are paid by the government. It should be national and local government but many local governments cannot afford it yet. We paid for the first year’s premium last year but now the local government should take over. But because many cannot afford it yet, I told Pingcoy, okay let’s re-enroll them. We re-enrolled already 12.5 of the indigents of which two-thirds are children. So that means 8 million children are now re-enrolled. Eight million indigents in addition to the 39 workers who are really paying their premium to Medicare. But the 8 million indigent children are enrolled already. And we are seeking to enroll another 8 million in the months to come so that when they go to the hospital there is someone to pay for them.

Pingcoy, what I want is like in Thailand. In Thailand they pay 30 baht and then the balance is paid by the insurance. So, maybe so it’s not too much of a loss, if you will allow parents, maybe if your child is sick and you bring them to the hospital, you will agree to pay 30 pesos so that there is sustainability in the program. Then the balance under the rules of Philhealth can be paid by Philhealth so that the family is healthy and the children are healthy.

So, these are the many parts of Bright Child. And if we have bright children, we will have bright adults in the next generation. And maybe the turmoil of our political system will be lessened because our next generation will be better, more honest, more intelligent and hopefully less politics in the next generation.

To all of you, thank you very much. Congratulations!

Source: Adamson University Library