Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During a courtesy call by the Philippine Women Judges Association (PWJA) Members

[Delivered at Rizal Hall, Malacañang, March 4, 2010]

Justice de Castro, outgoing Secretary Devanadera, incoming Secretary Dizon but not for the same position, women judges, lady members of the bench, welcome back to Malacañang!

This event is timely as we join with the rest of the world in celebrating March as Women’s Month. So, Happy Women’s Month to all of you!

We are proud of the great strides the Philippines have made in women empowerment. And you, the women judges with your 500 members have contributed much to that to uplifting the lives of our women.

The Philippine Women Judges Association has been truly a potent force in fostering an independent, efficient, and highly competent judiciary since your inception almost a quarter century ago.  In the practice of continuous trial system, for instance, as well as in other areas of effective court management, such as the mandatory wearing of judicial robes, the PWJA has shown us how much our lady judges can do to influence the direction and quality of our judicial system.

Guided by such luminaries as Justice de Castro and past leaders of PWJA, this association I’m sure will go even farther to improve the welfare of our womenfolk. I hear that one of the topics of this year’s convention is Republic Act 9710 or the Magna Carta for Women.  This is one of the most important pieces of legislation to come out during my administration.  I hope that this law will help you and even your male colleagues in the adjudication of cases involving abuse and discrimination against women.  So as womenfolk, as fellow women, let us continuously work hand in hand.

We in the Executive are certainly very willing to work hand in hand with the courts to ensure the full protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms of women, especially those who are marginalized.  And we’re also very much willing to work with the courts on the promotion of the social, political and economic equality of men and women in our society.

A recent report shows that the gap between male and female socioeconomic standings in the Philippines has significantly narrowed.  And this on top of already a very good record.  In fact in the U.N. and in the World Economic Forum, we are actually number six among all countries in gender parity in the whole world.  The only ones ahead of us are New Zealand and, of course, Scandinavian countries and then we’re next.

And even at that, the latest report shows that our gender parity has improved even more. The 2010 Mastercard Worldwide Index of Women’s Advancement looks at four male-to-female ratios: labor force participation, enrollment in tertiary education, employment in managerial positions, and the number of those earning above the median income.  We were already doing very well, better than all other countries in the world except for five.  And now the results for 2010 indicate that we scored better this year than last year, so we’re getting better and better all the time.

And if you compare us to our neighbors in the Asia Pacific, our absolute score and our improvement were much higher than the score and the improvement across Asia Pacific countries.

And I am sure the women judges helped make this happen because you have put your trademark discipline and long hours to work on behalf of a nation.

You’ve had a very long day, so I will not prolong it anymore with a long speech or a lecture.  I just want to say:  for strengthening the institutions of justice in this country, congratulations!

And thank you once again for your continuing support. And Happy Women’s Month!

Mabuhay!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during a courtesy call by the Philippine Women Judges Association (PWJA) Members. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080444/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27675&Itemid=38