Thank you very much, Secretary Marita Jimenez, who is the Cabinet officer for Regional Development of Region MIMAROPA. You know, Mai Jimenez was the former regional Director of Region IV when I was Undersecretary of Trade and Industry, and I was the coordinator then—oh, no—of a province of Cavite. But because she was Regional Director of Region IV, I made her coordinator of MIMAROPA. And because she is handling many foreign-assisted projects, that's why so many projects are coming to MIMAROPA, including those that Governor Reyes discussed.

I thank Governor Reyes for his very kind words about what we have accomplished here in the past year. I also congratulate Congressman Edmund Reyes. I also congratulate Board Member Nepomuceno and the various town mayors here. But of course, I congratulate Mayor Jonathan Garcia, the Mayor of Mogpog.

Mayor Jonathan Garcia mentioned that my father, President Diosdado Macapagal, came here in 1965, because he built your municipal hall, the town of Mogpog. I am here now with Secretary Cito Lorenzo of agriculture. Because, as Governor Reyes said, Cito Lorenzo is in charge of providing your mango seedlings. And the governor is right, we added more. This is not enough, it's just a sample. We should have brought five thousand seedlings so that you could be like the province of Guimaras, which is the same size. Guimaras is small but sweet, because their mangoes are very sweet. And only their mangoes can easily enter America, Australia and other places. These seedlings, which are just a sample, hopefully will help you in this very beautiful province of Marinduque.

The governor is also right that we are bringing, and Cito is implementing these pumps for irrigation because irrigation is really number one for farmers who have good income and those who have no good income. It's the farmers who have good income. And in this area, your barangay, it's very productive but it's difficult to bring products if your bridge is just like this. That's why we are building a multimillion bridge to make your products easier to transport.

Here with us now is our Secretary of Environment, Bebet Gozun. She is in charge of the project study that the governor mentioned, which will provide a way for the people of Marinduque to recover from the problem that occurred in the Marinduque mining accident in Sta. Cruz. Another thing Bebet is doing here is that the DENR has a Memorandum of Agreement with twelve bishops to take care of the mountains. And here in Marinduque, one of those twelve bishops is here, so I am happy that your bishop, Bishop Jose Oliveros, is here.

You know, I know Bishop Oliveros' brother, Roy Oliveros, better. Or we all know him better because Roy Oliveros was in the labor movement and with us in the coalition that helped make EDSA 2 happen. By the way, do you remember the time of EDSA 2? Do you remember the spokesman for the impeachment trial? Wasn't it Edmund Reyes? Roy Oliveros was with Edmund, and he continues his work now under my administration as a member of the board of the Development Bank of the Philippines.

So if we want to have more ships in the roll-on/roll-off ferry to bring Marinduque closer to different places in the Philippines, especially during the Moriones festival, let's look for an investor who will borrow from the DBP for the roll-on/roll-off ferry. And I am sure Roy Oliveros will help that come to the province of Marinduque.

Barangay captains here, I congratulate all of you. And my fellow citizens, I am happy to be back here because I used to come here when I was still a senator. In fact, I have been to all the towns of Marinduque. But here I am again because I want to, if possible, talk to all the people of Marinduque, if I could only. Because I want you to know that I know the feelings of small provinces and islands because I am small too. I know that it is difficult in a remote place, like this, remote used to be, becoming close. But I also know that it's fun sometimes because I've celebrated with you many times here in Marinduque.

If I have learned one thing from my visit here it is: “even if you are small, you have an important contribution to make to the history of our country.” When I went here last year, I went to Torrijos and there we celebrated the contribution of the Battle of Pulang Lupa to our history. In fact, because I went there, I even ended up on the front page, you crowned me. Isn't that your custom here? The newspapers said, “look at her, the Philippines has business problems, why is she partying there; why is she being crowned?” I was even attacked because of that. They probably don't understand—those people—that when you come here, I learned about the value of the butterfly industry here. I learned about the needs of your hospital. So we gave 10 million, and here is 2.5 million as an installment of the 10 million. In other words, these things that are small, when you are in Malacañang, they are big things for ordinary citizens. And that's what should be given attention. In fact, because I was photographed there, many citizens throughout the Philippines learned “what is the war of red earth; what is the courage in our history of the people of Marinduque.” How do I know that the whole town, the whole country learned? Because after that, everyone who celebrates their great battle of history wants me to go to their celebration. But I can't go to all of them because we also have a lot to take care of in the capital of our country.

Joey Lina, this project—that's why the representative of the DILG gave us the project description—is under the DILG for implementation, providing the national counterpart to the local government. And the local government puts in its counterpart, and the local government implements it. But Joey Lina couldn't come here because he has something important to take care of. He is taking care of the investigation of the mutiny in Oakwood. It's good you laughed because if you watched television yesterday, the events were funny if our economy hadn't been hampered by them.

Now I have only seen people who swore to be honest, honorable and courageous, who have the full courage to lie and further insult the intelligence of their Filipino countrymen. These arrogant scoundrels are a great shame to their uniform. They should be thankful that they have a democratic system to express their beliefs, a democratic system that they wanted to overthrow. Let's just imagine how a government would be run by them and their sponsors, where they would act as prosecutors, judges, and enforcers all at once. So, is General Ledesma here? He's not? Where is General Ledesma? Oh, General Ledesma, I just recently, I just promoted you as your new division commander.

So General Ledesma, my first instruction to you as the new second division commander is that the Armed Forces of the Philippines must strive to eradicate this disease of adventurism, dictatorship and totalitarianism that is slowly poisoning the minds of some soldiers. Likewise, to your citizens, to all our citizens, what I ask of you, I am calling upon all our people to condemn and resist these attempts to destroy our democratic way of life.

We should not allow the desires of a few to override our constitutional institutions. So I am just bringing the statement of Secretary Joey Lina, that he cannot come here because I have many instructions for them regarding their investigations, including investigations into the involvement of some big names in the mutiny that took place. I’m directing the military and the PNP – which Joey supervises, the PNP — to bring up all pieces of evidence to the media and to the public. We must show the people the cold and unvarnished truth. We’re not engaged in a witch hunt against any family or kinship group. This is not a personal matter. All charges will be backed up by hard evidence. The aim is justice and due process, not vengeance against anyone.

Thank you that here in Marinduque it is peaceful. We don't see any mutinies, we don't even see much NPA in the province of Marinduque. Congratulations to all of you.

In fact, in my study, in the data of the barangays where the NPA places their shadow organizations or revolutionary committees, only one barangay in all of Marinduque is on the list, Guisian of Mogpog. Who are the people from Guisian here? But according to the governor, the NPA has left there, so let's make sure they don't come back. Let's make sure they are not poisoned by evil ideologies.

So last night, I told your Regional Director of Region 4b, Paraluman Giron — who isn't here now because I left her in Romblon – that we should implement distance learning in Barangay Guisian in Mogpog so that the bad ideologies won't return. Oh, your superintendent is here, can you take care of that, Mr. Saet? Okay. Now, as the governor said, you already have your own superintendent, since last year, so she can handle this. And since she's here, I also want to inform her that I'm releasing funds to put up a school in the barangays I saw that don't have schools yet. Three barangays in Buenavista: Binunga, Bangkuro and Baat. One barangay in Torrijos, Bangcuangan. And one barangay in — oh, it's in Sta. Cruz — and one barangay in Torrijos, Sinambahan. And here, going back to Mogpog, I also want to inform you that we will provide a credit line to the Mogpog Traders Multi-Purpose Cooperative in the barangay market site for a three million peso credit line from the Land Bank of the Philippines. That's it. Where are you? Ms. Lucy Malabanan.

These are the different parts of our programs so that development can reach more of the province of Marinduque. Actually, when I went here last year in Torrijos, that was when many Filipinos learned what the 'red land war' meant. But all Filipinos know the Moriones. And because there's a lot of tourism happening in our country, we want the Moriones to continue to be appreciated by our Filipino citizens. So last night, I asked the governor, how can we help to make it even better or to entertain more people and have them come here during the Moriones season. She said that many still come, but because of the difficulty of life, they sell the masks afterwards. So there's a shortage of masks, and the celebration might get smaller and smaller. If it gets smaller and smaller, people won't visit.

So I said, okay, with our one town, one product, although I already gave one town, one product, one million last year for each town that will develop our butterfly industry, let's also prepare the DTI to provide assistance so that there will also be a one million loan for SMEs that will make these masks, so that your beautiful custom and tradition in Marinduque will continue.

So I am happy to be here, the weather is very nice for us to have lunch here in Marinduque. Thank you all for waiting for me. And good afternoon to all of you and may it be that because Mimaropa now has its own region, because you already have your own superintendent, because you already have different regional directors and I will also put your own regional director of the DTI so that all your project studies can be done for you, may the lives of the happy and kind Marinduqueños continue to improve.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Groundbreaking Ceremony of Candahon Bridge. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194651/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6511&Itemid=38