Thank you very much Chairman Ray Chua for your kind introduction.

I’d like to thank also Chairman Sorio for his very kind welcome remarks and also Mr. Rosenberg for your being the host of this event, Cyber City Teleservices president. Of course, our host developer is Mr. Benny Ricafort, president of CDC, and our host congressman, Congressman Tarzan Lazatin. And I see our host city mayor, Mayor Blueboy Nepomuceno also here with us today. Thank you, Blueboy. Because Clark is made up of Angeles City and Mabalacat, we have other host mayor, Mayor Boking Morales, also here with us today. We have other national govenrment officials, our president of the NorthRail and chairman of the Subic-Clark Corridor, Secretary Ed Pamintuan, and a number of mayors of Pampanga who are here today. And I’m very glad that they’re all here with us. And of course, I greet not only George Sorio and Mr. Rosenberg but all the officers and leaders of the National ICT Confederation of the Philippines or NICP for this very important summit.

And I congratulate not only Ray Chua but the other commissioners and all the other colleagues in the Commission on ICT for your partnership with the private sector. Congratulations also to all of you, all of us for being selected again by the National Outsourcing Association of the U.K. as the off shoring Destination of the Year.

Indeed, the Philippines ranks as among the best off shoring hubs in the world because of cost competitiveness and more importantly our highly trainable English proficient IT enabled management and manpower. Our having won the off shoring Destination of the Year Award again also highlights the growing importance of the Philippine IT-BPO industry in the global market.

If in previous administrations electronics was the big ticket item for our dollar earnings, today we are creating wealth by developing the labor-intensive, skills intensive service sector like BPO and tourism as the key growth sectors, just as I predicted during my first State of the Nation Address in 2001. At that time, 2001, the Philippine ICT industry was virtually nothing — 4,000 workers. Well, there was a small one here, AOL. But we gave ICT a central role in our Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan.

We initiated efforts in three areas:

First, we built up the telecommunications infrastructure and opened the market for internet phone calls. In 2001, I said that interconnectivity is a must. We supported wider public access to communications and information services promoting interconnectivity and also establishing IT internet connections in public high schools which should serve, hopefully, as internet cafes during off school hours and through encouraging the provision of more broadband services in cities and identified growth areas. As a result of our push for telecommunications infrastructure and connectivity, international calls went down from 40 cents to today in VOIP, Rey Chua just told me, it’s down to two cents from 40 cents for IDD.

But when I saw that we all had our interconnectivity done, and the cost of connectivity had gone down, then the BPO operators gave us a new requirement for infrastructure redundancy. These demand came after the Taiwan tremor so that no Taiwan tremor could ever again cut off our cyber services from their global clients, we encouraged the telecoms giants — PLDT and Globe — to invest billions in international redundancy.

I remember groundbreaking the one of PLDT in La Union, and I remember the ceremonial groundbreaking which was held in Makati for the Globe which enters through Ballesteros in Cagayan. And because that Ballesteros has to have a connection all the way to Manila, any point from Ballesteros, Cagayan — is that Ballesteros? Yeah — all the way up to Manila can now have an internet connection because of that backbone.

And just to show how our redundancy and our infrastructure has caused us to be resilient and to have uninterrupted services, I remember a few years ago — was it typhoon Milenyo that hit NCR? — and I went to Convergy’s and I was talking to the Philippine president of Convergy’s and I asked her how did the typhoon affect you. Well, she said, “well, my roof in my house was blown off but the BPO services continued 24/7, no problem with that.”

Now we had Ondoy again and I went back to the same company for yet another expansion and I asked them, so how did the last typhoon affect the services? Nobody… ah, the first day of Ondoy when the floods were very high there were some absences, but the next day everybody was on the job and our infrastructure was not affected at all. So that is one of our joint accomplishments. Congratulations to the industry!

The second area for our efforts was to ensure an appropriate policy and legal environment. We’ve been asking Congress to create a Department of ICT, but while we still don’t have that, we started with the Public-private Sector Task Force on ICT with myself as chairman. Then, I created by Executive Order a Commission on ICT, and we are guided by the philosophy that it is the market, not the government that should determine technological outcomes. For instance, when we started in 2001, we thought that we would become very, very big in programming but the market provided that we will become very, very big in contact centers.

That is market determined, that is private-sector determined, and the job of the government is not to dictate which sub-sector will grow the fastest. Our job whether it is fast growth of contact centers relative to programming, our job in accordance with our philosophy is that the ICT sector should be driven by the private sector with minimal government intervention and regulation. So our job, our role is to provide the environment to create the growth of ICT.

As part of that enabling environment, we created a new title in the investment priorities plan called IT parks for purposes of giving incentives, and we assisted investors in identifying promising provincial sites, and we built more transport facilities and telecoms facilities to the sites where investors wanted to go. For instance, I recall investors were very happy and impressed with the English that is spoken in Baguio but they did not have good connectivity. So, I talked to the telecoms giants to provide the connectivity. We still continue to follow the market and make it move more smoothly — that is our work. Now the market is leading us to train our sights on growing the higher value added segments of the off shoring and outsourcing industries like accounting, legal, human resources and administrative services.

Geographically we identified a Cyber Corridor as one of the country’s five super regions for economic development, together with Mindanao for agribusiness, Central Philippines for tourism, the Luzon Urban Beltway and North Luzon also for agribusiness. Our cyber corridor started with Metro Manila up to Metro Cebu. This hub now according to our public-private sector task force which drew up our road map for RICT, this is now the core but not the only elements of the strategic plan… oh, I wouldn’t even call it the core but the opening, the original seeds for the future development of business process outsourcing. And as part of this road map, you in the private sector together with the government expanded that cyber corridor from the two centers of excellence: Metro Manila and Metro Cebu, to span what you call the 10 next wave cities — and because we’re talking about a corridor I’ll talk about it geographically from South to North — Davao, Cagayan de Oro, Bacolod, Iloilo, Lipa; that’s five. The others are Metro areas: Metro Laguna consisting of Sta. Rosa, Calamba, Los Baños, Cabuyao and San Pablo; Metro Cavite consisting of Bacoor, Dasmariñas, Imus and Cavite City; South Bulacan consisting of Malolos and Calumpit; Central Bulacan consisting of Baliuag, Marilao and Meycauayan; and we are very happy Central Pampanga consisting of Clark, Angeles and Mabalacat. In fact, I congratulate Clark for your fast ICT growth, you have now 15,000 ICT workers.

We are now number three. In other words, after Metro Manila and Metro Cebu comes Metro Pampanga. That is where the market has brought us and as far as infrastructure is concerned telecom infrastructures, infrastructure needed for a good ICT operation, BPO operation, Rey Chua tells us, wala nang makakatalo sa Clark. Congratulations!

Finally, the third area to support the growth of ICT is the development of human capital to close the digital divide. Well, George mentioned to us the term of digital divide, not only the digital divide but also the voice culture divide. In technical education and skills training, one of the sources of pride of our administration is that we have invested three times that of three previous administrations combined. A very large portion of this investment goes to our call center training partnership with the Business Process Association of the Philippines represented here by Oscar Sanez.

TESDA partnered with BPAP to train near-hires for call centers and other IT related fields. Since 2006, that was when this partnership was drawn up; TESDA has provided more than half a million training slots in various fields of ICT, including more than a hundred thousand directly supervised by the BPAP. In fact, if you’re going to talk about how much government has invested directly for ICT development, we have invested five billion pesos for ICT development particularly R&D, manpower, infrastructure, including the U.P. Science and Technology Complex, which we hope will become a premier technology and business IT incubator.

So today, where are we? Eight years later from when I said that ICT will be a growth sector of the future, from 4,000 BPO workers in 2001, now it’s like around 400,000 with good paying jobs that keep our young people at home rather than having to go abroad for a nice job. The BPO phenomenon speaks eloquently of our competitiveness and productivity.

But, it also happened because you the private sector and we the government sector shared a belief in ICT as the growth sector of the future, and we shared our vision of nurturing this sector.

So, I thank you all for having achieved this together. Thank you for forming the NICP and may you have more success.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 2nd National ICT Confederation of the Philippines (NICP) Summit. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133923/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26742&Itemid=38