Many thanks, Inko Pidong, and a belated happy birthday to you. A belated 80th birthday indeed, a jubilee birthday for Inko Pidong, and I was called by him, on his birthday, but now I come to warmly welcome him. Happy birthday!

Governor Pabling Garcia, many thanks also for your very handsome welcome to me and for your expression of support for me, with the family of Mayor Ouano, the Garcia family has always supported me, so I have become very close here in Cebu and in Mandaue City.

Vice Mayor Seno; mayor of Consolacion, Mayor Gungob, thank you for coming; provincial board members; barangay captains and officials here in Mandaue; the companions in the provincial board members; my fellow provincial board member, mMagsangkay; councilors here in Mandaue City; our SK; and the beautiful daughter of the governor, Gwen Garcia.

With me now are my Cabinet members who always help here in Mandaue and in Cebu. With me now is Secretary Mike Defensor. These titles and certificates of full payment that we are giving, the resettlement project came from Mandaue City with the help of the HUDCC and NHA under Secretary Mike Defensor. He would have been a Senator if we were sure he wasn't underage. I said, Mike, you're a Senator if we're sure you're not underage, because Mike will be 35 years old on June 30 and we need to know the law regarding when a Senator needs to be 35 years old. Is it on June 30, the day of the oathtaking, or on the day of the election? But whether underage or of age, we know that those of us who receive these certificates today, own the land.

With me also is Secretary Marita Jimenez. She is my secretary for Special Projects and Official Development Assistance. And we know that here, in Cebu province and Mandaue City, there are so many assisted projects, and these projects that came to my administration from our sources of foreign assistance came through the work of Secretary Marita Jimenez.

With me also is Secretary Teresita Ging Deles. She is now my new Presidential Adviser for the Peace Process. She is the one negotiating with the MILF, the NDF, and all sorts of small rebel and secessionist groups, but before she became my Presidential Adviser for the Peace Process, she was my Secretary for Anti-Poverty. And many of our projects here in Cebu, the partners against poverty, also came through the diligent work of Secretary Ging Deles.

With me also is my Presidential Assistant for Region VII, Felix Guanzon. And we also have with me one of the brightest intelligence officers in our country, who is now our Region VII Regional Director of the police, General Bobby Delfin.

To all of you, my brothers and sisters, good afternoon and thank you very much for your warm reception and welcome to me today.

When Inko Pido Ouano introduced me, he said that I might not need to introduce myself to you because many of you already know me. He said that my words might be that you already know me for a long time, maybe just now, but I know that we have known the Ouano family for a long time. Since I became a senator, since 1992, I have always visited here in Mandaue to give my respect to Mayor Ouano and his family.

Therefore, I have become a member of the Ouano family. Since I was a senator, twice, vice president, so Inko Pido said earlier that I became president, their family is really like one of their children became president. Inko Pido said that they and Mandaue City owe me a lot. My friends, there is no need to count debts because we don't know anymore, they owe me, you owe me. I also have a lot of debts to you and to them, to their family.

We can no longer count who has the balance of surplus. The important thing is that we are always together in the progress of Mandaue City and the province of Cebu.

And whatever I have done for you, I will not say it now, the important thing is that we know that there is still a lot to be done for you from my administration.

Like other projects that we need to do, first of all, Mike Defensor, the NHA has really helped our resettlement victims… Ay, beneficiaries. Now, I’m also asking Mike Defensor to fast track the release by NHA for the construction of the medium-rise buildings in Looc, Mandaue City for the squatter families of paradise island. Okay ba yon, Mike? Okay ba yung 100 million pesos? 100 million pesos sa mga pamilya sa Looc, Mandaue City.

Secondly, our assistance for the purchase of rice and more housing materials for the fire victims in Sitio Aroma, Barangay Subangdaku, is now ready for release. We didn’t… We didn’t bring it, did we? Malou, the check from PCSO, isn’t it? But it’s ready for release, so I told Felix Guanzon that he will get it from PCSO and personally bring it here to Mayor Teddy Ouano upon Mayor Teddy’s return from Bangkok.

Thirdly, I know that your hospital is undergoing renovation and expansion. As I told PCSO, since PCSO under the Office of the President, I tasked them to help our health projects, I told PCSO to contribute to equipment and laboratory supplies and the annex to your Mandaue City Hospital.

Fourthly, you seem to have a request to reclassify the foreshore land to become urban development. Alam mo yon, Mike, ano? Their foreshore land that they want to become urban development? So, the one in charge there is DENR. So, I told DENR, through P.A. Felix Guanzon, that DENR and other agencies will help the City of Mandaue with its request for the reclassification of the foreshore land. So that there will be more urban areas here in Mandaue City.

Because Mandaue City is truly urban. Because you are truly the industrial center of all of Cebu, and Cebu is the industrial center of all of the Visayas, therefore Mandaue is the industrial center of all of the Visayas.

And because of the products of your factories here in Mandaue, even the entire province of Cebu, even the entire Philippines has increased its growth rate. They really say that even the world now has many problems since the 1997 Asian crisis, since 9-11, since the terrorist bombing of the World Trade Center, since SARS, since various problems in the world and within the Philippines, because the progress of industry here in Mandaue is always constant, the growth rate and the Philippines in the entire Asia and Pacific region which has 21 economies, the Philippines is number 6 in growth rate. And many of our exports come from Cebu and from the industrial center of Mandaue.

Therefore, I have many debts to the Ouano family and to the people of Mandaue, there are still many debts and the entire Philippines, and the entire economy of the Philippines to the people and those who work, those working, the factories in Mandaue, therefore we really need special help here in your city.

Still, I don't want to prolong my speech, I just want to convey my great gratitude and my promise that as long as I am president, the City of Mandaue and the province of Cebu will always be in my heart.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Multisectoral Program in Mandaue City. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615141044/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7516&Itemid=38