Thank you very much.

It is easier to pronounce my name Arroyo. Because we are Latinos, this is the same with the Mexicans.

Five years ago, when the Philippines hosted APEC, there was not a single female APEC leader. Today, I’m very happy that the Asia-Pacific region now has staff gifted and thoughtful women leaders like President Megawati and Prime Minister Clark. And I’m very honored to share this platform with them today.

We come from three different countries with three different cultures and three different sets of challenges. But we share common commitments to prosperity, to democracy and to peace.

We were together last year in APEC in Shanghai. That summit took place right after September 11. At that time in that Summit, we all agreed that the attacks of September 11 were an attack not just on the United States but on all who believe in freedom and tolerance. And in that summit, we all agreed to take a strong stance against terrorism. And we discussed how to prioritize our work in order to carry out that strong stance. We made plans about aviation security, energy security and other ways by which we could promote security on the economic front.

Many things have happened since then. Since then, the terrorists were kicked out of Afghanistan. So was the host government that welcomed them in Afghanistan.

In my own country I set to crush terrorism militarily and economically. I challenged the Abu Sayyaf right in their turf and I believe we have made great success. They used to be thousands, now they are a few hundreds. Of course, a rifle shot here and a bomb there succeeds in instilling more fear. But nonetheless, I assure you we are making headway.

However, none of the successes that we have had prepared us for the October attacks, especially the attack on the beautiful island of Bali. That attack and the other attacks of October remind us that this war against terrorism is going to be long, difficult and borderless. And unfortunately, it comes at a time when we are also fearing for the global economy.

My concern is how the terrorists have shifted our attention away from how to work to make the global economy thrive. We have shifted our effort to how to secure ourselves and our countries. My concern arises from my experience. The experience of my country shows that security impedes development and conversely, poverty feeds extremists with recruits. The terrorists in the Philippines are in that southwestern corner of our country — the island of Basilan and the island of Sulu. Not coincidentally, these two provinces are the poorest provinces in our country with the lowest human development index. That indeed demonstrates how closely interlinked is the war against terrorism with the war against poverty. And if we neglect the economic imperative at this time when we are so concerned with terrorism we would be feeding on terrorism by promoting hunger, disease and ignorance.

Since last year, we have been able to build in our world in APEC and everywhere else a coalition to eradicate terrorism. It has worked well. And I believe that this coalition building would work equally well to ensure economic security. Further, it can also work equally well to lift the global economy out of lethargy.

The key step is to build trust once again in the local economy. But how do we do that? Let me just count two ways: first, security. Dealing with terrorism remains our most urgent priority. And our first challenge is to deal with it and make sure that this is a safe and secure world. In the Philippines, we participate in global efforts and we also work to promote this coalition at the regional level. For example, with our sister and neighbor Indonesia as well as with Malaysia we have an anti-terrorist arrangement. This arrangement includes sharing intelligence, tightening border patrols and if need be joint peacekeeping. I think we should expand this coalition and take more aggressive action.

In the Philippines, too where we have Christians and Muslims — actually, we are a Christian nation, a Christian minority in a Muslim region, the Southeast Asia — we pursue broader inter-faith dialogues because the terrorists wish to instigate a religious war. But we must instead make this an occasion for religious understanding, ecumenism and solidarity.

Terrorism as you all know, the CEOs, impacts directly on business. And that is a challenge to reduce border restrictions which are bad for business while at the same time protect these borders against terrorism. That is a great challenge of APEC. This challenge needs a combination of new technology and cross border cooperation.

Let me now go to the second way by which I believe we can restore faith and trust in the global economy. And this second way use to address the perceived inequality in receiving the benefits of integration. We must start with the WTO. We need to reengineer the WTO to assure that there is a level playing field. That the rules of trading are not stopped in favor of developed countries who preach liberalization to the developing countries on the one hand, but practice protectionism against the developing countries on the other.

It is our challenge in APEC to reengineer the WTO, because the Doha round that we are undergoing offers that opportunity. APEC as APEC is a voluntary organization in the sense that our commitments are voluntary and not treaties that are legally binding. But APEC is very influential in the WTO and therefore the role of APEC should be to reinforce the leadership in the WTO and make sure that the Doha round is truly what it is build as a development round.

One way would be to influence WTO to come up with an early harvest of results that will benefit the most number of people in the world.

What should these results include? May I enumerate: one, the elimination of harmful agricultural export subsidies; two, the opening up of markets for tropical agricultural products and other products of interest to developing countries such as tuna and textiles; three, the liberalization of services where developing countries can benefit most including labor mobility in sectors such as information technology, health care and education; and fourth, the enhancing of capability. The enhancing of the capacity of the developing country-members to negotiate effectively, implement commitments and improve the competitiveness of our products.

To do all these, we don’t expect APEC to finance. We do not expect APEC to finance all these capability building. But we do expect APEC to use its influence to turn to other sources of funds and to turn to others that have mandate for capability building. At Monterey, here in Mexico, some time ago, the participants in that summit agreed that development and security go hand and hand. The developed countries pledged new resources to fight poverty in order to fight terrorism. And the developing countries promised to put these resources to good use by instituting reforms in their countries and economies. This new approach is a hand up approach rather than a hand out approach. And it recognizes that this is not charity but investment in people. It recognizes that teaching people how to fish rather than giving them the fish leads to sustained prosperity. However, months after Monterey we have yet to see these resources come to the developing countries in a meaningful way. And so, I hope that both sides of the development divide will make good on their Monterey pledges.

We need to pay special attention to the growth of the SMEs. As my beloved sister and neighbor President Megawati said, it is a big part of life in Indonesia. It is a big part of life in other developing countries and the Philippines as well. SMEs and micro-enterprises provide a business approach to the alleviation of poverty. In my country, we are doing this, too with our one town, one product program. And it shows that it can work.

I hope you, the CEOs of APEC, will look at integrating these self-help initiatives in your business plans. We do our SMEs now with greater vigor in the Philippines because we have to rely on domestic efforts to stimulate growth and safety nets because we are not yet sure of the recovery of our export market.

But indeed, a lot of support will go our way and the other developing countries way if the U.S., Japan and Europe can recover. And so we hope that they will recover and we suggest that this is a good time to finally carry out the postponed reforms that may have led to the lethargy of those economies. I mean, not the reforms but the postponement.

Our region especially looks to Japan to resume its traditional role as the engine for growth. We, in ASEAN, of course, also have the responsibility to contribute to global economic security. We are working to make ASEAN integration a reality. And we have to be open to new ideas about creating building blocks for integration. Thus, the ASEAN countries pursue regional and bilateral trade arrangements that were unthought of many years ago. We do have to minimize the adverse impacts of terrorism and maximize the benefits of integration through greater cohesion in trade, capital, labor and security policy.

The coalition in response to terrorism can and must extend to a coalition in economic relations. The global economy will be able to pull through if we approach it the way we have been approaching our fight against terrorism.

And may I assure you, that in the same way that the Philippines is an active partner in the global coalition against terrorism, the Philippines is also ready to work with the global community to meet the challenge of economic security and prosperity for our peoples in the 21st century.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Plenary Breakfast at the APEC CEO Summit “A Conversation with Leaders”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210659/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8401&Itemid=38