Happy fiesta to all the Iliganon people!

We celebrate St. Michael’s Feast Day with the good news that our economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability with some of the strongest macroeconomic fundamentals in 20 years. We have aimed high and have met the challenge: six years ago, no one thought we could get more revenues, cut down on tax cheats, strengthen the peso and move the stock market. And no one thought we could bring our budget into balance, pre-pay our debts and raise employment, but we have.

Today the Philippines is on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. Investments are pouring in, the peso is strong, our stock market has reached historic heights and we have created six million jobs in six years. And the world is taking notice: the Philippines is one of the best values in Asia for domestic and foreign investors.

We are committed to consolidating the gains in new revenue by making long overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure. This includes billions of pesos in education, healthcare and training along with billions in new

– bridges, including the Panguil Bay bridge which will connect Misamis Occidental and Lanao del Norte;

– airports, including Laguindingan Airport, which was allocated close to P1 billion for the year 2007. Its civil works began in February; and

– roads including the Iligan-Bukidnon Road, which requires a total budget of more than P1 billion and is scheduled for completion in 2012, but is ongoing and we have a new release of P50 million to ensure the work continues, and the Iligan C-3 Road which is a city road but the DPWH helped with the feasibility study, and there is an allocation in the 2008 budget of P50 million as a contribution from the city government, all these infrastructure to upgrade the competitiveness of the Philippines.

For the farmers, P200 million is allocated each month for Farm to Market roads in Mindanao. This year, 24 FMRs in Lanao del Sur and seven in Lanao del Norte, worth P62 million, will be completed. This includes the Tangcal-Tinago road in Linamon which will boost agriculture and tourism.

The allocation for irrigation nationwide is P500 million per month, and P200 million of this is allocated to Mindanao. Among the irrigation projects being pursued is the Malaig Irrigation project in Butig, Lanao del Sur.

Regarding electricity, we sympathize with your goal of amending the EPIRA so that the 10% systems loss charges will no longer apply to you because you are close to the source of electricity.

On digital infrastructure, in my inaugural address last 2004 I said: I aspire for every child to be able to attend school, with sufficient space in the classroom and with computer linkage in every school.

I also said that by 2010 the network of digital infrastructure will have linked the entire country.

But due to political noise, we have suspended the national broadband and cyber education projects.

Meanwhile, I have instructed our Secretary of Transportation and Communication to discuss with the telephone companies the gap created by the suspension and ask them how they can help.

I assure our hardworking, competent civil servants planning and implementing projects that we appreciate their laudable work. I take great pride in the discipline of my administration to focus on the economy and our overall economic health.

A large part of the progress is attributed to the businessmen of Iligan and the provinces of Lanao, and other businessmen throughout the country.

We see signs of a wave of entrepreneurial activity in the Philippines. We need a vibrant middle class if we are to join the ranks of modernized nations in 20 years, which is my aspiration. In several key areas we have promoted a new entrepreneurial class. One is microfinance, where we have extended more than P100 billion in loans to low and middle income men and women all over the country who want to start their own businesses. In addition, our Central Bank has created a series of investment incentives and programs for foreign remittances to be invested in capital enterprises.

I asked Secretary Favila why the BAMBE Law has not yet been implemented. The implementation is at the level of local officials. Then, during dinner with the local officials, this was one of our agenda items.

Your theme – Preserving economic gains through investments in peace and order – demonstrates your readiness to be more active in peace and development.

Congratulations on the newest security asset for our city, the Camera Security System. This will help in the work of incoming Chief PNP Avelino Razon.

A peace agreement with the MILF will bring a new era of economic development to Mindanao. Coupled with this is our new paradigm for peace in the region. At a time when hard power has not proven its value in the world, our model for dealing with the flashpoint of Mindanao has focused on a unique combination of soft and hard power to promote peace. We have been able to meld together confidence-building measures grounded on strong interfaith dialogue and cultural awareness; investment in economic and basic infrastructure development; and mutual security arrangements to keep the peace in Mindanao.

We are very close to an agreement with the MILF. With your support, I remain optimistic we can overcome the final barriers on ancestral domain so that we can bring finality to the peace. However, we have achieved a great deal. The region is vastly improved in terms of safety, security and economic growth. So the current agreements are making things better; it will really take off if we achieve lasting peace and the millions of foreign aid promised comes pouring in.

The Abu Sayyaf stand in the way of bringing peace, stability and order to the Southern Philippines. We have decided we must wipe them our once and for all. They are a menace to peace and a beacon for international thugs who wish to join their ranks.

The Communist rebels have spent years as a low-level threat. It is time for their disruption and violation of human rights to be put to rest so that the nation can move ahead. They impede the progress and development of a number of rural areas. They are responsible for a wide range of human rights abuses. If we are to become a modernized country, we have to put a stop to their ideological nonsense and their criminal acts once and for all. I offered amnesty to communist rebels who now want to live in peace.

Our most important initiative for peace is our human investment program to return the benefits of our development to the people. Over the next three years, we will translate the positive results of our reforms to real benefits for the people. We will increase investment in our country and our people to: 1) improve social services such as health insurance subsidies for indigent families and food for school programs and 2) boost educational support in our efforts to reduce poverty by investing in better school buildings, new textbooks and teaching materials, and training programs for teachers and school administrators.

For Mindanao, our concentration is on increasing services for health and education for the poorest provinces.

We have moved on as a nation. The people are much, much more concerned about taking advantage of our economic progress than the backsliding of political protest. People want peace, order and stability. We have been through many upheavals. Time and again, the people have indicated we want a stable government and economic progress. That is what we are getting now. That is the sentiment I believe will prevail.

The maintenance of peace and progress is in our hands. Let us strengthen our unity so that the economy continues to grow and to maintain peace here in our beloved city.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech at the Iligan Business Forum. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412142618/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2155&Itemid=38