Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the UN-WTO 6th International Tourism Forum for Parliamentarians and Local Authorities

[Delivered in Cebu, October 22, 2008]

Welcome to the Philippines and to the island of Cebu.

We meet in the midst of a global economic crisis that has been responsible for driving up the prices of food, fuel and rice around the world.

Every week brings a new chapter in the financial drama that is gripping the world. Some might say the recent chapters read like a horror novel. Three weeks ago, the US government approved a bailout worth $700 billion that many thought would calm the waters. Last week, those waters were roiling across the globe as Asian and European markets and governments scrambled to respond in kind. Then, markets around the world swung back again in a positive direction.

Who knows where they will be at the end of this week and next week. One thing is sure: we must not lose sight of its impact on the ordinary people who bear the brunt of these fluctuations. We must not revert to complacency just because the markets swing to the positive.

Costly commodity imports like oil and rice should be offset by commodity exports, hard commodities like primary products, and soft ones like leisure, eco, and medical tourism.

After all, in the past, tourism has shown its strong resilience in the face of global problems. The financial crisis in 1997 came and went with barely a dent on the volume of tourist arrivals. Bali and the rest of ASEAN have suffered terrorist attacks, and most of ASEAN has endured the SARS scare, but the numbers of inbound visitors to our region have continued to increase.

Let us therefore look beyond the difficulties posed by the current global economic slowdown. Let us address the major issues which will continue to influence the strategic directions of global tourism. Issues like climate change, the role of women, and the relationship between tourism and poverty alleviation.

On climate change, protecting the environment is one of our top priorities. An example of our efforts to preserve the “Green Philippines” is our support for the Coral Triangle Initiative. This is a program that will seek to protect the rich coral areas which abound in six countries in our region, most especially the Philippines. Preserving the Coral Triangle will maintain our reputation as the best diving destination in the world. It is also part of the responsibility of our six countries to future generations.

On a broader scale, we have also begun the “Green Philippines” plan. This is a blueprint for mapping our environment and economic policies that will allow for sustainable development. Sustainable growth should not fall on the backs of the poor or erode our environment. Yes, there is a price to make the Green Philippines come to life. But the cost is greater without the investment in our people and our environment.

On the role of women, the tourism industry is a major creator of wholesome jobs for women. As theme of last year’s World Tourism Day said, “Tourism Opens Doors to Women.” Indeed, product development like souvenir handicrafts and spa therapy, conservation efforts like mangrove protection and clean-up dives, and marketing and promotion are areas that lend themselves well to gender parity.

On fighting poverty, tourism is a major creator of jobs and livelihood. Throughout Asia, we have models of strategies that have successfully integrated poverty alleviation with the growth of tourism.

For example, we have a community-based tourism initiative in the Philippines, GREET, G-R-E-E-T, or Grassroots Entrepreneurship in Eco-Tourism. With the help of financial and technical grants, GREET has benefited almost 4,000 households in 15 Philippine tourism destinations.

Our concept is based on transforming attitudes, such that individuals who used to unwittingly damage the environment have successfully become the protectors of environmentally fragile sites. Slash and burn farmers have become mountain and forest trail guides for hikers and wilderness trips. Boatmen who used to hunt our whale sharks are now ecoguides for tourist interaction with those beautiful creatures. Alan Amanse, 40-year-old college undergraduate and father of two, was earning P100 a day from driving a tricycle and fishing in our whaleshark sanctuary in Donsol in Central Philippines. Now, as whaleshark-watching officer, he earns P1,000 a day, ten times his former income, and he is building his dream house.

Global economic realities threaten the fight to reduce poverty worldwide. But we must stay hopeful. Let us keep our faith in tourism as a powerful instrument to alleviate poverty. As you discuss how to do it, may every participant enjoy the natural wonders of our country and the natural warmth of our people.

Once again, mabuhay and welcome. Maraming salamat.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the UN-WTO 6th International Tourism Forum for Parliamentarians and Local Authorities. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134908/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1721&Itemid=38