The past year 2001 will be remembered for the high drama of political and economic events. It was a turning point for our country and the world. We had blessings and we had deep tragedy. 2001 saw the restoration of moral authority in our government through the instrument of people power. 2001 brought tragedy to mankind in the 9/11 terrorist attacks. 2001 was a triumph of the spirit as the people of Afghanistan were liberated from bondage.

For the Philippines, 2001 was a year of rebuilding, reinvigorating, and reshaping our democratic institutions, our governance and our economy, and of restoring international confidence in the Philippines and the Filipino people.

Shortly after I assumed the Presidency of the Philippines last January 20th, the International Community joined me in a Vin D’Honneur very much like tonight’s occasion to express its recognition and support for our new government.

During that occasion, I said that the Philippines faces several realities that characterize its international and regional environment to which we have to respond in order to achieve our goals.

Let me reiterate them and place them in the context of today. The first reality is that China, Japan and the United States, and their relationships, will be the determining influence in the security situation and economic evolution of east Asia.

September 11 redefined the inter-relationship among these three countries into one of solidarity against global terrorism. These countries led the nations of the Pacific realm in Shanghai in forging the APEC declaration against terrorism.

The warmth and camaraderie shown among the leaders of these nations in particular during that Shanghai Summit have underlined their role as a constructive force for peace and prosperity in the region.

Second reality; more and more Philippine foreign policy decisions have to be made in the context of Asean. Together with our regional partners of the 7th Asean Summit in November 2001, we adopted the Asean Declaration on Joint Action to Counter Terrorism. And only recently, we completed the draft of a trilateral operational agreement against terrorism with Malaysia and Indonesia to secure and safeguard our common borders.

Third reality: the International Islamic Community will continue to be important for the Philippines. I am proud that our friends from the OIC and other parts of the world were with us this morning when I installed the new regional government in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao. This augurs well for the peace and development of Southern Philippines. It is a testament to the growing strength and stability of our democratic institutions.

Our relations with the Islamic nations will continue to bear prime importance in our effort to defeat all forms of extremism, and to promote tolerance, interfaith solidarity, understanding and respect among our diverse peoples and ethnic traditions.

As we assisted East Timor, we are likewise committed to take part in the rebuilding of Afghanistan. We shall continue to be an integral part of international peace keeping and humanitarian endeavors.

Fourth reality: the country’s economic growth will continue to be heavily dependent on foreign investments. Thus, Europe, a major source of investment in recent years especially with the operation of the Malampaya gas and oil fields, will continue to be an important partner in promoting international prosperity and stability. We have reason to be optimistic that projects like Malampaya will spur our economic growth.

This project is expected to significantly augment our country’s power reserves and promises to be an important source of revenue.

I am pleased to declare to the foreign investment community that the Philippines is back on its feet, resolutely and resiliently battling global crisis.

We have gained the much-needed momentum to press on our path to development. We’ve firmly stabilized the domestic political situation while continuing to mop up residual problems of law and order. Confidence has been restored by good governance and leadership by example. We have infused, to a great degree, common sense, discipline and accountability in public management and public service.

Leaders from government, the private sector and civil society have committed to undertake a concerted effort to combat poverty and accelerate economic development. In pursuit of this, we forged a socio-economic pact during the national socio-economic summit last December.

The unity of our people is crucial to safeguarding the gains of 2001 and maximizing the opportunities of the new year.

I am confident that the foreign community will continue to be our partners in this enterprise of consolidation and unity.

In the midst of the recession in many countries of the world, our GNP grew by 3.7 percent in the first three-quarters of 2001, surpassing the predictions of the private sector. This is a significant turnaround considering that less than a year ago, our economy was about to go into a tailspin in the wake of domestic instability.

In 2001, the Philippines revitalized its ties with our global partners, a task I gave to the Department of Foreign Affairs and to the special envoys whom I introduced at the Vin D’Honneur last year. They have successfully done the job. They have informed the international community of the steady gains we have made, of the stability and viability of our political, social and economic reforms. They have also secured commitments of bilateral and multilateral support for our domestic efforts.

This brings us to the fifth reality that guides our foreign policy, that the coming years will see the growing importance of multilateral and inter-regional organizations to promote common interest.

Out active participation in regional and international organizations is a concrete demonstration of our commitment to the international community. Aside from attending the APEC Leaders Summit in Shanghai, and the Asean Summit and the Asean plus 3 Summit in Brunei Darussalam, I also addressed the United Nations General Assembly in New York. On this occasion, I conveyed the message that the Philippines is back in business, a reliable partner in the globalized realm and a committed and responsible vanguard in the most crucial issues of international affairs. We were one of the first to respond to the United Nations Security Council Resolution of 1368 based on a multi-pronged action program to combat terrorism both in the southwestern part of our own land and in the global arena.

Sixth reality: the defense of the nation’s sovereignty and the protection of its environment and natural resources lie at the heart of foreign policy. We will continue to move in this direction as we seek consensual arrangements such as the regional code of conduct in the South China Sea.

Seventh, a country like the Philippines can benefit most quickly from international tourism. It is often said that human capital is our most valuable resource. The Philippines is the home of the great Filipino worker. This statement gives rise to a number of conclusions. One conclusion is that, high growth business sectors that inherently draw on strength in human resources should now become very important. I can identify Information and Communications Technology and tourism as two such sectors.

Another conclusion is our eighth foreign policy reality, that Overseas Filipinos will continue to play a critical role in the country’s economic and social stability. In the entire amalgam of global affairs, the great Filipino workers stand out as our greatest resource. In every nook and corner of progress and development, our workers are there, turning the wheels of industry, managing the networks of global commerce, healing the sick and teaching the young.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the international community for hosting millions of our workers. They have contributed their share to the strengthened stability of your own nations as they have brought pride and economic benefits to our country.

We celebrate them as the heroes of the new millennium. And I dedicate the year 2002 to the great Filipino workers.

We will continue to face more challenges as the year 2002 moves forward. However, with sufficient political will and the spirit of cooperation, we in the international community should be able to weather such storms. But as we have built a global coalition to eradicate terrorism, so too can we close ranks to lift the global economy. We must address both political and economic security. This renewed sense of global community could be the key to early recovery.

This is one warm manifestation of globalization and present us with an added challenge. But the events of September 11 and following also presented us with an opportunity to work together and come out stronger on a variety of fronts. The coalition that has been built and the relationships that have been fortified in our collective response to terrorism can and must extend to global, regional and bilateral economic relations.

We face a rocky road ahead, that is certain. But the global economy can and will pull through if we approach our economic uncertainties with the same cooperative and integrated approach that we have applied against terrorism.

The Philippines stands ready to work with its friends and neighbors to meet this challenge. I’m a believer of personal diplomacy which has become a primary instrument of national and collective interest in the modern world. I have met with leaders of several countries and I welcomed some of them in Manila. It has been my pleasure and privilege to represent our people in the close and meaningful interaction with leaders of other nations.

In 2002, I will visit several countries to further strengthen our network of bilateral relations and to assure our partners in Europe and Canada that the Philippines will continue to be an active and constructive force in global affairs.

In the coming year, in this year, the fight against poverty will remain the over-arching vision of our agenda. I am hopeful that we will achieve our goals with a sustained confidence given our administration by the Filipino people and the world.

On this note, may I propose a toast to all the nations and peoples of the world, especially those represented in this gathering, that we shall continue to work together for a more peaceful and prosperous world.

Greetings.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s speech during the Vin D’Honneur. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412231222/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7606&Itemid=38