Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the Launching of the LPG Conversion Program for Tricycles

Thank you very much, Mayor Sonny Belmonte, for your introduction, and thank you for your constant support of our national government.

Congresswoman Nannete Daza, congratulations on your initiatives like this one.

Officials of the national government in transportation and energy, local officials of Quezon City, to all of you, local officials of Quezon City, and to our tricycle drivers, Merry Christmas.

Our Christmas is early – five days early. Merry Christmas to all of you, and now that we are in Simbang Gabi, we should count all our blessings and look at the future with greater hope, our confidence, our optimism.

As Sonny Belmonte said, it's surprising! The Philippine economy had an added kick for the last quarter, and this added kick is despite the difficulties in the world. Two-thirds of the globe is now in recession but the Philippines, is not.

That's why the people need to come together this Christmas, celebrate faith and family, and our community should come together and set aside disagreements and political differences. And let's identify what good positive things we can all do together to improve our lives.

Sonny talked about the surprising thing, because in the midst of the crisis – it cannot be denied that there is a crisis in the global economy – the challenge for us is to not let the world's crisis become a crisis in the Philippines.

And in times like these, it is the duty of the government to help the people overcome the hardships brought about by inflation and the weakening economy of other countries.

And during this troubled time, it is the role of government to help insulate the Filipino people from shocks and economic pressures. That is what your government – executive, legislative, national, city – is doing, everything it can to ensure there is food on every table, and to protect your income, even that of tricycle drivers, to put food on the table and protect your earnings.

And let us continue our investment in our system of care for health, education, and social services.

And that being said about luck. Perhaps we are lucky because we worked hard to become lucky.

Because if not for the painful reforms we made in the past seven years – and thank you, Nannete was a big part of those reforms in Congress – the global crisis would have become a Philippine crisis as well.

Instead, in the chaotic global environment, according to world experts, the Philippines is like an island of peaceful economy. But this strength and resilience of the people and the economy are still not enough consolation for the ordinary Filipino if he has to pay higher prices for basic necessities.

And we know your pressures, those riding public transport, those driving for a living. We have not forgotten the pressures you faced just a few months ago.

We have not forgotten the high prices, the high inflation; and even though these prices are now falling, of course we know you were surprised and worried about job security and what your income can buy.

We are all concerned here, that's why we are working, striving to keep the price of rice, food, and our fuel low, especially for tricycle drivers and operators.

And this is the aim of Congressman Nannete Daza's program that she told me about when we had dinner there at Malacañang. She told me about this project – and of course Nannete, she is really aggressive, and she sought help from our national government to channel the funds through us, and thankfully Mayor Sonny Belmonte agreed with the Quezon City government.

And it is right that you tricycle drivers are being fought for by Nannete because tricycles play a big role in the daily life of Filipinos – multipurpose, they can enter places that jeeps or cars cannot, and in many parts of the city, tricycles are the only passenger vehicles used.

That's why it's important to help those who drive tricycles so they don't have to keep raising fares for the many passengers they serve in remote barangays.

So this is a good example of helping – helping tricycle drivers switch engines to use LPG.

How much cheaper is it now, Nannete? Isn't LPG 50 percent of the cost of gasoline? Sonny Belmonte said that 80 percent of taxis are now using LPG. So Nannete said, let's help the tricycles also have savings through LPG.

We import almost all of our crude oil needs, so that is a problem, but we have a little natural gas from what is called the Malampaya project.

And this natural gas helps reduce the amount of oil we import, so LPG is the answer to crude oil because we have LPG that can come from our own resources. Although we still import a lot, that's why we agreed to help some tricycle drivers and operators who are here now to be given LPG conversion kits by Nannete and to help fund it.

Because when I told Nonoy Andaya, he was scratching his head, he said, where will we get the funds for this. I said, include it in the program for funds for engine conversion from the proceeds of the VAT.

If our DOTC officials remember, recently… Because when the price of fuel went up, the collection of taxes also went up. So that increase was used to help those who were suffering from the increase in fuel prices; and part of it was used so that those jeepneys would convert to LPG.

So now, this fund is what we will use to help Nannete’s project.

Secretary Angie Reyes just sent USec Ampatuan to remind us not to forget to complete the safety approval process of the DOE for this conversion kit.

We are establishing this — the “proceeds of VAT” program — in June, during the time when the price of gasoline increased and the government had additional funds.

So this, we are returning to the people, we are returning to the jeepney drivers, jeepney operators. And this is a return to the people of the earnings from our rise as an investment in the town in all programs that promote our continued progress and will save the poor who are the first to be hit when prices jump, especially oil.

Now the price of gasoline, diesel and LPG has gone down, but we don't know what will happen in the future, so it's good to have this option.

But now that the price of LPG, gasoline and crude oil has gone down, I don't want to miss the opportunity to thank the bus and jeep drivers of Central Luzon, Southern Luzon and Metro Manila again, because when the price of oil, crude oil and LPG went down, these buses and jeeps immediately agreed to lower fares since December 15th.

Let us all thank the buses and jeepneys. This is the action of the people – of the private sector, of the transport sector – that gives us complete dedication to our future, and regarding hope, optimism, the resilience of the Filipino people.

According to surveys, 70 percent of Filipinos look to the future with hope. We – executive, legislative, national, city – will ensure that the government delivers public service to our people.

So today, we thank Nannete for a very good idea, a very good gift to our tricycle drivers and operators.

To you and to all those present, Merry Christmas, let us welcome the coming new year with hearts full of hope and trust in our abilities. Merry Christmas, congratulations and thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). Speech of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, Launching of LPG Conversion Program for Tricycles. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134547/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=16816&Itemid=38