In continuously upholding the AGFO in our Constitution and legal processes, thank you very much.

The high regard of our soldiers and police, and of the citizenry, for you is immeasurable. Truly, many continue to look up to you.

You continue to play your role in nation-building.

With your inspiration, we have succeeded in cutting by half the number of active insurgents from the 2001 numbers. Our AFP Chief of Staff and all those who served in his post before him have imparted the right principles to our soldiers. Congratulations.

With your inspiration, crime rates have dropped over the years even as our police forces have proven themselves in enforcing the law and defending the Constitution. The leadership of the PNP and their predecessors have built up the PNP into the dutiful civilian force it is meant to be. Congratulations.

We have had an unfortunate legacy of political violence. I abhor it, and we have tackled it head on. We have met with a lot of success since we announced the formation of what was to become the Melo Commission. Extrajudicial killings are down and prosecutions are up. We will not be satisfied until we are at zero, but we are making progress.

As we improve the security of the parts of the country that have known some degree of violence, we are able to quickly move to develop the economy of those areas. When we do that we ensure a lasting peace and order that ensures that security is no longer an issue.

Our vision is based on a strong and growing economy. It is the central pillar that we have labored to create to help guarantee peace, order and stability in our country. It is paying off: we have the strongest economy in over 30 years, the peso is strong, investments are surging in, we are close to balancing our budget.

We have made tough and politically unpopular decisions to raise revenues and crack down on tax cheats so that we could invest in our physical infrastructure and in our people, including our soldiers and policemen.

In both the PNP and the AFP, we have had an increase in salaries and benefits along with improvements in equipment, materials and support services.

In the AFP, we have cleansed the pensioners list, saving millions of pesos and cutting processing time for veterans’ claims. With this rationalized list, I hope all outstanding old age pensions can be settled by year end, especially since we have doubled since last year the budget for paying arrearages to P3.528 Billion. I signed last week the law granting pensions to Filipino WWII veterans who get pensions from the U.S. And we continue to lobby for the passage of the Filipino Veterans Equity Bill in Washington.

As for the shortfall for pensioners that AGFO has pointed out, the Defense Secretary can perhaps request a supplemental budget to make the pensions current.

I am also directing Secretary Teodoro to give me a full report on the actions taken on the RSBS. Let us have an end to this issue that will give satisfaction to our men and women in uniform.

The people want, and we are delivering, investments in three critical areas – what we call the three “E’s” – namely, the Economy, the Environment and Education — all this to elevate the quality of life of our people.

Our first obligation and commitment is to put food on the table in the Philippines. Rice is a global issue and has deeply impacted the Philippines. We are taking strong, swift decisive action to make sure it doesn’t become a crisis, with a singular focus on mitigating price to the best of our ability.

Since the global situation became apparent many months ago, I have been committed to helping increase and stabilize the supply of rice, as well as to deliver targeted subsidies to the poor who are most directly affected by the global price rises. We have reached out to our neighbors like Vietnam and others in ASEAN and elsewhere to ensure a stable supply and affordable prices.

We will continue to work with our neighbors in the region to secure rice supply. We work with nations of the world to share best practices and best ideas to make sure this is a one time global event. We have directed our government to crack down on price gouging; increase the supply of rice where necessary; invest more in planting and agricultural modernization; and provide rice subsidies to the poor.

Our strengthened economic situation gives us the ability and flexibility to respond forcefully to make sure we maintain control of the situation.

With this base of new-found economic stability, we are in a much better position to weather these economic and price pressures than ever before. That does not mean that it lessens the pain on our poor when rice and gas prices increase, but we are able to help ease this burden.

With your support, I remain bullish on our economy, optimistic about our future and deeply committed to being a force for good.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapaga-Arroyo’s Speech During the First Quarter Fellowship meeting of the Association of Generals and Flag Officers, Incorporated. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412122002/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1340&Itemid=38