Thank you so much Ronnie for your introduction. Thank you for your summary and thank you for hosting this strategic forum.

Governor Lapid, thank you for hosting the different governors, city mayors and the uniformed officers who are so important to the subject of this forum. Our champion for the urban beltway super region, Ed Pamintuan. Thank you, because… I don’t know if you got my text. I said, you know, there are a lot of things we have to work on as far as political… You know, as far as the internal security is concerned. And I sent you a text message saying that that’s part of your job as champion of the urban beltway super region here in this region.

And Oca Calderon, who is in the lead of the work of the police in our internal security, good luck! On your work. All the local government officials who are here — governors and city mayors — all the police officers, thank you all for being here and thank you for your resolve. Thank you to the local governments because as Ronnie Puno said, you’re willing to spend, you’re willing to put your money where your mouth is. And so if we work together and pool our resources together, certainly, we can achieve our strategic victory by 2010.

Ronnie talked about macro-economic performance. Indeed, our macro’ legacies are beginning to emerge:

One, fiscal turnaround. We’ve all seen that. And our deficit has gone down so much, we may even have a balanced budget by 2010.

Second legacy, Charter change. The fight continues, local governments.

The third is the super regions. So that we can develop the natural advantages of your different regions. And here in the urban beltway, as I said, made up of the part of Central Luzon starting from Clark-Subic to Metro Manila through Calabarzon to Batangas port. That’s the one that is overseen now by Ed Pamintuan.

And fourth macro legacy is the strategic defeat of the left. Thank you for nodding when Ronnie Puno said the year 2010.

Operationally, how do we do the strategic defeat of the left. You have had a lot of your action plans there, but really if I may mention one important indicator, revolutionary taxation must stop. Not only because it’s illegal but because it is a bane to jobs and livelihood.

And then there is the Mindanao peace process. That must be factored heavily in our blueprint for internal security. We must make a distinction between the Mindanao peace process and the players, and the Abu Sayyaf and the cohorts, on the other hand.

As far as the Abu Sayyaf and its cohorts are concerned, they are already on the run and it’s only a matter of time before we finally rout them. And I congratulate the police, the local governments who have been helping us fight them.

Sustained confidence is built on the twin pillars of political stability and economic growth. And I’m glad that Ronnie talked about being part of our campaign to win the hearts and minds of the people who are the target market for the insurgence and the terrorists. We need to give them the news about the economy and what it has been doing for them. After all, poverty and the sense of powerlessness that it brings provide fertile ground where terrorism can easily spread its evil ideology. And sometimes unless you point it out very clearly, the benefits to the poor of development are not very clear.

Yesterday, I was on T.V. with two ordinary citizens. One is my neighbor in Barangay San Miguel near Malacañang. I told her how has life improved over the last five years of our administration. She said, because you expanded the MRT and now because — her work is… She is a masahista — now I can go… I can spend less to go to my clients. I require less time to go to my clients, and then I can cross the underpass in Quiapo to Barangay San Miguel because it is very clear and bright and safe. So she’s earning more income because of mega projects like MRT and so on.

There was another one who was there, he was a fisherman from Guimaras. And I asked him. ‘how has life been changed for you since I became president? He said, ‘because you have fought illegal fishing in the seas of Guimaras, now our catch is bigger, and I am earning more income.

It’s so difficult for everybody to see the macro benefits, but there are more… The micro benefits of macro measures, but there are so many stories like this that I’m sure you in the LGUs can pick up more quickly than I can and spread the word around.

Meanwhile, we continue to focus on improving the economic indicators under the administration’s watch. The economic and social clusters in the cabinet are getting together. I asked Ric Saludo, a Cabinet secretary, to have a joint Cabinet meeting on Tuesday of the National Anti-Poverty Commission and the National Economic and Development Authority because the economic and social clusters of the Cabinet should get together to ensure the benefits in store for the Filipinos in the short and long-term.

And here, as Ronnie has mentioned, I hope indeed that this meeting has been an opportunity for Ronnie to explain to you the solid achievements that this administration has achieved working together with you. And to talk about how we can together explain this further to the people in the countryside and even in the inner jungles of the urban areas.

Our thrust for social payback is founded on several concrete measures we are now pursuing: one is the increased compensation of state workers; the other is the expanded microfinance program, and your social workers in your municipalities are going to be important here because we have empowered the DSWD, which is devolved, to be a conduit for microfinance where the NGOs do not operate; massive infrastructure, and our champions have been going around to explain what that massive infrastructure is; pump priming through the super regions strategy to provide jobs; anti-poverty mitigating measures, most of which belong to agencies that are already devolved to the local governments; health cards for the indigents; agricultural extension for the marginalized farmers.

Just today, I talked to Arty Yap, our returning compatriot Secretary of Agriculture. I told him, ‘Arty, the extension needs our help for the marginalized farmers.’ He said, ‘but that has already been devolved.’ Extension is devolved to the local governments. I said, ‘what is the agricultural training institute doing?’ ‘They are making a policy study.’ ‘Oh Arty, I said, we’re very, very long on policy. Let’s have more on implementation.’ Let’s have the agricultural training institute work more closely with the local governments for local projects for extension to the marginalized farmers.

Another means, another concrete project to bring development direct to the ordinary people is financial assistance and scholarships for students through CHED and the state universities and colleges, and so on.

Well, I have been calling the concerned officials because they should ensure forward momentum. Aside from these projects, there are many important things especially related to internal security and the security of our economy that the officials have to push forward faster:

One, the cases of Atong Ang, Honasan, Estrada and the mutineers must move faster.

Second, the peace process in Mindanao. And I have asked President Bush, the American government to have a deeper and broader involvement in the peace process in Mindanao, and he has said yes’ and they have identified a senior person from the U.S. embassy here in Manila to be able to work with our peace process panel.

And then third, Oca, the war on street crimes, illegal drugs and illegal gambling.

And then fourth, moving on corrupt officials, tax cheats and smugglers. Earlier, I asked Boy Morales, ‘what is this they are saying about containers that slipped through?’ ‘Ma’am, I went to the port, I photographed the containers, those 11 containers are still there, why are they saying they slipped through?’ ‘Well, of course, many are no longer able to slip through.’ That’s why the customs collections are very high. So we really would expect that there will be a demolition job on those who are doing and meeting their targets.

Then, another important measure that was moved forward. Checking non-performing nursing schools.

Also, relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction of disaster hit areas. Rosette, I’m happy to hear that the houses in Guinsaugon are already ready for turnover, congratulations! The Duke of Gloucester, the cousin of Queen Elizabeth, is coming to the Philippines in February, and he specifically asked to see those houses in Guinsaugon. Of course, when an economic superpower wants to see a specific project, we know what that means. So congratulations, Rosette!

In general, disaster management. For instance, this barge, this barge that sunk off Occidental… Misamis Occidental — is Leo Ocampo here? — well, I have instructed that there be an investigation on why that happened, because what happened… What, they caught a local storm? But are these… Aren’t this boat supposed to weather local storms? They’re supposed to be double hulled, double bottomed, etcetera, etcetera. So we have to have more efficient disaster management as far as things like that are concerned.

And then, of course, our subject matter today, the war on terror and insurgency. We cannot take lightly the fact that activities being perpetrated by local terrorists enjoy the support and funding of foreign terrorist organizations. And that is the reason why we must have a concerted effort against this threat.

And I am very happy that in this forum, we can see that indeed there is implementation of E.O. 546 that gives the PNP a new role directing it to lend active support to the AFP in internal security operations. Because the DILG is in charged of supervising the PNP and overseeing — not supervising but overseeing — the local governments. So it’s a perfect relationship that we can have between the PNP and the local governments.

And the solid working relationship that we can see here in this forum between the PNP and the LGUs is the key to our success.

So I thank you all, I thank the governors and city mayors for such a strong participation, fifty of you are here, I understand. I thank you for coming all the way here, I see people from very, very far away. Thank you for your interest in fighting insurgency. Thank you for interest in working with the PNP. And once again, thank you once again because this is only one of the many ways in which you have supported the national government.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Closing Program of the National Forum on Internal Security and Counter-Terrorism. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409203031/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3029&Itemid=38