I went here today to the Cogeo Police sub-station to express my gratitude and congratulate our police officers — Sub-Station Commander Noel Gragutero is here, and also his cops and even the tanods (village watchmen) — to thank them because despite their severely lacking facilities, they are good at doing their job. Because the other day, a few days ago, no, a month ago, my manicurist, Nitz Valderama, told me she was held up, so she no longer wants to go home late. When I get a hot oil treatment, she needs to stay overnight at Malacañang because she was held up one night when she went home. What happened was, she was calling the police here, but their telephone line was already cut. Now she went here, and because she came here, the one who held her up was no longer able to reach her.

But because she reported it and because they didn't catch him that night, they followed up and didn't give up. And in the process of searching for the one who held up Nitz, they arrested many other wanted individuals. That's why the people here expressed their gratitude to me, thanking them because many of those who had troubled them were arrested, and finally, the one who held up Nitz was also arrested.

So I am here to thank them and give my congratulations because despite the difficulty of their facilities here, they are still able to do their job well. That's why I told General Ebdane earlier, give them a telephone.

But what will happen here is that it turns out it's only temporary because it was already sold by the NHA (National Housing Authority). So Mayor Gatlabayan has land there, near here, also in Cogeo, and Governor Ynares, the wife of Ex-Governor Ynares, Nini Ynares, the mayor and I, we will each give 250,000, for a total of 750,000 for the new station. That is our kind of reward for them — to have a nice station — and General Ebdane will give them a new radio, and they already have a cellular phone, so they will post the numbers, and the mayor will also have a new telephone installed.

So, I just want to show here that we have good police officers who, despite their severely lacking facilities, can serve our people.

So, I would like to commend them for their good work and their sacrifices because despite the difficulties they are facing, they have continued to arrest hold-uppers and other criminals and prevent serious crimes for happening. The police here are operating under heavy constraints in mobility and communications.

The plight of my manicurist has reflected the plight of all ordinary people victimized by criminals. I sympathize with her just as I am deeply concerned about people losing their hard-earned money to muggers. We must protect the poor from crime not just the rich and the influential. So we are improving, in fact, giving new facilities to this police station because it serves ordinary people in communities in need of public order and peace of mind.

We should not tolerate pockets of lawlessness in our poorer communities. We must make sure that ordinary people have the mantle of law enforcement and law protection just like the more affluent areas — and this is another mandate i have placed upon the shoulders of the PNP leadership.

So to the police in Cogeo, thank you very much and congratulations to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during Her Visit to Cogeo Police Station. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412224726/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8375&Itemid=38