Thank you very much, Secretary Roque, for your introduction of me.

And perhaps you already know Secretary Bert Romulo, our Secretary of Foreign Affairs; Secretary Cerge Remonde, our Press Secretary; Secretary Bert Gonzales, our National Security Adviser; and Ambassador Paeng Seguis, who is the Chairman of our Peace Panel negotiating with the MILF.

I would like to greet President Makabinta and the entire Philippine community, as well as Ambassador Vicente – welcome to Libya from being Consul General in Hongkong – and Mr. Jamal, our friend from Libya who’s been taking good care of us since we arrived here today. You may all be seated. To all of you, thank you very much.

Congratulations to our graduates! And to the others, thank you very much for attending here. To my fellow Kapampangans, thank you very much for your presence tonight. To my brothers and sisters from the Visayas and Mindanao, thank you very much for coming. To my Ilocano compatriots, thank you… tonight. To my fellow Bicolanos, thank you very much for coming.

And I want to say to you, perhaps you already know this, from what I hear from the people here, all the people here in Libya salute you. Congratulations!

I’m happy to learn that companies in Libya compete with the Filipinos working for them whether as nurses in Libyan hospital — congratulations! to those at the Medical Center — or engineers building the towers of Tripoli, our mechanics manning the oil fields in the desert, and your various jobs here, my hats off to the Filipino workers in Libya.

The diligence and quality of your work are truly undeniable, as well as your good character and loyalty to duty. That's why even with Ambassador Vicente here, you are the true ambassadors of the Philippines in Libya. And not only that, you are even more important to our country – your sacrifice and loyalty to your work, to your families, and to our country are a source of pride and are valued.

As Ambassador Vicente said, I always say that in times of hardship and ease, you OFWs strengthen our country. The 16 billion dollars sent by OFWs around the world last year, even with the economic crisis, was a record in our country's history. But this year you are sending even more, so thank you very much.

And I know that this comes from sacrifice. It is not a sacrifice joyfully borne, it is lonely work, very hard work. Although here in Libya, I hear it is not as lonely for some of you especially those who are working in the oil fields compared to other countries because many of you have been allowed to bring your family with you, isn't it? That is a big advantage compared to OFWs of other countries. And this way you’re even able to look after your family members yourselves.

I am not hesitant to visit our people and your hosts around the world from the Middle East to the American Midwest like Chicago, from Libya to London listening to your problems and needs. Finding out how our government can help you by working out better policies on migrant labor or by saving lives and restoring liberties.

And I’m so glad that here in Libya there are not too many problems with the law. And I don’t have to come here to ask for salvation from the death penalty for any Filipino worker. My visit here this time, kasi meron sa inyo nakilala ko na nung nag state visit ako ng 2006, but this time my visit has given me the opportunity, to renew the opportunity to engage the leaders of Africa who are important to our country. We were invited by Libya, by the chairman of the African Union to come to their summit and also to the 40th Anniversary tomorrow of the Libyan Revolution.

Africa is becoming more important, more and more important to the Philippines. We are directly affected, our energy security is directly affected by the peace and order in Africa. But even more than that the safety and welfare of many of our Overseas Filipinos are also affected by the peace and order of Africa especially our seafarers. Malapit nang matapos ang East African monsoon, so we feel a surge of pirate attacks of the coast of Somalia where many of our seafarers work on board the ships that pass through the Suez Canal and the Gulf of Aden.

Although many have been released, more than two hundred Filipino seamen suffered at the hands of pirates, so we are diligently working to protect our seafarers. This is one issue where it is crucial for Africa to work together to bring peace and order in the affected areas of the Coast of Somalia.

Earlier today I had the opportunity to speak with the President of Somalia. He is also worried, he is also concerned about the terrorrists who harass the boats that pass through the Suez Canal and the Gulf of Aden of the Coast of Somalia. And he realizes how important it is to us because we are the number one seafaring people in the world.

So, one way by which we can help to address the problem of peace and order in Somalia is by institution-building. For example, strengthen their civil service, strengthen their coast guard, and as you know Filipinos are experts in these things, in human resource development. That's why because this is important to our seafarers, what I discussed with the President of Somalia earlier is that Filipinos will help in training their civil servants. It will benefit Somalia and it will also benefit our Filipinos.

On the part of Libya, Libya has always been standing by us. During my administration, Libya’s help has been so big in bringing peace and hope to the Southern Philippines. And also, in helping to strengthen and form a deeper relation with the other Muslim countries. (applause) Together with Brunei and Japan, Libya monitors our ceasefires with the MILF.

And I am glad to see some of the students who are studying in the Islamic Call Society because that is a very important institution for us to teach the real Islam, the Islam that loves peace and abhors hatred. And it is our honor that during our administration we were able to accord the Libyan Islamic Call Society diplomatic status (applause) to make it easier for us to work together for peace and development.

Libya’s role in our peace is also important because of the connection of peace to development. As we improve the security of the parts of the country that have known some degree of violence — and we are doing this together with the help of the international community, including Libya — we can move faster to bring development to those areas that once had many conflicts. Perhaps that is also one reason why we are one of the few countries in the world that is weathering the current world economic recession and our growth rate remains positive.

This global economic crisis has shown that our economy is stable and strong, with low inflation, and we are ready for an economic rebound. Our business outsourcing and call centers continue their boom. Tourism, I just spoke with Secretary Durano earlier on the phone, our manufacturing sector is rising again after falling during the world economic crisis. New construction is continuous and non-stop. Our hotels are full of businessmen from all over the world.

That is why we are bullish for our prospects for a solid recovery. And this is important because we are striving to create good-paying jobs in our country so that overseas work will just be a career choice and not the only option for a hardworking Filipino.

Meanwhile, to our graduates today and to the organizations helping here in this program, I want to thank all of you who have a high regard for the Philippines here in Libya because you show the excellence of the great Filipino worker.

Therefore, to all of you, congratulations! More power to you!

Maraming, maraming salamat.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the meeting with the Filipino Community. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412100052/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26199&Itemid=38