Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Vin d’Honneur

[ Delivered at Rizal Hall, Malacañang Palace, Manila, January 18, 2008 ]

Welcome to a peaceful and successful year in 2008. We look forward to this year, as together with 91 percent of the Filipino people, we’re brimming with confidence in the resilience of our economy, hopeful for peace and security for our people here and at home and abroad, and determined to continue to pursue a strong foreign policy abroad.

2007 was the year the Philippine economy turned around. Through the tough choices we made to enhance revenue, raise tax collections and run a tight budget, we are now on a path to sustained economic growth. We have the highest growth rate in a generation, the lowest unemployment, a surge in investments, high job creation, a budget coming into balance, a strong peso. We’re grateful for the support of our allies and development partners for our reforms and investments, which have enabled the Philippines to join the ranks of fast growing Asian economies with strong finances, infrastructure and social programs.

As a result of our focus and discipline, we had been able to take the hard-earned revenue and savings, and put it to work for the people by investing in education, health care and infrastructure. We had been setting our sights on a modern Philippines ready for joining the ranks of first world nations.

In 2007, we made a huge down payment toward that day. We aim to make sure we keep it that way through the duration of my term. For the Philippines to succeed, we must aggressively engage the world. We continue this engagement in 2007, as we have done throughout my presidency. We will continue it in 2008. We need the world and we like to think the world needs us, our hardworking people, our ideal geographic location and our reliability as a friend and ally.

The United States, China and Japan, Singapore, New Zealand, India and Australia, Spain, the Vatican, England, Portugal and France, Kuwait and Africa have all been part of our itinerary this past year forging security alliances, encouraging investments, protecting the interest of our valued overseas foreign workers. Closer to home, significant progress has been made in our fight against political violence. In less than a year, since we authorized the Melo Commission and followed up its recommendations, we have seen an 83 percent drop in violence against political activists and journalists. While we are pleased with the progress, we will not be satisfied until every last incidence of violence has stopped and every criminal prosecuted and behind bars. We must stop the legacy of violence and start the era of political harmony.

We take pride in the continued strength of democracy in our country, even as we make gains in the protection of human rights and the promotion of social justice.

Let me of course be realistic: 2007 was not always smooth sailing, not least of which in the political sector. The November coup attempt fizzled, but it still gave a black eye to our nation in the eyes of the world. Half of our battle in the Philippines is to overcome the self-indulgent political theatrics that send the wrong message to the world.

The reality is that we have become a stronger, more stable nation as these types of political shenanigans fall flat with the people. Filipinos are tired of political sideshows. They want peace, order and security and a good job and a good education.

In the international arena, we had hoped by now to have a trade agreement signed, sealed and delivered with Japan. We remain optimistic that our Senate will see the wisdom of approving this vital agreement.

Perhaps even more pressing are the issues of energy independence and the price of foreign oil. We are bound and determined to move the Philippines toward energy independence based on heavy investments in biofuels, geothermal, wind, solar and other alternative energy sources. We are equally determined that conservation must be an essential part of the equation. To that end, we are holding a series of high level meetings this month and next. Out of these meetings we will develop a blueprint, or more aptly a ‘greenprint’ for the energy future of our nation.

In our quest for first world status in a generation, we will safeguard not just the rights of man but those of nature too, through more support for programs to preserve the environment and address climate change while building a better life for our people.

The poorest among us suffer the most due to the high price of global oil, so any program we initiate will focus not just on energy independence in the long run, but to relieve the pain of energy cost in the short run. How this will be carried out is an open question, but we will do everything in our power to share the burden and relieve the poor from bearing the biggest burden.

The eradication of poverty has always been the overriding goal of my presidency. In its last three years, we will build a momentum in key program areas, that would make the millennium development goals well within reach by 2015.

Finally, let me touch on our peace efforts in Mindanao. We are close, yet sometimes the closer we get, the farther the distance seems to be. We are determined, as we have said to you before, that peace in Mindanao is one of the most essential building blocks this nation can achieve to secure its future. Peace is better than conflict.

Our alliances with you are also indispensable in advancing our peace efforts, in expanding international understanding and interfaith dialogue, and in keeping terrorism in check.

Once again, we look forward to another year with you and wish you every success. Our door is always open to friends in this room. We remain humble about the job we do everyday and excited about what we achieve every year.

Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen: please join me in a toast for a year of deeper international friendships and stronger hope for peace and progress in the Philippines and the whole world.

Thank you very much.

Mabuhay!

Source: Adamson University Library