Thank you very much to General Manager Ed Pamintuan for your introduction of me.

And I would like to greet our government officials who are here today. Here are our two congressmen, Congressman Chuck Mathay and Congressman Zialcita. And here is our host in the very important city of Quezon City — and congratulations Sonny, this Amoranto Stadium is really beautiful, I might use it for my affairs in the future; chairman Rosel Alex Santos and various other officials and members of the Social Housing Movement; our awardees; my beloved urban poor; distinguished guests; fellow citizens:

I am pleased to meet the organizations that provide support so that we can finally achieve the goal of improving the lives of our citizens. Because, it is really needed, in the new politics, it is not only personalities and politicians who lead, it is not only patronage that prevails. In the new politics, the platform is important and institutional engagement with the people is important. Part of the institutional engagement with the people is the role of NGOs like the Social Housing Movement. That is why I am here at your celebration, because this is a coming together of a sector related to the distribution of decent housing and land and a way for the people to come together and find immediate and long-term solutions to the expanding housing needs of our citizens, especially the poor.

I congratulate the officials and members of the Social Housing Movement on your celebration.

Thank you also to the government officials who are here — Sonny Belmonte, the two Congressmen, the heads of the housing agencies who are here — they are here at the meeting and sharing important information and ideas that will strengthen our united effort to bring land security within reach of the poor.

As I said earlier, the new politics must have a platform. The platform of our government now is very clear. What we are striving for is to eradicate poverty within a decade. This goal has four agendas: first, jobs coming from investments; second, modernization of agriculture related to social equity; third, special attention to the underprivileged; and, fourth, to raise the level of morality in government and society.

The third, the special attention to the underprivileged, includes striving to achieve land security for the poor.

I learned that the Social Housing Movement has been around for a long time, and you have already accomplished many things in the field of housing. These include active participation in relocation, community organizing, site development, socio-economic surveys and others.

You serve the urban poor, as does my administration. That's why I always say… Oh, there's Congressman Butz Aquino, let's call him to come here, he's also an awardee, Butz… Oh, there's Mike Defensor, I've been looking for him, maybe you were late. Come Butz, come Mike too. Butz is an awardee and Mike should have been the one to introduce me. Hi Mike. Hi Butz. Morning, morning, and congratulations. Maybe you can help me. Anyway, what I was saying, the urban poor, I always say, the urban poor should not be considered a problem. The urban poor should be considered part of the solution. This is through People’s Organizations.

One big solution is to help the urban poor achieve security of tenure on the land they occupy. We have already done this, in the first year of my administration, for more than 150,000 families. Most of the 150,000 who gained security of tenure are those living on government land that is no longer used by the government. I ordered that these unused government lands, such as those near the railway tracks where no trains pass anymore, be sold at a low price to those living there. We have also declared some alienable and disposable areas for the urban poor to buy.

Some, however, live on private land but have entered the community mortgage program. Here, NGOs such as the Social Housing Movement are major partners.

Sometimes, we cannot avoid relocating those called squatters. For example, those living in dangerous areas, such as under bridges, along rivers, along railway tracks, where trains still pass, and in flood-prone areas. Here, we also need the help of NGOs such as the Social Housing Movement.

Another group that needs to be relocated are those living in right-of-way areas. Also, squatters who are demolished due to a court order, and this court order is usually because the landowner is private. These people need help finding a place to move to.

Therefore, today, I reiterate that housing and security of tenure are a central part of our government's platform.

The housing sector plays a very large role in expanding our economy.

When a citizen has security of tenure on the land they occupy, when they have a document, this document can be used to borrow capital for livelihood. It doesn't need to be a transfer certificate of title, many papers are respected by lenders. This is happening in many other countries, and is also happening in the Philippines, according to a study by an expert in these matters named Hernando de Soto. We want to expand this system so that the urban poor can use the land they occupy not only to live on but also as collateral to obtain livelihood capital.

Thus, former squatters will have a livelihood and our high unemployment rate will decrease.

This is part of the reasons why we are giving primary importance to securing land tenure for the urban poor. Perhaps, what we have achieved for more than 150,000 families within a year is a testament to your government's sincerity regarding this.

On top of security of land tenure, we are also looking for affordable housing for our poorest of the poor. For example, I saw a house in Bulacan made of bamboo that only cost 18,000 pesos to build. It is a beautiful and economical halfway house for those being relocated.

The HUDCC — so it’s good that Mike Defensor was able to come here — is the main agency managing housing and land matters.

Mike inherited a lot from his agencies, vacant houses from the previous administration, and these are now being sold at discounted prices. This is just one proof of our effort to give special attention to our underprivileged in our economic development plan.

I hope the Social Housing Movement takes inventory of these vacant houses so you can find beneficiaries who can buy them on a lease-to-own or long-term lease or easy-installment basis.

The HUDCC is also looking for funds for houses for workers. The GSIS is willing to fund this. However, the GSIS does not engage in retail because housing is not the GSIS’s job; it only places its funds as an investment in housing but does not build the housing itself. Therefore, the GSIS funds for housing must go through banks that will act as intermediaries for these funds. However, banks are still hesitant to be too aggressive because during the 1997 Asian crisis and the year 2000 post-BW crisis, banks were burned by many housing loans that were not repaid to them due to the collapse of economies in those years. So I hope the NGOs — not just the NGOs, the socially-oriented entrepreneurs, I saw… Where are they? They’ve already left? Nonoy Icafort, he’s gone. I hope they are still here because I appealed to these entrepreneurs to invest. There is funding, but there needs to be an investor, someone to operate, to develop. Including the social housing movement, NGOs, I hope they help the government with this, especially those NGOs that have proven to be a good credit risk because many intermediaries are needed to actually build the housing development.

One reason why banks are hesitant is that they take a long time to be paid because it takes a long time to recover the investment in housing, and this is because of the long red tape before development can actually begin and houses can be sold. I think the social housing movement knows this because they go through this red tape. So one big thing the HUDCC did was to significantly reduce the red tape in the housing permit process.

Mike, isn't it true that it used to be 188? Now, only 40 signatures are needed. Wasn't it the case, Mike, that it took two-and-a-half years to finish the paperwork before development could begin? Now it only takes three months.

That's why I hope that NGOs with the capacity, and businessmen with knowledge in development, will focus on low-cost housing because there is a lot of housing needed for our workers.

In the next two years, the HUDCC will formulate several key directions for the housing sector.

It is now easier to borrow money for housing. The loan value now is the lowest in the history of our country. This is also due to the government's efficient handling of the national budget. Our budget deficit is small, so the government borrows less, and therefore doesn't compete with the private sector for loans. Competition for loans is one of the things that raises the interest rate. So if a former large borrower like the government is quiet and doesn't borrow as much, the interest rate goes down. Now is the time for developers and those who want to take out a housing loan to borrow so that our workers can have housing.

I have been going around to the urban poor even before I became president, and in my travels, the urban poor always say that their main need is security of land, or in English, shelter security. This is why I want 150,000 families to have shelter security every year. We achieved this last year, and I hope NGOs like the Social Housing Movement will help me achieve it again this year. Because last year, many of the lands distributed were government lands. Now that many government lands have been distributed, we need to do more community mortgage programs to reach 150,000 beneficiary families. And I know that the community mortgage program is one of the activities of NGOs like the Social Housing Movement.

I also want our country to build 100,000 units of low-cost housing for workers annually, and 50,000 units of socialized housing for the very poorest of all.

I know that if our poor could afford it, our poor don't want to be squatters. It's really sad to be a squatter in your own country. But it is very difficult to get land in the city because the price of land in the city is high. Nevertheless, I understand the dream of every person to have a decent and secure home.

I mentioned that no one really wants to be a squatter in their own country if they could help it. I need to correct myself for a moment: there are those who want to be squatters, the professional squatters. And the professional squatters make our job of giving rights to the genuine landless who really want land with security more difficult. That's why one of the things the Social Housing Movement is asking me to do is create a task force, an anti-professional squatting task force, so that we can separate the genuine landless who are looking for a home from the professionals who use squatting to make a living.

So, I am establishing this task force now, of course, Mike Defensor will again be the chairman because he is the one managing the land problems. But Mike is nodding, so it's okay with him too.

Actually, we have already done this before, when NGOs report about certain known professional squatters, we have already made arrests, we have already filed cases. So we know that we can achieve success as long as we focus our attention there.

This also came from a proposal from the social housing movement. This is part of the result of our institutionalized consultation with the citizenry. And I am doing this because you and other NGOs are proposing that we separate those genuinely looking for land from the professional squatters.

You, how many of you are from Payatas? Anyone? Atty. Perez is here, okay. I have two messages for Payatas: one is what Atty. Perez said, to just declare the whole area as alienable and then add a provision that if a private sector owner can prove ownership, that will be respected. So actually, we had the DENR do its homework and the DENR has already submitted all the results of its homework and it is now with my lawyer, Secretary Nonong Cruz, to formulate an executive order that protects you and protects me.

My second message for Payatas: I went there twice and said about the bridge between Payatas A and Payatas B, the chairwoman wrote to me that when she followed up with the DILG, she was rejected, but it wasn't the DILG that this was followed up with. This project is called the 'Tulay ng Pangulo' (President's Bridge), it is the Office of the President and the DPWH. So when I received the chairwoman's letter that she was rejected by the DILG, I also told Nonong Cruz to take care of it with the DPWH. So we will continue the President's Bridge there in Payatas.

That's the two things mentioned by the social housing movement that I hope I can answer, the proposal of Atty. Perez – he isn't actually an attorney but I said he was very clever because he thought of that idea so I call him Atty. Perez – and the issue of professional squatters, yes, the syndicates, the syndicates, so the syndicate.

So help us… I hope the social housing movement will become a member of Mike Defensor’s task force. Let's find the syndicates that are extorting money from you and then let's arrest them, let's file cases against them. And that is what I expect from the social housing movement.

May this anniversary next year, let us all say that this agreement that came from good consultation with the people has succeeded because we worked together in action and in deed.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Celebration of the Social Housing Week. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225229/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8338&Itemid=38