Thank you.

Thank you very much. Thank you Lito for your kind introduction.

I would like to greet Tita Terry Nilya, the founding president of Christian Family Movement, very nice to see you again and you’re looking so well, Tita; Roger and Nora Panlasigui, thank you so much for the kind things you said about me during your opening statement; other members and officers of the Christian Family Movement; ladies and gentlemen, happy golden anniversary to the Christian Family Movement!

I’m very glad to join you here tonight because, indeed, Filipino society is founded on the family. And as Roger acknowledged earlier, family is very much a part of my administration’s policy, especially population policy, responsible parenthood and natural family planning.

I always stress to the bureaucracy, especially the health bureaucracy, that we hope for every couple to make responsible parenthood decisions regarding birth spacing because it‘s good for the health of the baby; it’s good for the health of the mother; it reduces infant, child and maternal mortality; it’s also good for the healthy relationship between parents and baby; the healthy relationship between husband and wife, and therefore the healthy relationship within the family.

It’s also good for the health of the economy.

Our administration has focused on economic reforms because this is the way to remove our country from poverty that has been with us for centuries.

Yesterday, in this very hall, we announced a 10 percent increase in SSS pensions. This increase in SSS pensions is a direct payback of our tough economic reforms. We can see how biting the bullet can speedily win dividends for the average Filipino family because the average Filipino family has at least one SSS plan holder among you.

Meanwhile, the bullish outlook of various investors and financial institutions has sparked business confidence and boosts the cycle of more growth and social reforms. We take pride in the resiliency and productivity of the Filipino people that drives the economy forward. Both business and labor continue to reap the fruits of good economic stewardship and social justice. We made some very difficult decisions regarding tax reforms. But now with resources at hand, because of those tax reforms, we can continue to invest in education, infrastructure, basic services and other important components of national strength and discipline.

This is what we call the second phase of economic reforms, escalating infrastructure and social services, because the first phase was to reform our tax base to raise more revenue.

Because of the confidence generated by our tax reforms, next year, we will save 22 billion pesos in interest payments. Where will we put this 22 billion pesos? We will increase education spending by 16 billion, we will increase health spending by five billion, and we will increase social welfare services by one billion. Sixteen plus five plus one is 22 billion — all coming from savings in our interest payments.

With the 16 billion pesos for education, part of that will go to building 6,000 classrooms to close the classroom gap in elementary education. I have told the Department of Education: I hope, after I give you 16 billion pesos more than your present budget, we will no longer have classrooms with 100 students per classroom. It’s because if we have less than 100 students per classroom and we have two shifts, then it would be very comfortable at less than 50 students per class, per shift.

We will also be able to provide universal health insurance, which means at least 85 percent of our families should have PhilHealth or SSS or GSIS health insurance.

And we will make sure that the 10 poorest provinces in the country will have comprehensive and integrated delivery of social services including microfinance. This is where we will spend our 22 billion pesos in interest savings.

I would like to thank CFM for reinforcing our socioeconomic reforms with the spiritual and moral transformation of our society. Thank you for what you have been doing all this past 50 years.

And as I was telling Roger because we are pushing for natural family planning, in the Population Commission, I have put Lito Sandejas, representing CFM, and Gerry Sotto Padilla, representing Couples for Christ. So we will make sure that the Population Commission’s policies will be on pro-life family planning.

So, I was happy to see that Lito is a member or an officer in fact of CFM, and I hope that we will work together — CFM, the Population Commission and the Department of Health — so that we will push pro-life policies in our family planning programs.

I think that would be the best way to start spending your next 50 years.

To all of you, let’s work together for pro-life policies.

Maraming salamat.

Happy golden anniversary to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Cultural and Awards Night in Celebration of the Golden Anniversary of the Christian Family Movement (CFM) in the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409204409/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3007&Itemid=38