Maraming salamat, Secretary Bert Gonzales.

Group commander give ‘tikas pahinga.’

Vice President Noli de Castro, our new Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and just appointed general, General Del Bangit.

General Victor Ibrado, Happy Birthday and Congratulations! I also greet the Ibrado clan whose members trooped from different parts of Antique and Iloilo to be part of this memorable event. Together with Vice President Noli de Castro, I greet our other officials, appointive and elective; Bishop Tumulak and other guests from the civilian sector; members of the Diplomatic corps; men and women, officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

The change of command honors not only the outgoing and incoming commander but also every soldier, airman, sailor and marine serving the nation. We sleep peacefully at night because these courageous men and women stand on guard. We enjoy the freedom of our democracy because they surrender theirs to the restraint of soldiery and the Spartan discipline of the uniform. We continue to benefit from the tangible progress of our economic modernization because the great Filipino soldier is there to safeguard us, to protect us, to secure our lives and livelihood.

Under Bong Ibrado’s leadership, we have narrowed the lair of hardcore terrorists in the South and continued to confine and limit the communist insurgency, which is now sputtering on empty fumes. Congratulations! Bong to your achievements.

A strong national defense and a strong economy are the twin pillars of any nation’s strength. This is certainly true in the Philippines as well. As President, it is my constitutional obligation to maintain the peace, order and stability of our nation while investing in our people and growing our economy.

With the appointment of General Bangit, we are pleased to provide the continuity required to keep our nation stable and strong. As we have heard from the endorsement of General Ibrado, as we have heard from the remarks of General Bangit, General Bangit will always put the nation first in performing his duty to uphold the Constitution and protect our citizens. Congratulations! Del.

The history-rooted ceremony of the change of command that we are having now reminds ourselves that leaders are transient but the authority and responsibility endure as they are transferred to another leader. As it is with the Armed Forces of the Philippines, so it is with the entire Republic of the Philippines. So, too, is our entire Administration devoted to ensure a smooth transition to a new government. The people come first.

Our accomplishments and progress to date must be passed on to new leaders to continue the forward march of progress. In the meantime, we will remain totally focused on governance and advancing the key programs we have advocated since coming to office, namely: infrastructure, education, healthcare, job creation and economic stability. And, of course, advancing our national security and the smooth operations of our men and women in the Armed Forces who serve our nation with professionalism and distinction. They put their lives on the line for us everyday to protect our freedom and our way of life. And therefore today, not only do we congratulate and thank General Ibrado. Not only do we congratulate and wish well General Bangit. We congratulate and thank the great Filipino soldier.

Together with our soldiers, we have made considerable progress since we came to office. While nothing is ever completely achieved, we will turn over our nation having achieved a number of rock-solid accomplishments. From the beginning, we put forward very specific plans and detailed programs including for the continuing modernization and professionalization of the Armed Forces.

We have worked hard everyday to make sure we delivered on our plans and programs. In the national life of our economy most notably, we have made major progress improving our national infrastructure with more roads, an expanded commuter rail system, bridges and ports. We have made major gains in education, building more classrooms, installing internet access, improving teacher salaries, but together with teacher salaries also soldier salaries, so that in the last nine years the soldier’s pay has been doubled from the time when we started. And, of course, part of our educational reforms is more scholarships for deserving young people including families of our soldiers.

While more certainly needs to be done, we have made major gains in multiplying access to Philhealth, 82 million of our 90 million population have access to Philhealth. In other countries that will be considered universal coverage. We have made progress in electrifying barangays, increasing tax collections, creating new markets with foreign countries and improving relations with other nations including security relations.

Our 36 quarters of consecutive growth have been unprecedented. We maintained our positive growth even during the global recession that started almost two years ago. Sadly, though, the progress we made was dealt a setback with the global recession in the sense that the global recession particularly hurt the poor and the middle- class even if we did not have recession in our country.

The global recession prevented the economic growth from really reaching the poor. It has prevented our economy from lifting all boats as we had hoped and planned. Yet the progress we made can be passed on for the next administration to build on.

We will be leaving the nation in better shape than we found it. We will be leaving the nation safer than we found it because of the great performance of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. From day one, we have always offered very specific programs to achieve our vision for a more modern, vibrant nation including a more modern vibrant Armed Forces.

We cannot put food on the table with just hope; we need a detailed plan of action and the ability to execute that plan and turn it into tangible results. That is what we have tried to do every single day. That is what our Armed Forces have done every single day with their area of responsibility. And I congratulate them for that.

Much remains to be done, but we have made good progress on many fronts. We are optimistic and hopeful about the future of this nation. We remain deeply committed to a smooth transition to a new government. And as we have heard from our outgoing and our incoming chiefs of staff, we count on the Armed Forces to help us prove that our democracy works for the future of our nation’s children.

To Bong Ibrado, a big thank you from the Filipino people whom you have faithfully served. And to General Del Bangit, the very best of luck.

And to our soldiers, thank you very much and long live!

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) Change of Command Ceremony. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080409/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27702&Itemid=38