Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the Lakbay Kontra Droga 2004 and Grand Culmination Rally

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Secretary Joey Lina, long live the entire DILG!

I am grateful that there are so many of us here. So many officials. So many barangay officials. So many NGOs and I want to greet some of them. First of all, here is our Chairman of MMDA, Bayani Fernando. Bayani Fernando is doing a lot. He is cleaning the streets of garbage. He is cleaning the streets of drugs. So long live Chairman Bayani Fernando!

I want to greet our Mayor of Manila, Mayor Lito Atienza. I also greet the Manila youth, thank you all. Mrs. Beng Atienza is also here. Her son-in-law Miles Roces is here, right?

You know, it's good that Mrs. Beng Atienza is here. Because we are not only bringing the fight against drugs to the barangay, we are also bringing family values to the barangay. That's why I agree with Mayor Lito Atienza. Here are our various good mayors, they are here: the mayor of Caloocan, Mayor Rey Malonzo. Mayor Rey Malonzo is about to have his hospital equipped, maybe Rey, we will put some drug rehab facilities there.

I also see the good mayor of Valenzuela, Bobbit Carlos. Do you know, in Bobbit's barangays – isn't it Bobbit, we are catching shabu factories? Why are we catching them? Because the barangay information network is reporting about these drug pushers. So thank you very much, in Valenzuela we can clearly see that the fight against drugs is carried out in the barangay. Congratulations, mayor of Valenzuela, Bobbit Carlos.

I also saw the City Mayor of Sorsogon, Sally Lee. Your companions in Sorsogon, God bless you all with a good evening. Where are they? And we have so many appointive officials here, I will not mention them all because we are together. So when I am here, they are with me too. When I bring the fight to the barangay, they are with me too. But I want to greet some of those I saw here. Among the NGOs I see here is VACC – Volunteers Against Crime and Corruption – and they are really – I read it in an SWS survey – the number one most credible NGO. Congratulations! So if Dante Jimenez, Kapitan Diño, Rose Bud are with us in the fight against drugs, we will surely succeed.

That Rose Bud, she revealed a lot about the fight against drugs, so we started a lot of things. Kapitan Diño is helping not only with drugs, but he is also defending the victims of rape.

So this fight against drugs that we are bringing to the barangay is just part of the fights that we are bringing to the barangay. In the barangay there is the fight against drugs. In the barangay there is the fight against poverty. That's why when I became president, I reversed the Executive Order made by President Estrada which reduced your IRA by twenty percent. So your IRA is complete so that you can fight poverty in your own barangay.

Fight against drugs, fight against crime, fight against poverty, fight for those who want to destroy the good morals of the family. All of this is the fight we are bringing to the barangays.

So friends, youth, barangay officials, help me in all these fights. Let us unite, long live the barangays! Long live the youth! Long live those who fight against drugs!

Thank you very much to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Lakbay Kontra Droga 2004 and Grand Culmination Rally. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090444/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5642&Itemid=38