FOR THE GOOD OF THE FILIPINO FAMILY

Family physicians are those that the family feels comfortable with. Family physicians become friends rather than just professionals servicing us. And so I’m very happy to be here with all of you.

I take this opportunity also to commend Ddr. Sanchez for calling to my attention — sometimes directly but many times through other physicians who know me — about the concerns of the doctors of the Philippines. And it is because of your feedback to me. It is because I have so many doctors who are friends and also who are professionals, family physicians and specialists, whom I consult for my own health. It was because of this that I encouraged the exemption of physicians from coverage of the VAT law. It is also because of the text messages of many of the physicians to me protesting the 20 percent withholding tax scheme that I called up Parayno, BIR, to have a dialogue with you. And Parayno reported to me that it is not 20 percent, it is now 15 percent for those earning 720,000 and 10 percent for those earning below. And Dr. Sanchez just reported to me that you had opposed the requirement for a notarized declaration of your earnings under oath. That you want a simple declaration in a form issued by the BIR, and he reported to me that Parayno — because I talked to him on the phone — has agreed to your demand.

I congratulate you, family physicians on your 43rd anniversary. Your commitment to the progress of your profession helps transform the lives of so many of our fellow men.

You and I are kin in leadership and practice. In doing our respective jobs, we have to do it well because our work affects deeply the lives of people.

Like you, I have been fighting and working for the good of the Filipino family especially the poor and the average Filipino family for they form the backbone of the Filipino nation.

We all have families, even you. The families you take care of, as well as your own families, all Filipino families want change. And the change desired is about livelihood, jobs, prices, sources of income, health. The enemies of the ordinary Filipino are poverty, hunger, sickness, and also moral decay.

And because even you professionals consider livelihood important, I hope this VAT exemption will help you. I fight against the enemies of poverty, hunger, sickness, and the decay of family moral values. I am fighting for change. During my short presidency, I made a strong start coming from the chaos I inherited. Former President Estrada only created half a million jobs. That's why we inherited more than four million unemployed. In a short time, we made a strong start in cleaning up the mess we inherited. We were able to turn the economy around. During my short presidency, we created more than three million jobs. How? Because we now have one of the highest growth rates in the Asia-Pacific — 5.5 percent. Only China and Vietnam are above us, we are the same as Malaysia. We have left all others behind in growth rate.

And we have the lowest inflation rate in a generation, help along by the good work of many of our pharmaceuticals including Unilab, Glaxo, and many of the members of the Pharmaceutical and Health Care Association of the Philippines who had been bringing to the market a lot of medicines with lower prices.

We’ve also had a 26 percent inflow of foreign investment. And in the past two months alone since the Christmas season — this you know is important because you know the importance of water to health — I brought clean water to more than 600,000 families in Metro Manila, Rizal and Cavite. We brought health insurance during my short period of the presidency to more than 8 million indigents, so that today the majority of Filipino families, to include the SSS and GSIS members, are covered by health insurance. But these are all just a down payment. There should be another installment for the ordinary Filipino family.

And you and I must be there to help them. After all, it's campaign season and it's not against the law if instead of being in Mindanao asking for help, I am here asking for your help for the next installment.

We will have clean water and clean government. Just recently we launched a program to achieve universal health insurance coverage. And I’m not here just to ask for your support in the elections, I’m here to ask for your support in governance — help me find the remaining indigents who still do not have health insurance. I know that many of you served poor families. You know whether they have health insurance or not. So, I hope you can work with my Philhealth President, Dr. Pingkoy Duque, to enroll the indigents that you take care of. So that if you have to endorse them for hospitalization, you will not feel so bad and have a heavy heart, because the state will help take care of the medical and hospital bills.

Yes, I will fight for unprecedented change that makes us more secure in our health, strengthens our families, and stamps out corruption, to gain for all Filipino families the kind of respect that our doctors and others in the medical profession have earned all around the world.

That is also one reason why your profession is important, not only to me, the son of a doctor, not only to my family, but also to the family of our nation. Because the first — isn't that what they call the Filipino worker world class? But who was the first Filipino worker recognized throughout the world? — the Filipino doctor. You, you blaze the trail for other Filipino professionals all over the world.

Your profession serves our whole country because of your good reputation all over the world and because of the work that you directly do for the people of the Philippines. And you, the family physicians particularly serve the family. We are alike in that. It is your mission to serve the family my mission to keep the family whole and thriving in a world of formidable challenges.

For the family that we serve, for the families that we serve, lets join hands and win the future.

Because you take care of health, but because of your great influence on the families that have become your friends, you also have a great influence on their character, on their family values. That's why you can do so much for the change in our society. Not only in the field of physical health, but also in the field of the mental health of the Filipino family, the health of our nation. Congratulations!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2004 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].