Thank you.

Thank you, Secretary Puno.

Other officials of the Philippine government headed by General Lomibao, Dr. Dee and the other officials of the Filipino-Chinese Charitable Association, our awardees and their families, men and women of the police, Father Reuter and guests, ladies and gentlemen.

Tonight, we are together to give recognition to the brave men and women who risked their lives in enforcing the law, keeping the streets of Manila safe, and controlling threats to peace and order.

Our society could have been plunged into chaos and lawlessness, our economy gone to ruin if not for police officers, policemen and women like our awardees who remain true to their oath and their duty. To them, thank you very much.

I also use this opportunity to thank the Philippine Chinese Charitable Association because you are truly helpful to our police. And I also use this opportunity to thank the police for working with the military and all our law enforcement officers and even our entire justice system against criminality. For the failure of the dangerous plot to overthrow the constitutional government, thank you also for what you did.

I am making sure that the rightful reward for constitutional fealty among our men and women in uniform are given. This is help from the private sector, but the government is also increasing what we can give to the police. Perhaps some of you were there at Camp Crame when I announced that this year, in the first quarter of the year, we are directing the DBM to release one billion pesos for the PNP, for your guns and your vehicles, so that you are safer and fewer will die, fewer will need to be taken to the Chinese General Hospital.

We will also modernize and reform the armed forces and the police. That's what the Armed Forces, I caught up with the joint defense assessment with America. That was completed during my time, so now there is funding being helped by the Americans to modernize the Armed Forces. So when the joint defense assessment was completed, I also requested our friends in America to do a joint law enforcement assessment, so that whatever they are helping our armed forces with can also be helped with our police.

Together we must work, not double but triple time, in leading the country towards progress and resolving deep-seated poverty.

We must counter the negative effects not only of common criminality but also the effects of destabilization through wholehearted action, not only in your defense of peace but also in infrastructure, jobs, housing, food, and education. But the criminal justice system, the entire criminal justice system must bear down against destabilizers and coup plotters and show them that crime does not pay.

Once again, I salute our awardees who exemplify model officials and police personnel with loyalty and professionalism.

Once again, congratulations to you! To the families, thank you and long live!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Annual Western Police District Recognition Night. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412215008/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2427&Itemid=38