Today is the eve of the celebration of the First Anniversary of People Power 2, which is also often called EDSA 2.

When I was building my Senatorial line up, they said, what will our ticket be, EDSA 2 Coalition. I said, no, because EDSA 2 makes it seem like only those from EDSA are the heroes of the Philippines. That's why it should be People Power because EDSA 2 was not only held in EDSA. It was held in Cebu, in various places in Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao and by those from Manila, Visayas, Mindanao, Luzon.

That's why it's important that in our celebration here for the four days of People Power 2 – January 16 to January 20, the celebration is not only in Manila but throughout the Philippines. Especially in the various places where People Power occurred. That's why in the midst of the celebration of People Power 2, I came here to Cebu to celebrate the equally important role of People Power 2 outside of Manila.

And I chose to celebrate it with TUCP. Because I want to emphasize that People Power is not the personalities with me, like me, but the great Filipino worker. And if the great Filipino worker is People Power, those who should benefit from the policies of the People Power Administration are the great Filipino workers.

We find the great Filipino worker in various sectors of the economy and of the country. For example, included in the great Filipino worker are the great Filipino miner, the great Filipino coconut farmer, the great Filipino fisherman, the great indigenous people, the great tourism worker, the great farmer, the great worker in industry, the great worker in the capital, the great worker in the province.

That's why I started the celebration of People Power 2 upon entering the new year, by going to various places to celebrate my anniversary as President. I went to Masbate, where there are many miners, and there, in honor of the great Filipino miner, I announced that instead of P200 per hectare charged by the previous administration, I lowered it, the People Power Administration lowered it to P40, from P200 to P40.

I also went to the remote town of Milagros, Masbate, a town of fishermen and I inaugurated a processing plant in that remote area for crabs, because this is a way to raise income from fishing. We want to raise income from fishing, we must add value added through processing.

I also went to the fishermen there in the very remote areas of Macunacon and Binalucan in Isabela, there is no processing plant there. They don't even have roads leading to the processing plants of Cauayan, of Isabela, so I will build a cooperative there to have deep seaboats and cold storage, for the small fishermen at the end of the Philippines in Binalucan and Macunacon.

I went to the Cordillera to celebrate with the indigenous people who, through the newly organized National Commission on Indigenous Peoples, will be given more focused attention, and we will allocate P20 million to expedite the issuance of 100 ancestral domain titles. Because this is one of the targets I mentioned in my State of the Nation Address for the great indigenous Filipino. In Isabela, I also went to plant new hybrid rice that will increase yields by two and a half times and thus, also increase the income of the great farmers in the expected planting of China hybrid on 50,000 hectares to be planted starting this April.

This Sunday, after my two weeks in the provinces, I will be in Metro Manila. I went to various areas of the urban poor in Metro Manila and Mega Manila, including Rosario, Cavite, to fulfill the various rights launched, that former squatters have the right to buy the land they are occupying. And now, I am here with the great Filipino worker in the industry in the great city of Cebu.

I am glad that your theme today is job creation and protection in the globalizing world. Because this is a continuation of the TUCP’s anniversary theme, “Strengthening Solidarity for Nationalism, Development and Progress.” And all of this requires honest and efficient governance.

As I told you last December when we were together, right? Tatang Tito recounted when we were together in November 2000, but we are together so often because I have a very high regard for the TUCP. We were together in December and we said the biggest problem of our country is poverty. When I entered office as president, 40 percent of our people were living below our poverty line. That's why the war against poverty is the main focus of our administration. In this fight, I expect your help. And I thank you for the help you, the TUCP, are giving to successfully lift our country out of poverty within a decade. We will fight poverty through our unified plan, the Medium Term Philippine Development Plan, where I gave my synthesis or summary in the State of the Nation Address. And this plan is being promoted after thorough consultation with all basic sectors including the labor sector.

For the first time, there is a chapter in the medium-term plan about increasing and improving employment. The plan’s objectives are: first, job creation or new opportunities for the labor market. Second, accelerating job placement both locally and abroad. Third, improving working conditions including enhancing the skills of workers and improving the benefits and working conditions of workers. And fourth, employment preservation or providing security, protection, as you said, for those who already have jobs.

Last December, you were also there at the Socio-Economic Summit. In fact, one of the leading convenors was the TUCP. At the National Socio-Economic Summit, we created the National Socio-Economic Pact of 2001, which is a continuation of our sincere desire to fight poverty and improve the business climate. In fact, human resources are a critical element in developing our economy and improving our society.

The only way to rise out of poverty is to have decent work for anyone who wants to work, work that provides the worker and their family with dignity and security, sufficient food, clothing, housing, education and a decent standard of living.

This is what the workers' unions want. This is also what the administration wants for everyone. We need to intensify our efforts to achieve these. And now, on the eve of the anniversary of EDSA 2, which installed me as president, let us review what we have done to improve working conditions here.

Cebuano - even though there are 1.3 million entrants in our job market. Income increased and almost 2 million new jobs were created. In the year 2000, 27.4 million people had jobs, in 2001, 29.15 million had jobs. More jobs came from agriculture, in 2000, 9.9 million were agriculture-based workers. In 2001, 11 million…. The industry sector and the service sector also grew.

It is true that there are concerns about the closure of businesses and the permanent loss of jobs. But according to the DOLE monitor, if 65,000 lost their jobs, only within DOLE itself, the job placement made by DOLE during that period was 300,000, not including those that the market itself provided jobs.

That's why job creation is faster than job losses. More people now have confidence that they can find a job. We created 1.7 million new jobs even though the world economy weakened and there was turmoil in the world. Earlier, I was very happy because I read in the newspaper earlier and yesterday, the Asian financial market, the World Financial Market, the darling now is the Philippines.

For us, a peaceful relationship between workers and other sectors is very important to create a peaceful climate for investment and trade. Although our laws are more protective of the welfare of workers than the laws of other countries in Asia. In fact, an article came out on the front page of the Manila Standard, that in our region, the largest increase in worker wages was in the Philippines for the year 2001.

However, despite this, there is still much to be done to achieve genuine peace of mind in the workplace.

We emphasize three points. First, is the proper use of mechanisms in the workplace or work place mechanism, whether it is a cooperative mechanism or a corrective mechanism. We are always improving that. Second, the rights of both parties must be respected. And that is something I really admire about TUCP, because you are very realistic, you respect both sides.

As Ka Tito Mendoza said, there are words, words, words, for them words upon words even in complexity the company that is having talks will close. I asked Pat, I asked President Mendoza, and I said to congratulate TUCP, because Pat and I know that there is no company where TUCP is the union that has closed due to a labor dispute. Third, constant conflict can worsen if it is brought to court because our dispute settlement system is very legalistic. That's why DOLE is also making more efforts to improve our Dispute Settlement System. I hope the unions will also help to improve and expand the use of this system.

The labor relations situation in the country is good now. And this, as I said, is a big debt of gratitude of the government to TUCP.

As Pat Sto. Tomas said, in the last year, many strikes were averted due to good dialogue. There were some that were averted but the company closed. But with your union – that’s what Ka Tito Mendoza said, you have been called many things – moderate, conservative, and you are all but you are none. I can say that because of your excellent work in protecting jobs and improving the conditions of worker members, I would say one important word to describe your union is, it is a mainstream labor union, one that truly believes in improving the situation of workers.

That’s why I am here, as I said, for the first two weeks of January, I celebrated People Power 2 in far-flung provinces and towns. For this week, Metro Manila, the urban poor. But I made an exception for today, this morning here in Cebu to be with the TUCP.

By this time last year, almost 11, I was with Bert Romulo and Rene de Villa at Linden Suites, we were debating whether the EDSA crowd should go to Mendiola or not. By this time last year, 11 hours ago, I already had an agreement with General Reyes. I couldn’t tell Bert and Rene because I couldn’t say anything until it happened, lest it be sabotaged. The agreement was, General Reyes asked, through Leo Alvez, the night before, around one o’clock in the morning this time last year, Leo Alvez went to my apartment and said, I have a message from the Chief of Staff, give the time and the mechanism. Well, I said, mechanism, I’m not a soldier, you know about that. But the time, now. I said, now. Leo said it couldn’t be now, one o’clock in the morning. Because, first of all, we have to fix the other side. Meaning, Crame, we still need to talk to the police. And second, so what’s the time? He said, when does it peak at EDSA. Nani Braganza was with me. Nani said, three o’clock in the afternoon. In that case, therefore, we meet at two o’clock in the afternoon, General Reyes and you, and then you will go to EDSA. Then, so you have to meet in a nearby place. What is a place where you meet but you can be sure it’s safe. I said, we meet at Linden Suites, but I don’t know if it is safe. Everybody knows we’re meeting at Linden Suites, I think. We could meet in my brother’s house at Valle Verde. But I’ve had a few meetings there also, I don’t know if it’s totally safe. Leo said, if I may, I will choose a house at my friend’s place. And that the house of Eddie Jose where I will go now after this, to have our reunion of the safehouse where the top brass came to discuss the withdrawal of support.

So anyway, the agreement was 2 o’clock in the afternoon. So at noon, I was supposed to have lunch with Cardinal Sin and President Aquino. But at 11 o’clock, that’s it, at this time last year, urgent, if I could pass by Linden Suites with Rene de Villa and Bert Romulo because of the debate. They wanted me to exercise my leadership to convince the people to March to Mendiola, because it’s not possible to be there at EDSA for five or four days, and something’s got to give otherwise people, the crowd will just get tired, go home if there’s no mission, go to the next stage to make the military come out. I knew the military was coming out already. But I could not reveal a secret. So they kept forcing and forcing me to agree to ask the people to move to Mendiola. And in the meantime, Nani Braganza slipped a note to me in —you’ve got to go now because Secretary Reyes is already waiting for you. So I remember Rene de Villa making a sentence, you’ve got to exercise your leadership. But before he finished that sentence because I got the note, I stood up. Well, I’m exercising my leadership, I’m meeting General Reyes now. So I went to that house where I am going to now after this, and General Reyes was there, and it had to be much earlier, it couldn’t be 2 o’clock because by that time he was already being called to Malacañang. In other words, there was already the intelligence report about what’s being planned. So we were there. And I guess you have read the rest already in the various accounts. We had a very long discussion. And I remember General Reyes said that it was very painful for him. But he said, I’m not asking for anything except good governance. And I think nobody in EDSA 2, nobody here in Plaza Fuente Osmena asked for anything except good governance. And I hope that is what I’m giving the people of the Philippines.

And so today, I am very happy. I am happy to be with our brothers and sisters here in Cebu for the celebration of the commemoration of People Power. And I am pleased to be with the Filipino worker. Because as I said in my new year’s message, this year 2002, this is a year that we will dedicate to the great Filipino worker.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 12th Supreme National Congress of the Associated Labor Unions (ALU). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412231134/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7598&Itemid=38