Thank you.

Thank you Secretary Roque for your introduction and for organizing this very important conference.

Secretary Romulo and the other members of the Philippine Cabinet who are here with me today. Ambassador Cabactulan and the other officials of the Philippine government based here in the Middle East; Deputy Speaker Villarosa and the other members of Congress who are here with us today; Governor of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao Zaldy Ampatuan and our other Muslim leaders who are here with us today in Dubai upon my invitation; employers; recruiters; and all those who are working for more employment for Filipinos here in the Middle East.

Thank you for coming to this conference. And thank you for your manifesto that provides 200,000 new jobs aside from those already in the roster of the POEA. Maraming salamat sa inyo.

The world economy continues to challenge developed and developing nations alike. So, our top officials not only the Cabinet members, legislators and Muslim leaders here but even the Vice President of the Philippines have traveled to Dubai to promote the interests of our expatriate workers here in the Middle East. Economies had been difficult in several countries but we thank the governments and the employers of the region, of the Gulf Region and Northern Africa that Philippine workers are still, Philippine workers are still in demand and that they are still the most sought-after workers in the region. So, we have come here to champion our workers before the governments of the Middle East and those firms that are hiring workers.

Central to keeping our economy moving is keeping our workers employed, both at home and abroad. The central mission of the Philippine government is the health, security and safety of our people. Good jobs and good wages will continue to help achieve these goals.

In these trying times for Filipino workers, both overseas and domestic workers in the Philippines in the export-oriented industries, the government will not sit idly and do nothing. For government, it is now payback time. The heroic efforts of our Overseas Filipino Workers whom we call our modern-day heroes will not go unreciprocated. So, we have a program of full reciprocity being carried out to help Overseas Filipino Workers in the host countries that are now being buffeted by the economic crisis.

Naturally, Secretary Roque and his department, the Department of Labor and Employment, is taking the lead in carrying out the government’s payback program for the Overseas Filipino Workers. One of the components of this full government support in helping Overseas Filipino Workers who have been displaced is to find remunerative jobs.

And for OFWs who want to cross over to other countries or to other companies in the same country that are in need of their skill and talent, the Philippine Overseas Employment Administration — and Jennifer Manalili is here — is carrying out a marketing blitz to expand the market for our Overseas Filipino Workers, and part of that marketing blitz is our Job Summit today and tomorrow.

So far — correct me if I’m wrong, Nitoy? — but it seems a number of Filipino workers deployed thus far has continued double-digit growth. The market for Overseas Filipino Workers remains high and resilient. Of course there are some challenging spots, but overall while some expatriates have lost their jobs, employment overseas is holding steady because new jobs are being created at the same time like the 200,000 new jobs that you, the employers, recruitment agencies and hardworking government officials had been able to put together.

We are proud that our expatriate workers are increasingly skilled and diversified in their fields. And we are glad that bilateral discussions with many countries are opening up new employment opportunities abroad for Filipinos in a wide range of skilled sectors.

I thank you that your manifesto specified the country, the skills so that this can be provided to our Technical Education and Skills Development Authority which has been given a budget of billions of pesos as opposed to hundred millions in previous administrations. And we will tailor those scholarships that it is handling out to the specific skills that are spelled out in your manifesto.

Given the global environment, indeed, we must be prepared, which is why we are doing everything possible to continue to create jobs at home and abroad.

Aside from tailoring the skills training to your specific needs as spelled out in your manifesto, we are taking the licensure examinations of the Philippine Professional Regulation Commission to selected international locations where large expatriate worker populations are present, including Dubai I suppose, so that these workers who have finished their college degree in a specific skill but still have not taken the professional licensure examination can do so and therefore by getting that license they can prepare for higher paid and more secure employment. We are doing this, for instance, for the professions of Mechanical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Architecture, Certified Public Accountants, Civil Engineering, and teachers.

So, let me once again reiterate, the government will not sit idly and do nothing for our modern-day heroes in this time of great world economic uncertainty. And I thank the employers, the recruitment agencies, and the hardworking Filipino bureaucrats who are here, for supporting us in identifying business and employment opportunities amidst the global challenges.

May you have a fruitful Job Summit. And thank you once again for being here and giving jobs to our Filipinos.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). PGMA’s Speech during the Dubai Job Summit Conference and Luncheon. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412104059/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=23452&Itemid=38