KEEPING THE FLAMES OF HEROISM ALIVE

The soldiers who fought in World War II, most of whom are no longer around, are pillars of courage and heroism, we’ll forever be indebted to them. This memorial that we unveil today is a tribute to them. Nothing is ever enough however to show our gratitude for their sacrifice. On the wall we unveiled today, are inscribed the names of 32,285 gallant men who took part in the Bataan-Corregidor campaign, and the Death March from Bataan to Capas.

Max Soliven’s father, Commander Major Benito Soliven, who commanded 1,000 men has his name inscribed in that wall. Seven of my uncles have their names inscribed in that wall. One uncle, Angel Macapagal, does not have his name inscribed in that wall because as he marched from Bataan through Lubao, on the way to Capas, passing through his hometown, he knew where he would have some drinking water from a well, and he was very thirsty. He went to the drinking water and found out that nobody noticed that he had gone, so he did not go back to the Death March and he survived. But the seven others did not survive. And I am proud that my family, the Macapagal family, is part of the Death March and part of Capas and part of Bataan.

Each of those men, the 32,285 men whose names are inscribed in this wall, is a hero. An example for us in today’s difficult times, faced with a mortal crisis, they embraced a collective destiny and gave their all for the flag.

We offer our heartfelt gratitude and prayers to these brave individuals whose names are inscribed on the wall at the Heroes Memorial. And we remember them especially in these times, times of many challenges in the world and in the country that require heroes, especially in these days.

We Filipinos of the current generation, we face these threats and what I can say as your President, to face success and these various threats, I need the support of the entire citizenry. For example, we are investigating those who carried out the bombing in Davao. The arrest of the suspects is only the beginning. We shall uncover the larger conspiracy behind the terrorist acts in Davao, and expose the face of the enemy to the people.

I have directed the probe to be determined and unrelenting. The people must know the motive and the mastermind behind these acts. Even if we have to chase the truth across frontiers with the cooperation of our allies against terrorism. I commend the vigilance of our security forces as they fight for our freedom from violence.

I ask our people for your support, together we shall show the world that this country will never be a safe haven for terrorist groups.

One of our weapons against terrorism is the competence of our soldiers, which is being enhanced through trainings such as Balikatan. This year, Balikatan will be held in several locations including Sulu. The Province of Sulu is strategically important, that is why “Balikatan” will partly be held there.

The local governments want it, and this is important to our national security. Anti-terrorism exercises will improve the capability of our soldiers to gain ground. We are determined to cut down the entire body of terrorism in the country, and the Sulu connection is vital to this objective. There is a nexus in Central Mindanao connected with another hub in Sulu, both interlinked with militant cells in several urban centers. We have to take down all the nodes and cells to contain the threat and we must not take this effort in isolation.

We acknowledge the opposition to this exercise. We will take that into consideration in the constitutionally adherent terms of reference.

Ang laban ng mundo kontra sa terorismo ay umabot sa giyera sa pamamagitan ng Amerika at Iraq. The U.S.-Iraq war is virtually over. The Coalition is now crossing the bridge between mopping up operations and the beginnings of restoration. We must remember that we have also benefited in a significant way from this victory. We are now safer from weapons of mass destruction. We are now more secure from the tentacles of worldwide terrorism abetted by rogue states. We have won freedom as much as the Iraqi people have won their freedom.

Thus, today, Heroes Day becomes even more meaningful as a time to reminisce the sacrifices of our own soldiery and people during the past war. Celebrating the nobility of the soldiers gives us an opportunity to pay homage to the Coalition Forces as well as to the Iraqi soldiers who died in the conflict. We also join the Iraqi people in their struggle for freedom whose profound meaning we had always known throughout our history. This meaning of freedom is the stuff our heroes of Bataan and Capas were made of. Many fought shoulder to shoulder until death. Others perished out of hunger and disease.

In their memory and in honor of those among them who continued to live among us, let us all work together and harder than ever to win the battle against terrorism, to win the battle against poverty, to win the struggle for democracy, independence and freedom.

Thank you.

Source: Adamson University Library