Thank you very much, Secretary Bert Gonzales for your introduction of me.

I would also like to greet a key player here in our program, the Secretary of Education of the Republic of the Philippines, Secretary DJ De Jesus. And of course I would like to greet our officials of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao under the leadership of ARMM Governor Parouk Hussin.

And in our program, our ARMM Vice Governor and Secretary of Education of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, Vice Governor and Secretary Mahid Mutilan, also plays a big role.

I greet our Host Mayor, City Mayor, Mayor Omar Ali; I greet the Governor of Lanao Del Sur, Mike Adiong; Vice Governor Ramos; our Congressmen, Faysah Dumarpa and Ben Macarambon; the other Cabinet Secretaries here are Secretary Mai Jimenez, Secretary Ging Deles, Secretary Dinky Soliman, Secretary Cito Lorenzo, Secretary Renato de Villa; and two P.A.'s here, Jess Dureza and Mona Valisno.

I greet all the Mayors of Lanao Del Sur who are here, as well as the Vice Mayor and the entire council of Marawi City, and Assemblyman Usman Sarangani; our superintendents: Salma Bagul, Zenaida Ampatuan and Ilindang Dimaampao; Ali Mohamad Anwar Bashir, President of Jamiah, and our peace officials, the South Commander of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, General Roy Kyamko and the Deputy Director General of Police, Virtus Gil; also here is the head of OMA, Sam Ampatuan; to all of you teachers, Assalamu Alaikum Warahmatullah Warrabakato. Peace be upon you.

I intentionally visited the areas of Muslim Mindanao after Independence Day to remind us all that Muslim Mindanao is still part of the Philippines and this should not be forgotten. I, I will not forget Muslim Mindanao especially Lanao because I, my youth was spent a long time there in Iligan. And I know that for too long, the people of Mindanao have been feeling economic exclusion. This is one reason for the rebellion here.

Yesterday, I went to Barangay Inug-ug of Pagalungan in Maguindanao, which is being made a sanctuary of peace itself by the villagers with the help of Tabang Mindanaw, the local government of Pagalungan and the Diocese of Kidapawan. They convinced the rebel groups and the military not to involve the community in their fight and allow the normal lives of three hundred families in the sanctuary to return. Former President Cory Aquino, a pillar of peace, was our guest at the event. Earlier, we came from Sultan Gumander in Barangay Ubanoban, and they also said, “Welcome to Barangay Ubanoban, a zone of peace.”

As proof that even the fiercest enemies can be humane, may these efforts lead to broader peace and unity in Mindanao.

During my stay here in Mindanao, I hope to advance the peace process and promote the rehabilitation of conflict-affected areas. I also want to ensure that the Mindanao National Initiative or ‘Mindanao Natin’ program, which I specifically developed for the development of Mindanao, is implemented in a way that can bring about rehabilitation and development for our poor countrymen.

I want to expedite the implementation of ‘Mindanao Natin’ with a fund of 5.5 billion pesos for five thousand barangays in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, in Lanao del Norte, in Bukidnon and in Zamboanga Peninsula. This program is also supported by Official Development Assistance amounting to 1.3 billion dollars.

Mindanao is now in the midst of fighting terrorism and poverty, using various capabilities from within and outside our country. From my visit, for example, to America last month, I brought back important economic assistance: 96 million dollars for assistance to the development and safety of children in the most difficult parts of the country, and two-thirds of this will be spent here in Mindanao. This is in addition to 74 million dollars for various USAID projects for Mindanao. This includes 33 million dollars as continuing development grants to former MNLF rebels, and 50 million dollars as assistance to our peace process with the MILF if they renounce terrorism. The total value of this assistance from America on my recent trip is more than what the Philippines received when it had a military base, because during that time, America provided 200 million dollars a year to the Philippines annually.

My trip to Korea yielded 100 million dollars worth of Official Development Assistance, of which 9 million dollars will go to building the necessary fund for the Laguindingan Airport of Misamis Oriental, which will be larger and closer to Lanao del Sur than the Cagayan de Oro airport. My visit to Japan secured additional funding for ARMM projects worth 20 million dollars.

The 33 million dollars from USAID for the ARMM social fund has already begun, which we agreed upon with President Bush during my first visit to Washington in 2001. We met yesterday with the board of the ARMM social fund to discuss where this fund will go. It was agreed that a portion of this ARMM social fund will go to building houses for those who were burned in the war. I also said that the ARMM social fund should fund distance learning or television schools that will bring reading, writing and arithmetic to remote areas where there is a lack of classrooms or teachers.

To prepare the youth to be the next generation of knowledge workers, we have upgraded math and science teaching in basic education last schoolyear. Now, we will upgrade English teaching, even in the madrasah so that our great Filipino worker will continue to have the advantage in this increasingly competitive world.

To expand the chance for our children to graduate from school, we are ensuring that there is a school in every barangay. But more than this, in all schools with more than fifty students per classroom, I am instructing Secretary De Jesus to create two shifts for the classes so that it will not be crowded and difficult to study. In elementary schools with more than one hundred students per classroom, this school year, I am also instructing DepEd to build additional classrooms.

Here in ARMM, I stayed up late last night because I counted the schools with more than one hundred students per classroom. And I counted in ARMM, one hundred and thirty-seven schools. So I will allocate 40 million pesos to build new classrooms in those schools. In this way, we will address once and for all the severe lack of classrooms that has long plagued our students.

I also said that the ARMM social fund should spend on the documentation of the poor for the titling of the lands they occupy. This addresses the long-standing problem of Muslim communities regarding land titles. In connection with this, we will establish one-stop shops for land titling and registration in the ARMM under the Office of Muslim Affairs and DENR. The first such one-stop shop was established yesterday in the ARMM compound in Cotabato City. Teams will also be sent to the communities of Lanao Del Sur and other areas of the ARMM to receive and process land patents that will lead to land titles for you.

Earlier, as I said, I went to Sultan Gumander here in Lanao Del Sur to start the road funded by the Kuwait fund for Arab Economic Development. Kuwait is funding four road projects here in Lanao Del Sur to Lanao Del Norte amounting to 20 million dollars. And the place we visited in Sultan Gumander earlier will only take two and a half hours to reach Cagayan de Oro so that their products can easily reach the various markets of our country.

Yesterday, I also created the ARMM Unified Command of the Armed Forces of the Philippines as stipulated in my Executive Order 212. The ARMM Unified Command will protect the welfare and security of those living in Muslim Mindanao. This ARMM Unified Command will be placed under the supervision and control of the Southern Command of the AFP, General Roy Kyamko. He will have a Deputy South Commander for the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, that is the first step of the unified command. And those from the ARMM who have the appropriate skills will be prioritized to be included in the said unified command of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao. I also told DOLE to provide emergency employment to the out-of-school youth of the ARMM. So earlier, upon my arrival at the helicopter site, I inducted these emergency employment beneficiaries, our out-of-school youth. One thousand from Lanao del Sur and one thousand from Maguindanao. Under this project, the youth will be trained as a new group of Sala’am peace corps. They will be trained to participate in socio-civic activities, relief operations, police work assistance and medical missions. Each youth who joins will receive a 1,000 pesos allowance per month. They can join for three months to one year.

We have also created a search committee for those who may be appointed to the Shariah courts. We are looking for the most outstanding and most competent legal luminaries from the Muslim community. The committee will be chaired by Justice Secretary Datumanong because he is a lawyer and he is Muslim. Of course, Governor Parouk Hussin and Vice Governor Mutilan, as well as the seasoned lawyers of the ARMM, will be included in this search committee. I am requesting their recommendations within six months so that we can finally establish the Shariah courts you have been waiting for. Later, I will go there to that building because we will discuss how to revive the irrigation project that my father, the late president Diosdado Macapagal, made.

Let me repeat here the principles that guide us to fulfill our dream for Mindanao:

First, peace and development always go together;

Second, the development of our country should be based on constitutionality, national sovereignty and territorial integrity;

Third, our society is composed of different traditions based on social justice for all and respect for our diversity.

I will add a fourth to the three basic principles, which is that terrorism and other evils should be condemned.

I hope that our ‘Mindanao’ will be enjoyed by everyone in our country, not only those from Mindanao and Muslims, but by everyone, even those from Luzon and the Visayas, as an important step towards the fulfillment of the promise of Mindanao. The unity of our country was the meaning of our celebration the day before yesterday on Independence Day, we did that here in Mindanao.

My colleagues and I fully support the people of Mindanao in the aspirations of this frontier of our sovereignty.

As a united people under one flag, we can achieve meaningful autonomy in Muslim Mindanao and fulfill the promise of this region so that we can get closer to our aspiration of a strong and progressive Republic of the Philippines.

Long live the teachers of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao!

Okay. Thank you, thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Moral Recovery Training Program Culmination Ceremony. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412200650/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6466&Itemid=38