Thank you, Secretary Hidalgo.

Other officials of the Philippine government, many of whom I see here in this hall today; Joey Concepcion and all our other trustees helping us to develop entrepreneurs; Mrs Socorro Ramos, the living symbol of entrepreneurship in the Philippines congratulations! On all the honors you brought the country; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.

Entrepreneurship, I first heard of that term when I was studying economics. I remember in economics class it said that there are four factors of production — land, labor, capital and entrepreneurship. Land means all the natural resources; labor means our skills and also our muscle; capital means the man-made factors of production. But these three resources won’t produce anything unless there’s an entrepreneur to put them together.

And it said also that an entrepreneur is one who not just transforms these three factors of actual production, there are also inventions that go on in the world of science. An entrepreneur is the one who brings these inventions to commercial use and that is called innovation. So, the entrepreneur is an innovator. And because the entrepreneur does these things — puts factors of production together to produce something; transforms inventions into innovations — an entrepreneur must essentially be a risk-taker.

And that’s the difference between an entrepreneur and a manager who becomes just part of labor.

And given this definition and description of an entrepreneur, indeed, we can only agree that entrepreneurship is not only the key to economic growth and stability, it’s the ultimate solution to poverty. Because without entrepreneurs there can be no production; without entrepreneurs there can be no innovation; without entrepreneurs there can be no risk-taking. And if there is no risk-taking, well, no guts, no glory; no moving forward for a country.

That’s why in my inaugural address last year, I made it a point that in the number one item of my Ten-point legacy agenda, I said, that we must develop three million entrepreneurs up to 2010. That’s only up to 2010. We must develop even more entrepreneurs beyond 2010. And what we are promoting here today will develop those entrepreneurs into the next generation — education for entrepreneurship in basic education. And that’s why I’m glad to join you today on this occasion celebrating, promoting Entrepreneurship Training in Basic Education.

I made it a point when I assume the presidency way back in 2001, to put substance in every act of governance. And the most important substance is wealth and job creation. And this has been my business to this day.

When Joey was talking about how we need leaders to inspire, and that’s why we need entrepreneurs, and that’s the difference between managers and entrepreneurs. But when Joey was describing why some would hesitate to become entrepreneurs it’s because they’re afraid to take the risk especially the risk of losing capital.

I know the meaning because I know what it takes to take risk and to risk losing capital. In my case, I have taken the risk to lose my political capital just to do what’s right for our future generation.

In my State of the Nation Address last July, I said, that the Philippines is divided into a degenerated political system and an economy that is poised for take off. As we prepare for Christmas and as we celebrate entrepreneurship in basic education campus on this day, let our spirits be buoyed, but the World Bank study that places Philippines skilled workers as the world second largest population of skilled workers. So much resources for the entrepreneur to work with.

Let’s also be buoyed up in our spirits by the news that OFW money is lifting many families out of poverty. In the past, we used to expect seven, eight billion dollars from them. This year, they will be bringing in 10 billion dollars to our Philippine economy. Twenty eight percent increase, I think, over last year.

Where does their money go? It’s sends their children and nieces and nephews to school; it provides, yes, capital for the entrepreneurship of the younger brother or cousin, retired cousin; it provides school buildings for their community where we can have a campus that trains our young entrepreneurs.

Let’s also be buoyed up in our spirits by the hope that the PNOC oil exploration concessions in countries like Gambia and equatorial Guinea may be a glimmer of light at the end of our oil difficulties. Yes, there is good news for Christmas. And an entrepreneur must look at the good news and not be bogged down by the bad news. And let’s prepare for the New Year. Not only for the New Year but for the new generation.

Let our vision soar to reforming the whole system to change in the constitution for the good of the nation because that’s for the next generation. And as we look upon renewal let’s begin by reconciling the nation with God.

This month is a month when we have the days of prayers, and I shall soon declare in accordance with this day of prayer, a week of prayer, a period of national renewal. For Catholics, I would advocate a nationwide program whereby all will undertake the sacrament of penance and reconciliation. For Muslims, we are in Ramadan even now and I ask them to offer this annual fast for reconciliation with God. For other denominations, I hope they will begin a similar program in their churches. In this time of prayer, we as a society must seek guidance from and concentrate our efforts to God.

In this period of renewal, we shall direct the focus of government so that its bureaucracy will become more responsible to the call and needs of the time and the needs of ordinary Filipinos and ordinary entrepreneurs. This may mean amending the objectives of my executive order on government reengineering, and the issuance of an enabling executive order that will allow frontline agencies to operate in an emergency or state of calamity mode.

I am going to reorganize what is called the Presidential Commission on Effective Governance — I inherited that body — I will reorganize it precisely to study these frontline services. And I will be asking my Deputy National Security Adviser Virtus Gil to head this study on frontline services. And I will ask our trustees consultants to help him out to identify a day in the life or a week in the life or a month in the life of an ordinary entrepreneur; what are the frontline agencies that entrepreneur must deal with; where are his difficulties, and this would be what we will have to reenergize.

I’m also calling for a clean up drive in all provincial capitols and municipalities. I shall ask Governor El Rey Villafuerte to help us communicate that to the local governments and offices of the government to signal a fresh start, back-to-work attitude and atmosphere. As said by our speakers earlier, we must shape an environment that’s conducive — this is what they call the “broken glass theory.” We have to make the physical environment mood not just the frontline bureaucracy environment. We must make the physical and bureaucratic environment conducive to wealth creation with the goal of being first world in 20 years. Not that we will be the ones running the government in 20 years, but we have to have a goal for our children that we would like them to enjoy when they are the entrepreneurs in 20 years and there are seeds that we must plant today.

So I ask you, the entrepreneurs, and Joey Concepcion and our trustees, our moving spirits, to help me mobilize the whole of Philippine society, starting with the pillars of business in Metro Manila, Cebu, Davao. The national capital region should be projected simply as Manila and metropolis compared to Bangkok, Singapore or Hongkong for the purpose of internationally branding Manila as a major tourist destination. This will entail massive decongestion, face lifting and urban renewal efforts.

Towards the north, Vice-President Noli de Castro is already decongesting the Northrail area. And I have asked the MMDA Chair BF Fernando to especially intensify the face lifting and urban renewal in what we call the investor and creditor corridor, the routes that investors pass all the time when they’re thinking of whether they should invest in the Philippines. The route that creditors pass all the time when they are thinking whether we’ll have the ability to pay our debt back. And these are the routes from the airport to the hotels, from the hotels to Malacañang, from the hotels to Calabarzon. These are primary areas for urban renewal and face lifting.

To decongest Metro Manila — or what we should call Manila — we must also connect at last LRT1 to MRT 3 so that we will have a complete computer train loop. Right now that computer train is U-shaped. We want to make it O- shaped so that you can get on anywhere and get off anywhere in the metropolis.

In my inaugural address last year, I did say that I want to decongest Metro Manila, and for that purpose, we will develop northward and southward. North, what we will make Clark and Subic the best service and logistics hub in the region. One year after I said that in my inaugural address last year, let’s review what we’ve been able to do. The north expressway has been upgraded; the McArthur highway is being upgraded, rehabilitated; the Subic port and the Tarlac-Clark-Subic road are under construction; the Clark airport has about 35 flights a week. It will have 50 flights a week by December; and thank God, the case against Northrail has been thrown out by the supreme court. One year later from when I declared that intention, our goal of making Clark-Subic as the best service and logistics hub in the region is well on its way to being fulfilled.

But whether it’s in Manila, Cebu, Davao, Clark-Subic, Cagayan de Oro or Calabarzon. What we are doing is setting an environment to make the risk-takers feel that the risk is lessened. But in the end, all this is bringing the horse to the water. In the end, will the horse drink the water? — that is the entrepreneurial question. That is the moment of decision-making and whether the entrepreneur will take care and will take that environment as a sign to plunge into the risk that he must take, put the factors of production together, transform inventions to innovations — that will depend on whether we have developed a whole generation of entrepreneurs from grade school, high school, college and young business.

And so, the entrepreneur is the model to achieve what we want when we as a people begin to see the Philippines and ourselves to the eyes of a Filipino entrepreneur; when we begin to not be afraid to take risk; when we begin to see the opportunities rather than what drags us down, we will become proud of ourselves and of our country.

And so on this day, I thank Joey, Mrs. Ramos, the educators, the trustees, the supportive entrepreneurs, the teachers and the young would-be entrepreneurs, I thank you all for having the culture of entrepreneurship stay alive in our society because you are the future of our country.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Ceremonies of the Entrepreneurship and Basic Education Conference. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092252/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5197&Itemid=38