Thank you. Thank you.

Thank you very much, Chairman Cunanan. And I’d like to especially thank you because when last September I asked you to propose and work for the ten percent increase in benefits for the SSS members, right after that the SSS board approved it. Thank you very much for that.

Thank you also and congratulations! To Cora Dela Paz. Because under your very, very disciplined financial reforms in the SSS and making sure that investments of SSS are all sound, objective, rational, no behest investments, the actuarial life of SSS has improved from 2015 to 2038. Congratulations!

Vice Mayor Herbert Bautista, maraming salamat for welcoming us here in behalf of the big city of Quezon City which is one-half of Metro Manila and I’m sure many SSS members are residents of your city.

I would like to greet our commissioners, members of the board, all of you account officers of the Social Security System. Congratulations! On your second national convention and congratulations! On the 50th anniversary of SSS.

Kanina tinatanong ko kay Cora yung specific job functions ng account officers. Of course, we are all aware of what account officers do. There are account officers in banks. There are account officers in insurance companies, real estate companies, sales companies, and I wanted to see how the general function of an account officer is translated into what SSS account officers do. And from her description and her answers to my probing questions about what you do, I can gather that this is a gathering of the best and brightest in the SSS. You are the committed and dedicated foot soldiers of the institution. You spearhead collections. You spearhead good governance. Thank you for your sterling services to the people.

Why did we say good collection and good governance? Because due to your excellent collection, even if we don’t have to increase contributions by 10 percent, we can increase benefits by 10 percent because of your good collection, the fiscal position of SSS improves. And therefore that translates into good governance.

If there was a slight increase in contributions during our administration, it was because we wanted our working class to recover from past hardships, and the employers are the ones who answer for the employees' contribution. So many thanks to our Employers Confederation of the Philippines, the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry. They have representatives on the Board of Commissioners of SSS and these patriotic organizations spearheaded the move of the employers to shoulder whatever increase in contribution rates occurred in 2003 and this year. Thank you too to the employers.

If we look at what has happened in SSS in the past six years — and now that I have a chance to speak with you — I can’t help but remember the baseline situation in 2001. Goodness! SSS was faced with the threat of collapse by 2015. Steep challenges that took a heavy toll on its actuarial standing. That’s right, it wasn’t your fault, you were collecting well, the problem was the collections were going to investments that were not deserving.

But Cora changed that. We embarked on a radical reform program and after six years your institution is more than back to its feet. It is stronger and more resilient than ever. What a great gift for the 50th anniversary of SSS.

And if we look at the world around us, your accomplishments are even more deserving of praise in the face of emergent global crisis in social security programs that are in dire straits in other countries, while ours, yours, and our peoples is sailing steady on an even keel.

The reform of the SSS that started greatly with Cora’s administration and added on in a couple of years by the policy leadership of Thelmo Cunanan and our board, these were part of the hard-fought economic reform battles through which the Philippines has finally broken loose from its historic legacy of lethargy. Everybody talks about the tax reforms. It’s time that everybody knows also about the SSS reforms. When we talk about new revenues, we include increases in contributions for SSS. But not only from those small increases in contribution rates that the employers have agreed to shoulder in behalf of the workers, but your better collection and overall in our country a crackdown on tax cheats, but in your case also a crackdown on those who are cheating on their remittances. And these together with the fiscal discipline, fiscal discipline in our national budget where the money goes to where it should be in a very directed focus, but also fiscal discipline on the part of SSS making sure that the investments of SSS are sound and rational. All these have put the Philippines on a path to permanent, sustainable economic growth and stability. Yun naman ang kaibahan ng kaunlaran sa ilalim ng ating administrasyon. Six years, 24 quarters of uninterrupted growth. Nung araw kasi boom and bust. Yung boom and bust every three years akyat-baba. Ngayon tayo akyat-akyat-akyat. At ang laki ng papel ng SSS, ang reforms at yung inyong mga collection. And the world is taking notice. The Philippines offers one of the best values in Asia for investors.

There has been a significant increase in investments, exports. Despite the strength of our peso, our exports continue to rise and job creation is happening. Our unemployment rate has gone down. And so I ask you, let’s continue to work to ensure that this positive momentum will be sustained. As part of that effort, we are committed to consolidating the gains in new revenue by making long overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure. This includes billions of pesos for education, health care and training — and many here are helping the beneficiaries of SSS — along with additional billions of pesos for new bridges, roads and ports to upgrade the competitiveness of the Philippines.

I really take great pride in the discipline of the stalwarts and the soldiers, including yourselves, of our administration. We are very disciplined in our focus on the economy and our overall economic health. And I’m proud of the fact that because of the improving finances of our national government and our financial institutions like SSS, external debt is declining at a rapid clip. We have repaid… Prepaid so many of our loans. We’re committed to making sure we use the new resources these developments are generating to invest in vital social and economic needs. At kayo ang dami niyong ginagawa para doon. It’s been a tough road — I’m sure Cora had a hard time turning around the finances of SSS and lengthening its actuarial life from 2015 to 2038 — but together, all of us, I and the members of our administration long ago made a decision not to sacrifice long-term gains for short-term political expediency.

The remaining hardships are included – my wife even had surgery – that is part of the severity of an illness when surgery is needed, of course there will be sickness. For example, she is still having a fever now, that is part of post-operative complications. But in the long run, what will happen is sustained recovery. And that is what has been done with SSS, that is what has been done with the national government.

As a result of the SSS reform program, we’re really very happy and we must be proud that the actuarial life has been extended from 2015 to 2038. Malaking bagay yung inyong collections at I hope, inaasahan ko, na yung condonation program na dineklara natin nung May 1 nung isang taon ay nakatulong. I hope it enabled you to collect even more. In fact you’ve collected 1.7 billion pesos in delinquent accounts. Congratulations! To you for that. And because you were able to collect all of these together with our incentive that they would have some condonation or penalties, you have brought back, I understand, 200,000 SSS members to good standing. That is congratulations! To our account officers. And because of that the SSS last year, last September, was able to grant a 10 percent increase in pensions benefiting more than one million members.

Now on your 50th anniversary. So my instructions again, my request to our board, is maybe let’s gift the Filipino people with another 10 percent increase in benefits this year. This is social payback. As Cora said earlier, you the SSS are a fulcrum for social justice.

You are also the medium of industrial peace. Here are our representatives of the workers. SSS is a part of a mechanism that mitigates the financial burden of workers — as long as they are in good standing, they can borrow, SSS salary loans — encourages the overall productivity in the workplace and forges harmony in the economy.

But even as we celebrate our 50 years and the six years of hard-fought reforms within the institution that are now paying off for our people, we still realize that new social security schemes are imperative as we modernize our economy.

As we enter the 20th century, as SSS enters its second 50 years and so I ask SSS, the account officers, the different market developers to focus on the coverage for instance of our OFWs. So Chairman Thelmo Cunanan told me earlier, we are now going to focus on our overseas Filipinos in America as a trial or a pilot so that we can increase the coverage of SSS. Another one is the self-employed workers. That also isn’t automatic. Unlike corporations that are under the law, they are required to be included in SSS. Self-employed workers are a very, very big source also for coverage. And we were discussing that with Cora while we were here, that’s one way by which you can increase the market when you go to the community, when you talk to people, when you do your collections you can also identify new SMEs or even micro-enterprises that may want to cover themselves with SSS, self-employed workers and those who belong to the underground economy. It’s really like an insurance salesman looking for new clients.

And SSS also must broaden its involvement in programs that have a direct impact on the lives and welfare of the poor, such as housing because housing loans are a very big thing for our SSS members. And we are doing our best in order to finance the construction of housing, so that the SSS members can also finance their own amortizations and interest payments. So that is one help for the housing sector… The housing industry they are now… And the economy, the whole economy is now enjoying the lowest interest rates in history, right, single digit. There are even prime accounts there where they only charge three percent interest. And so you have the real estate firms putting up housing and you have SSS financing the servicing or the take out of the members of the SSS.

And therefore we have these continuing challenges. But if you have gone through the challenge of improving collections and improving the investments — those were great challenges that were almost for awhile seemingly insurmountable — I’m sure these challenges now of widening your market, improving the benefits and getting into additional investment areas or more investment areas like microfinance that should be much easier than what we have done, what you have done over the last six years. So what these challenges are now are challenges of how to make SSS even better. It’s no longer a challenge of how SSS will survive, SSS is very much alive because of you.

And so as far as the remaining challenges are concerned which are challenges of modernization and getting into the new century and spreading the benefits to a bigger population of our people, I am confident that you are up to the challenge because you have been up to even more difficult challenges in the last six years. And so on this your second national convention, on this year your 50th anniversary my message is: let us sustain our gains, the gains that you brought about in the last six years. And let us build on them in the next many years for the brighter future of the Filipino.

Long live the account officers of SSS!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the 2nd National Convention of the Account Officers of the Social Security System (SSS). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412150849/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2001&Itemid=38