Thank you very much, Secretary Gonzales, for your introduction of me.

And Archbishop Capalla and our other Reverend bishops including the incoming president of CBCP, Bishop Otchimar. Thank you also for inviting me to be here with you today.

Dr. Barra, Dr. Gomez and the different members and leaders of the Protestant and the Muslim community who are here with us; Father Alejo and your very good team; Secretary Dureza, our Presidential Adviser for Mindanao and I’d like to introduce our new adviser on the Peace Process, Secretary Annabelle Abaya. And of course you have mentioned him, you know, our chairman of the Peace Panel with the MILF, Ambassador Paeng Seguis. Well, you know him… Paeng you were not here in the room when they said that the people of Mindanao want to know you more. But as far as Archbishop Capalla said that you are happy to be with me today, I am also very happy to be with you today. So, thank you for inviting me here.

And I’m very happy to meet the academicians and other professionals who comprise ‘Consult Mindanao.’ And I thank you for making the rounds of your consultation and for coming up with a very professional piece of work that add on not I but also the Presidential Adviser on the Security and on the Peace Process can I’m sure receive us a lot of inputs for the work that they have to do. And very prevalent, pervasive in your report is that the confirmation that understanding the belief, faith and culture of people from diverse background is a major step in reducing tension and conflict. And you have said again through dialogue, we can reach out and understand the condition of those that are differently placed because of culture and religion, so that appropriate culturally-sensitive interventions to address their needs are developed and undertaken.

And, of course, you have also said that hand-in-hand with dialogue is the need for economic development especially at the community level. And, indeed, this has been what we have been trying to do. These are what we call the main elements of our “soft” power.

All the programs and actions for peace and development, of course — and we have been reminded by the Supreme Court — must be framed by our being a sovereign nation, by the integrity of the national territory, and by our fundamental law, the Constitution. And it is quite significant to learn — no, not to learn because we know it intuitively — but to have a confirmation that it’s difficult for the people to see the difference between the different groups. For instance, the different branches of government, the different factions of the Bangsa Moro, but it is important that we point out that though we may differ with one another there is something that we must all reject — and that is terrorism in any form.

We have as I said earlier a new Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process, Secretary Annabelle Abaya. Father, you were saying that the women were complaining how come there is no woman in the GRP-MILF Peace Panel. Well, there is none but there boss is a woman and that’s Annabelle Abaya. And she and Paeng Seguis who is from Mindanao, in fact from Surigao, are here today. All the members of the peace panel for the MILF negotiations in fact are from Mindanao. Paeng Seguis is a Mindanaoan from Surigao, a constituent of Bishop Otchimar. And maybe during the conversation today and in succeeding conversations, Annabelle and Paeng can brief you more on what is happening in the peace process with the MILF. But what I can say in general is that we are hopeful that the formal resumption of the GRP-MILF Peace Talk is imminent. Is that the right word, Paeng?

Paeng has just been back from Kuala Lumpur, but before that I had directed him to conduct massive consultations and dialogues with our people especially in Mindanao. And I’m glad that he has now the output of the consultations of Consult Mindanao, so that what he brings to the negotiations will be truly reflective of the people’s will.

Part of what Paeng has been able to do this past weeks are two very imortant achievements: one, the GRP and the MILF have concluded an agreement to operationalize, what Father Bert referred to, the International Contact Group for the GRP-MILF Peace Process, and I’m sure that the inputs that you put here will be a very important… ah, the output you’ve put here will be a very important input as he moves forward to operationalize this International Contact Group. And just a few days ago, the two panels have also come to an agreement on a civilian protection component of the International Monitoring Team. And we are happy that to date the respective declarations of the GRP and the MILF on the suspension of military offensives and actions continue to hold firmly.

You have given us a very pithy output on the report, very substantive, much to be studied from the national government, from the OPAPP and the peace panelists, the National Security Adviser and even the Adviser for Mindanao who supervises the MEDCO.

So, we thank you very much and my speech is not the main event, the main event is the presentation of the output. So, I would like to thank you, Archbishop Capalla and all the members of the BUC, for being consistent champions of peace and sustainable development. And we will very carefully look at what you have done what you have presented us and seek to do what we can practicably carry out. But we thank Consult Mindanao for giving the opportunity to be able to reach out to more Mindanaoans and also for keeping them aware of the path to peace.

So, to all of you, thank you, whether you are Muslim, Christian or Lumad. Thank you for keeping the peace through your hard work and steady faith in the Almighty.

Daghan salamat kaninyong tanan.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 37th General Assembly Bishops-Ulama Conference. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133940/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26713&Itemid=38