CALLING ALL FILIPINOS

I’m glad we’re here tonight in Cebu, the shining symbol of our fervent hope as a nation. Cebu has laid out the red carpet for you. And why not, you deserve a hero’s welcome because our nation continues to benefit from your hard work and sacrifices. As Loida said, last year, our kababayans overseas spent eight billion dollars in remittances. And may I especially acknowledge that two-thirds of these remittances came from the United States. So, thank you, especially our Fil-Ams.

You who are here tonight exemplify the global network just as deeply as the family network of Filipinos that thrive in our unique culture and progressive ways.

When the typhoons struck several provinces particularly in Quezon, Filipinos overseas came to the aid of the victims in unprecedented magnitude and compassion. And I thank you in behalf of the people of those provinces.

I’m so heartened by your love and sentiment for the folks and young ones back home. We live by our hearts, Filipinos, and we must be proud of it.

I remember the last time we met in Malacañang when I hosted you for a meeting there when you had your conference You asked me point blank, through a resolution, what you as global Filipinos, could do to help our country.

Thank you for that far ranging query. And tonight, we’ve seen some of the answers coming from you yourselves. And I think this is how Pinoy power! Worldwide helps us here at home. Loida and the other speakers have already mentioned some of the ways by which you can help and are already helping. She talked about the one thousand dollars instrument:

Indeed, you can kelp a lot if you deposit your dollar savings in our banks because the interest it earns abroad would also earn here at home, where your money is best needed. Your dollar deposits — they don’t actually have to be a thousand dollars though there are particular instruments for a thousand dollars. But even if they are smaller than that they will help improve our dollar reserves.

Two, it’s so important that you constitute yourselves into a lobby group to protect the country’s interests. I remember last year, Filipinos in San Francisco staged a heroic lobby to convince calpers to maintain their investments here in the Philippines, and you succeeded. And I thank you for that as well. Now, we need the same persuasive power when our sovereign standing is under review by several rating agencies and fund managers.

Three, increase your monthly remittances even by at least 20 dollars a month. The peso has hit an 8-month high and certainly a lot or that comes from remittances from overseas Filipinos.

Thank you for your love of family and country.

Four, retire in the Philippines, in a place of your choice and in the company of people you love. This is still the best place to spend the twilight of your years. Your peso has more value and health care is both excellent and affordable. Choose the most serene, rustic place, and invest now for your egg nest in the future.

Five, what you’re doing… Continue to do what you’re doing — mobilizing overseas communities to participate in the ten-point legacy program of my administration. Allow me therefore, to spell out very briefly the ten legacies.

I can be brief because my ten legacies are summarized in the acronym “BEAT THE ODDS”: B is for balancing the budget, E is for modern education for all. And this is where “Gilas” comes in. Thank you very much for being a very big part of that legacy. Aside from “Gilas” which seeks to computerize and penetrate with the internet all high schools within the remaining five years of my administration, I would also like to call attention to the labor department’s “Donate-a-Classroom” project. The classroom project is called “Galing sa Mamamayang Pilipino Abroad.” it aims to build 10,000 classrooms in the poorest barangays through donations from overseas Filipino community. To date, our OFWs had been able to contribute 245 new classrooms through your donations. Internet penetration, classroom and books I mentioned because I see Nancy Harrington. Thank you for your books for the barangay program.

To continue with our 10-point program: A is for automated elections, T is for transport and digital infrastructure to connect the entire country. And you’re connecting the school through the internet contributes to that. That’s BEAT.

For the: T is for terminating the NPA and MILF conflicts, H is for healing the wounds of Edsa 1, 2 and 3, E is for electricity and water for the entire country.

For ODDS: O is for opportunities for 10 million jobs. Loida has already talked about microfinance. We aim to create ten million jobs. And we aim that three million of them will come from microfinance. Also to create jobs, investing in the Philippines is now a wise thing to do. Our stock market is vibrant, our growth rate is strong.

Now, to continue for now to beat the odds: D is for decongesting Metro Manila, and the last DS is for Developing Subic-Clark as the best hub in the region.

The DOLE classroom program, the Gilas, the stock market investments, the books for the barangay, the microfinance – these are just some examples of how overseas Filipinos can contribute to the 10-point legacy agenda. And I’m glad Loida talked about hope. The year 2005 is “a year of urgent change and also a year of fervent hope.” I’m glad we’re having this meeting at the beginning of the year.

I begin this year with a sense of urgency, but also with a deep sense or hope and renewed purpose. As Loida described very well, the nation is at a crossroads, and must move forward with decisive action in Congress. I’m glad Mar and Martin are in the midst of such decisive action with the unity of our people, and a clear direction from your elected leadership.

Ana as president or this great nation — as you have asked me, Loida to do — I will provide that leadership and direction in 2005.

While it won’t be easy — nothing worth fighting for ever is — it must be done. Simply put, we must enact vital legislation to increase revenues, pass a budget that invests in our 10-point pro-poor program, and number three, take executive action towards wiping out corruption.

The economy is the foundation of our hope and the creation of jobs the central organizing principle of my government.

We are on the right track: our exports are up, a lot of them from Cebu. As I said earlier, our growth is up, and our spending is in line. As I said earlier, the peso is strengthening, thanks to you, the overseas Filipinos. The stock market is strong, agricultural growth has jumped, capital inflows are increasing and economic figures in 2004 were higher than expected.

And so, I feel justified in calling on all Filipinos, wherever you are, to stay the course. It’s time to tear down barriers and build up hope, growth, a new optimism at the start of this new year.

And I thank the global Filipinos for being here tonight to express to me the fervent hope for the urgent change that we all want to happen for the good of the folks back home here in the Philippines.

Long live overseas Filipinos!

Thank you all very much.

Source: Adamson University Library