Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the 14th National Congress of the National Movement of Young Legislators

[ Delivered at the Harbor Garden Tent, Westin Philippine Plaza, Pasay City, March 5, 2005 ]

THE MISSION TO SPREAD HOPE

I remember when attended your convention in Davao, I was still a senator, and at that time, there was already a call to review the local government code. But somehow, even if it was supposed to be reviewed five years after, it never got to us. Now, it’s fifteen years after, so I hope this time the review can finally take place under the leadership of NMYL.

Since that time in Davao, the number of young leaders entering the field of politics and local government has grown by leaps and bounds. This is a very good omen for the strength of our nation because one-half of our population is made up or those twenty years old and below. And with the young people entering government, it augurs well for a bright future for our nation. Besides the more young leaders, the greater the energy and the potential of the Philippines.

I remember the movement over the years and I can say having observed you as guest speaker, as guest, that your movement has become a fertile ground for character training and development, and for honing public management skills.

On this your convention, your 14th National Congress, my fervent hope is that you will follow in the footsteps of your founding president — at that time like Julian a Quezon City councilor — Francis Pangilinan. Now, fourteen years later he is the Senate majority leader and ready for greater heights of service to the nation. But even in your current position as local legislators, you play an urgent role today.

This is a year for urgent change in the Philippines. Economic growth, the creation of new high-wage jobs and bringing economic stability and predictability to the Philippine economy are central to improving the economic well-being of every Filipino.

I ask Herbert, because Julian was telling me and I’m very happy that you’re all ready to support the 10-point agenda. And I was telling Herbert, help me too to diminish the impact of rising prices. And Herbert said that it is among your breed, your group that you have been able to take care of some of the increase in prices that come from cheating and abuse of those who are selling to the consuming public.

The best way to diminish the impact of rising prices is to create new high-wage jobs, attract investment and bring overall economic stability to the nation. The government is doing these things, as well as cutting wasteful government programs and limiting investments to infrastructure and people. In addition, the government is taking action to protect consumer rights, expand spot checks against price gouging, undertake new conservation measures and provide tax incentives to employers to help their employees with transportation costs. These are things that the young legislators can do as well on the local front.

I’m focused like a laser beam on job creation and wage growth. I’ve brought in more than 60,000 new call center jobs, increased investments and jobs throughout the country with companies like Intel, E-Bay, Honda, UPS, Fedex. With the passage of my budget through Congress, I’ll be able to invest in the 10-point pro-poor plan including the creation of 10 million jobs in the medium-term. The 10-point plan will bring to life the pro-poor agenda that will create jobs in micro, small and medium enterprises, bring clean water and electricity to the entire country, increase access- to health care, ensure a school in every barangay and computer linkage in every high school.

To create more jobs and bring prosperity to the Filipino people, however, we must stop the culture of corruption that holds back our pace of development. I’m exerting executive authority to prosecute illegal loggers, cancel government contracts with corrupt companies, fire unscrupulous government officials who rob the nation, and restore integrity to our military leaders and soldiers who put their lives at risk to defend the honor of our nation. And I call on Congress, the private sector and civic leaders to join in this effort.

And I especially want to thank the young legislators, because I haven’t made the call to you yet, you already responded in your remarks earlier this morning.

I know that as young political leaders, the fire of dynamism, idealism and patriotism burns very brightly in your hearts. And I know having observed you in the past years that you will use that fire zealously and that you have the power to use that fire to stamp out all forms of graft and corruption in the bureaucracy, in the national government and in the local governments where you hold important influence.

Not only shall scalawags in the government be dragged to the bar of justice, their ill-gotten wealth shall also be forfeited in favor of the Philippine government.

Throughout the ages, the Filipino youth have distinguished themselves in fighting for their ideals and convictions. EDSA I and EDSA II came about because of the passion of our youth and their drive for patriotic leadership.

Your group, the NMYL, has always been a staunch advocate for new politics, for effective and efficient governance, for principled leadership.

And now, today, what is the challenge of the times? The challenge to all of you today is to join with everybody involved — national government, NGOs — in weeding out the deadwood and scalawags in government. Those who gnaw at the fabric of our morality to the detriment of our countrymen don’t deserve to stay in government a second longer.

Our strong political will towards fiscal reforms and to fight graft and corruption, terrorism and criminality has been rewarded with positive signs of an economic turnaround.

And with your support, by the time I step down as president in 2010, we shall hopefully have achieved a GDP growth of 7 percent, a balanced budget, ten million job opportunities and a significant reduction in poverty. Let’s bond together behind these goals.

We’re well on our way to our destination. The fiscal problem is on the way to resolution.

We are building a strong foundation for rapid investment-led growth. We have a healthy momentum on policy reforms. There’s resurgence in confidence. The bull run in the stock market is holding firm.

Honda is expanding its motorcycle production to 500,000 units by the year 2006. And if all goes well to one million units by 2008, a double of their present capacity.

This afternoon, I will receive in a courtesy call the global head of Timex where they will announce to me that they will set up their global distribution and logistic center in Cebu this July. Subic and Clark are our new magnets for investment. But, of course, we have Northern Luzon and Mindanao as the focus of our Agri-business investments. And then we have Central Philippines composed of the Visayas, Palawan, Bicol and the four northern islands of Mindanao as our focus for tourism investments. And then we have the Luzon urban belt way where the focus of infrastructure will be expressways and ports. And then we have Cebu and Davao that will be the new hubs for call centers and business process outsourcing. This is our general master plan tor investment in our whole country.

We will have upcoming economic partnership agreements with China and Japan to boost trade.

We have a perceptive upcycle in property and construction. Micros and SMEs, agribusiness, housing and sustainable mining will be clear in our sights as the economy surges forward.

I share these plans with you young leaders because you have a mission to spread optimism and hope among our people. We must not fall under the wicked spell of those who revel in gloomy forecasts.

With a clear vision on the part of leadership, decisive action on the part or senior and young legislators, and unity among our people whom you lead in the grassroots, the future will be bright.

Therefore I can say, young legislators, our economic growth will he hastened by your patriotic and decisive actions.

Thank you and Mabuhay!

Source: Adamson University Library