MOVING UP THE VALUE CHAIN

Thank you very much, Dick Gordon for that ‘wow’ introduction. And thank you and your colleagues in the Department of Tourism, Convention Bureau, their attaches because I understand they were working up to three o’clock in the morning just to make the National Federation of Filipino-American Association Convention a success.

It is really with great pleasure and heartfelt emotion that I welcome the officers and members of this second global Filipino networking convention. I would like to greet all of you, good day to all my beloved countrymen and Merry Christmas, just in time.

This global convention of Filipinos is a celebration. It is a celebration because it’s near Christmastime. But it is also a celebration and a recognition that the best and most competitive resource of our country are the Filipinos themselves.

Sometimes I hear them say the Philippines is rich in natural resources. Maybe Sonny Alvarez and I won’t totally agree with that because many of our mines are depleted, many of our forests are depleted, many of our seas are depleted. Maybe we had bountiful natural resources thirty, fifty years ago, but not today. What we have a bounty of, is the talent of the Filipinos.

The quality represented in this convention certainly proves that the country is not short of talents. That there is a generous pool of competent scientists, engineers, I.T. workers, communication technologists, senior managers, doctors, nurses, caregivers, educators, artists and many other professionals and workers. And aside from the 80 million talented Filipinos here, we have you, the eight million talented Filipinos outside our country.

We are the third largest English-speaking nation in the world. And that is one of the reasons why we are so accepted and competitive. But it is not just our English skill – though that is indeed a very important factor – I must say that, we are also a country with the best and largest pool of knowledge and technology workers. We are also the people who probably exhibit the fastest learning curves in the world.

You know, one of the things that I did in Japan, and continuously did this past weekend, was to work with Prime Minister Koizumi on opening the Japanese market for Philippine human resources. And we will begin with caregivers and I.T. professionals. I was being asked by the Japanese, “Okay, we may open our market to your workers with our laws but will your workers be able to compete with the language barrier present there?” And I said, you are underestimating the learning curve of the Filipino. Our Filipinos in the United States, of course, speak English very well, our Filipinos in Italy speak Italian. Our Filipinos in Hong Kong speak Chinese, and they will learn Japanese and whatever they have to learn in terms of technology, just to be successful as you have shown that you can learn whatever you need to learn to succeed and to compete because you, wherever you are,-are always among the highest paid ethnic groups in your host economies.

You gave me a set of resolutions. I often attend conventions that are highlighted by presentation of resolutions. But most of the time in other conventions, the resolution is talking about what the government should do for the members of the convention. In the six resolutions that you gave, I couldn’t help but think that the Filipinos, are characterized by the wish of John F. Kennedy that would characterize Americans — that you ask not what the country can do for you, but you have been deciding among yourselves what you can do for the country, the Philippines.

Nonetheless, I recognize that we do have a role to play in your lives. We do have an obligation to you, who help make our economy run. You, who make us proud in your host economies.

The role of the government in your lives would be, I guess, twofold: one is to promote the rights of our overseas Filipinos; and, the other one is to help you move even forward, even higher into the value chain. To move you higher in the value chain, the platform of my administration is to invest in education and training, to challenge the private sector to also make that similar commitment, and to entice our investors to work with us in the development of human capital. For instance, we have seen that there is a very big demand for our nurses today, because of the aging population in many of the countries that practiced population control a generation ago.

Therefore, there is a rapid deployment of our nurses, and rather than stop that — though we realize that it causes some temporary shortage of nurses here — what has happened is that, we had been able to make the market begin to respond to that. Because we administer a free enterprise economy and the government is not the one that makes the business decisions, the market itself provided now 40 new nursing schools, so that we can produce more supply to meet the demand abroad. And it was providential that just as this 40 new nursing schools cropped up responding to the market, responding to the world demand for Philippine nurses, our Congress was able to pass a law to make the nursing board bigger, more specialized. And therefore now, there are more nursing board members who can go and supervise the 40 new nursing schools, to make sure that the quality of the new nursing schools is at least the same as the quality of the old nursing schools, that produced those nurses that are so much demand in the world today.

That is part of what we mean by helping “move up the value chain,” investing in education and challenging and encouraging the private sector to do that, protecting the rights of overseas Filipinos, as you have celebrated and mentioned through the active support of the overseas Filipino community. Finally, in the short two and a half years of my administration, we were able to pass the much-awaited Overseas Voting Act and the much-awaited Dual Citizenship Law.

I remember when Sonny and I were in the Senate, and we both authored the Overseas Voting Bill. Each version is different or similar in many ways. But it never passed the committee level. So when I became President – and you were visiting me many times — I would say, I’m so proud, at last for the first time the Overseas Voting Bill has passed the committee and is now on the floor for deliberation. And then another visit of yours, I said, I am so glad that for the first time not only the bill passed the House, it has passed the Senate and it is now in the floor for deliberation. Each time we were able to reach a stage that we had not reached before in previous Congresses — until finally the bill became law, not one bill but the two bills that you were asking for.

But it’s not only those two bills that we passed for your sake. You might have heard about the Anti-Money Laundering Law that we also passed. We passed the Anti-Money Laundering Law with the primary motive of making sure that we are not sanctioned by the international banking community, and, because we do not want your remittances to have additional red tape and expenses when you send them back to the Philippines.

I remember the way we would brag to you and to ourselves, everytime the Overseas Voting Law and the Dual Citizenship Law went a stage further than it used to in previous administrations. It was also the same bragging that we did with regards to the veterans rights in the United States. I remember Dick said -the first time we went to the U.S. and in the White House, we had a meeting with the officials of the United States, the Veterans Affairs, even Colonel de Ocampo was there and he said he’s gonna tell all the veterans how I made “taray” to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs. Because, I told them, “How can you not make this an administration measure, after all the sacrifices that we’ve done for you in the Second World War, and not only that, all the sacrifices that we did to be your first foreign ally, Asian ally, in the war against terrorism.”

And so, it happened that the bill moved faster than in previous administrations. The bill got passed in Congress, and it was the first time. It went to the Senate for the first time, and it slept for awhile in the Committee on Budget. But in the next Congress, we worked for it again, and your work and our work, and the many times that I see President Bush, or Secretary Condoleezza Rice, usually many times my goodbye is “Don’t forget our veterans.” That’s how I say goodbye to them many times.

And it did, indeed, because I was so proud that the Overseas Voting Bill passed the committee. But it did more than that, it was passed into law. I was also proud that the Veterans Equity Rights… or the Veterans Expanded Rights reached the Senate. Now it’s more than that, it get passed into law. And following your own resolution and your own strong recommendation, my next step will be to work for an equity law and the budget to support it for veterans rights here in the Philippines.

In the past, when I was asking the Bush Administration for veterans rights in the Philippines, they responded from the administration or executive capability, they have been supporting the Veterans Hospital here in the Philippines. But this time it is in Congress, and I will ask Secretary Alvarez, Who is my Presidential Adviser for Overseas Filipinos, to draft a letter for me to the U.S. supporting the Inouye Bill, asking the executive to prepare the budget when the Inouye Bill is passed into law. So, please Sonny, you’ll do that job for me.

So this is my next step, a General Equity Bill for Filipinos living in the Philippines, not only in the United States. As I work to pass these long- awaited laws, the three long-awaited laws in the country, our country: the Overseas Voting Bill, the Dual Citizenship, and also the Anti-Money Laundering Law, the Expanded Veterans Bill or Law in the United States – as I work for that in the last two and a half years and was able to bring those things further than many, many years in the past. I also in the process, gained the experience necessary to understand what we need to do in order to change our society, in a way that leads to economic development and the elimination of poverty. Our historic problem has been the need for economic development to fight poverty. Historically, our economic development has been slow compared to our neighbors. We were doing one percent growth, 0 percent growth at a time when our Asian neighbors became the new tigers growing double digit.

But it is fortunate that in the current administration, two and a half years, our growth rate now is sixth among the twenty-one economies of the Asia-Pacific Region. This is higher than the growth rate of wealthier economies such as Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Korea. They almost had a negative growth rate due to the difficulty of our Asian crisis, but we have 4.4 percent GDP, 5.9 percent GNP. What is the difference between 4.4 percent GDP and 5.9 percent GNP? The GNP includes your remittances, the GDP does not. So our 5.9 percent growth rate comes from two sources: one is the double-digit growth of our agriculture now. And this is not accidental, this is because we made the largest irrigation hectarage in the history of the Philippines. And because we found, in my experience, we found in China a rice seed that doubles the yield. Not an accident but really looking, working and therefore making dreams come true.

And the other source of growth is the overseas remittances of our overseas Filipinos. Thank you very much for the eight billion dollars that you are sending our country.

That’s why I always say to overseas Filipinos, whether you are overseas contract workers or green card holders or dual citizens…the dual citizens are really considered investors because your remittances to your family are investments in education, housing, capital. Aren't those investments? Let's also count your resolution to invest 60,000 dollars in a hospital, in PGH. That is infrastructure, physical capital that you are putting in, so you are really an overseas Filipino investor whether you’re a businessman or you’re a contract worker.

Kami naman dito , we are trying to make your investments worthwhile. We are trying to give you a government that governs properly, so that you will not be afraid of where your money will go. The World Bank is praising us for our moves against corruption. They say our lifestyle check has been successful that is why, we have been able to surpass our targets for BIR and Customs collections. In fact, our Customs collections now are the highest in the history of our country. And also, they have said that our new Government Procurement Law that we passed alongside those three important laws, for the overseas Filipinos has also contributed much to increasing transparency and reducing corruption in government purchases.

My next reform is to organize — and we need a law again for this — the graft fighting agencies into an independent commission against corruption just like the I.C.A.C. in Hong Kong.

I am being advised by no less than the one who established the I.C.A.C. itself in Hong Kong. And we are learning, taking lessons from the experience of Hong Kong. And one of the important things I learned is that inspite the work of the I.C.A.C, inspite of the big budget they started with, inspite of the fact that they are only dealing with one city state — even smaller than Olongapo, it took them seven years to be able to have Hong Kong considered a graft-free country.

The lesson here is that I can understand the impatience of our people, two and a half years of fighting graft, how come there’s still corruption? I am impatient too, but if Hong Kong, a small country with plenty of resources, it took seven years to be able to defeat corruption, the lesson we are learning there is that, you don’t fight corruption by braggodoccio or bravura or claiming to come with a… St. Michael, who with one swish of the sword and slaying the dragon, no. Fighting corruption is like healing an infected wound, constantly cleansing, disinfecting through enforcement like the lifestyle checks, and through systems changes like the Procurement Law and I hope the I.C.A.C.

And this is what we are trying to do so that the continued help of overseas Filipinos to our country is deserved. You there in other countries, we are so proud of you because talking about integrity, competence, that is the reputation of Filipinos all over the world. You are competent, you are trustworthy, you are loved by the host economies in which you work, and you are loved by the people you lived and worked with.

So the last thing I can say is, continue your exemplary deeds. May your success be continuous, because your success is the success of your Motherland, the Philippines. Thank you very much and Merry Christmas to all of you.

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].