Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the launch of Manibela Kontra Droga (MAKONDROGA).

Thank you very much.

My Cabinet members — I won’t mention those who aren’t candidates because you might vote for them — I will just greet our senator and surely senator again, the venom, the fear of drug lords, Bobby Barbers. I will also mention the Most Outstanding Mayor of the Philippines, Sonny Belmonte. Congratulations Sonny on the very beautiful Amoranto Stadium. It used to look very dilapidated, now it’s so beautiful that it’s even used for international competitions.

I will also greet the Anti-drug Czar of Quezon City, Vice Mayor Bistek Bautista. I will also greet the Quezon City councilors who are here: Councilor Beth Delarmente and Councilor Ariel Inton.

And to you, long live the drivers!

Long live the operators!

Long live your families! Because we are doing this for the welfare of your families so you can be happier with them.

Long live those who fight against drugs!

I am very happy that we are gathering today to strengthen the change that we all desire for the good of the Filipino family. Crush the drugs! Suppress illegal drugs!

As Secretary Joey Lina said, before I became president, the fight against illegal drugs was very bad, very weak, especially the law against drugs was very weak. Before you can be imprisoned, you need to be caught with two hundred grams of shabu. Of the more than a thousand pushers arrested, only two were imprisoned, all were able to post bail. And as long as there are drugs in our communities, our families are not safe. As long as there are those who sell and use illegal drugs, your children, your spouses are not safe. What are we laughing at there? Maybe someone is using drugs here?

That's why when I became president, I asked Congress and the Senate to pass a tougher anti-drug law. And in the Senate, Senator Bobby Barbers made a law that is now one of the toughest anti-drug laws in the world.

So now we have arrested many big-time drug pushers who used to evade the law, including the number one drug pusher among them all, William Gan. Now, William Gan is gone, he is in prison. Many laboratories and shabu factories have been raided, so much shabu has been confiscated. And what is being done with the confiscated shabu, is publicly burned every week in front of the public and NGOs so it cannot be recycled.

A lot of smuggled shabu has also been seized. Just last week, in Valenzuela, Bulacan, more than three hundred kilos of shabu worth 1.5 billion pesos were confiscated by PDEA operatives during a raid in Bulacan. This is a continuation of our built cooperation between the Philippines and China in suppressing the international drug trade. We have built more rehabilitation centers so that former users will not relapse into vice. And if you are a drug pusher, you will be imprisoned for life.

All of this is part of the change I am fighting for for the ordinary Filipino. What we have achieved in a short period of time has strengthened enforcement but I need you drivers, operators here in the fight against illegal drugs.

First of all, I hope you yourselves will set a good example. Earlier, Jun Magno said, or you there, might fail the drug test? Manolet Dayrit explained the temptation that reaches drivers. Because the structure of the transportation industry sometimes you work straight for 24 hours, driving. So to stay awake they just use drugs. That is one thing we need to change the culture. You yourselves need to change the culture. You yourselves are the ones we expect to set a good example. You yourselves should be the first to undergo a drug test. And to encourage you to be the first to undergo a drug test, the first ten thousand drivers who voluntarily undergo a drug test, your drug test is free, you will not be charged. It’s just that there are millions of you. Those after 10,000 will no longer be free, but the drug test will be made affordable for drivers of public utilities.

We also expect that if you see someone who appears to be very high, you will not allow them to ride in your vehicle, whether it's a taxi, bus, jeep, or FX. And to all taxi drivers, we expect that if you deliver someone to a laboratory or a drug factory, you will report it, you will call the line 117.

You, drivers and operators, need a lot of help, so let us all work together at the wheel against drugs!

This strong effort we made to suppress drugs, suppress kidnappers, suppress terrorists, as Larry Mendoza said, they can no longer issue anything against us regarding peace and order.

But that is just a down payment, in the next installment, our goal is for all of us to be drug-free by 2010.

Long live Manibela Kontra sa Droga!

Thank you all very much!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Launching Ceremony of Manibela Kontra Droga (MAKONDROGA). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090556/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5645&Itemid=38