Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the program for the distribution of land titles to farmer-beneficiaries of Jala-Jala, Rizal

Thank you very much, Secretary Obet Pagdanganan for introducing me.

I also greet… I am also with Secretary Joey Lina, our Secretary of DILG; Governor Ynares is on his way, he called. But I want to greet the newly arrived Vice Governor Jovito Rodriguez; and thank you to our various mayors who are here today. Of course, our host, Mayor Delos Santos, thank you very much; and he also mentioned his fellow mayors under the leadership of the president of the Mayors League, George Bernardo. Thank you Mayor for your, that, your streamer “Welcome, Rizal Mayors League.” and I also want to greet our board members. Including the father of one board member, Congressman Ding Tanjuatco; I also want to greet all the officials here in the town of Jala-Jala.

The smallest and most remote town in the province of Rizal. So if I were only thinking about politics, I wouldn't come here. I would go to my compadre in Antipolo because it's so big. But I came here to show that this is work and not politics.

I also want to greet our peacekeepers, the Commander of the Southern Luzon Command, he is not here; the Commander of the Second Division, General Efren Abu. And also the one leading the police in Region 4-A, General Jimmy Karingal; and I called to the stage the Superintendent of DepEd, Edith Doblada.

Because I have three reasons why I am here. First, this… What Obet will do later. The distribution of titles to our land reform beneficiaries here in Jala-Jala. We have already heard Obet's story. We have heard the mayor's story. We have heard the story of the representative of the farmers, that this is the result of a long, long and complicated process. Finally, farmers of Jala-Jala, you are now the owners of your own land. And this is very important to me. Because my father, Diosdado Macapagal, he is the one they call the father of land reform.

When I became president, I saw that one million hectares of farmland still needed to be reformed. And if we want to achieve the eradication of poverty within a decade, all of that one million hectares must be distributed within a decade. So every year our goal is hopefully 100,000 hectares every year can be accomplished.

Last Sunday but now they are entering for enrollment. And also for the teachers and supervisors, superintendents, principals to train about SARS and other contagious diseases like dengue.

Congratulations to our health officials because we are one of the first to graduate from SARS in the world. And we don't want SARS to return. In Toronto they celebrated and then SARS returned. In Singapore they are celebrating now but Prime Minister Goh also says we should be careful so it doesn't return. But what was done… But they had hundreds with SARS before they graduated. Ten a day. We had ten in total. After ten, we stopped it. They had ten a day dying. We had two die throughout the period. After ten, the two who died, we had no more SARS. But let's make sure it really disappears.

And what our success with SARS, we can also do that with dengue. That's why we have a one-week seminar for teachers. But this is also a way for me to come and see what the needs are. Because they say there are not enough classrooms. But how many are lacking, that hasn't been scientifically done yet. So I said earlier to Secretary De Jesus, all schools where the ratio is 50 students to 1 and above should have mandatory shifting. Two shifts, morning and afternoon.

Now, if the elementary school is 100 students and above, even with shifting, there are still not enough classrooms. And the high schools if the ratio is 200 and above, even with shifting, there are still not enough classrooms. So I said this year we will complete the classroom gap. But we will define it. We will define the classroom gap. The classroom gap means all schools in elementary where the ratio is more than 100 to 1, that means there is a classroom gap. All secondary schools where the ratio is 200 to 1, that means there is a classroom gap.

Now the wealthy local governments are offered by DTI to borrow counterparting. The national government will have a counterpart, the local government will have a counterpart to build classrooms. And according to this, there are already three thousand classrooms throughout the Philippines that local governments will borrow to build them. But the national government also has a counterpart, the local government will borrow only a small amount. But many of these are poor, so that's what we're looking at. We will ensure that this classroom gap will be closed this school year.

So I called Edith Doblada. “Edith, I'm taking your records now. I'll just take them, okay?” and I looked at it. And what I saw here in Rizal, we have… If June is our definition of the classroom gap to complete the classroom now, we will need an additional ten million pesos for the classroom gap if… Sorry, Director Agustin if it's not DPWH that will do it. Because DPWH is expensive. I've been telling you to make something, a design that costs only 300,000. So what I'm doing… Because what I saw… How many classrooms did I see earlier? Ah… Where are my papers, the ones I was working on earlier? My papers? No, I was counting the classroom gap, it's not here. You took it. What I saw were about — 16 plus 11 is already 27 — about 30 classrooms are lacking throughout Rizal. And those 30 classrooms, if you use the DPWH budget, it's too big… Isn't it? How much is one of your classrooms? Can you afford 250,000? Because the Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce is making 350,000 for two classrooms, I think. So what I will do, I will donate to the federation 10 million. I know they will add 5 million. So that… Because that's what happened in Cavite. In Cavite, only nine were lacking. So I gave them 3 million, I think. They said that's too much for one classroom, but not enough for 2 classrooms for 9 schools. So they said, we will just complete it so there are 2 classrooms. So I'm giving them a budget of DPWH for one classroom and then they complete it and it becomes two classrooms. So I will give them 10 million so that all these schools that are lacking will have two classrooms. But what… Really Director Agustin, make a plan that we can afford. So 500,000 per two classrooms then, right? So you can afford 250,000, right? Why not… Now at headquarters isn't it like that? Is that a new plan? No, but your problem is there's no ceiling yet, no… What? Will it be varnished? Because if it's a new design, I might give you the money. Just allocate 10 million for the province of Rizal. Because that will close the classroom gap.

But over and above that, the congressmen, the governors, the mayors, the NDC-DTI will have others. But I see that at the very minimum we should build that. So that's what I will ensure.

So that's the second reason why I came here. Because I wanted to see what your classroom gap is. The critical classroom gap.

Thirdly, it's been a long time since I've been to Jala Jala, even though it's small and far. Perhaps because it's small and far, almost no one goes there. That's why I will visit you.

I have nothing more to read so I will leave the podium. You can't see me anyway.

You know, when I went to America, they provided me with a platform so I could be seen. Because they said that when the Queen of England went to America, she stood on the stage like that. But they didn't provide her with a platform, so she herself said, all the people saw was her hat speaking. Anyway, I was reading so I needed to be here earlier. But now, there's nothing more.

Jala-Jala… You know, this Jala-Jala, that's what Ding Tanjuatco said when he was Congressman, the farthest and smallest town. But this Jala-Jala, I've known it for a long time even before you knew me. Because when I was undersecretary at the Department of Trade And Industry, I had the integrated development program for Jala-Jala as my project. And Mayor Delos Santos knows that. Then, when I became a senator, the slaughterhouse. But the mayor said he hasn't opened the slaughterhouse yet because he's waiting for the market, which has finally been approved by logofind, the DILG program together with the World Bank for markets. And it was approved just last week. So I said, “Mayor, maybe you can invite me to the groundbreaking?” because we can combine the market and the opening of my slaughterhouse.

So, this land reform which is very close to our family's heart. So thank you for the opportunity to visit you again. And now Obet and his colleagues will distribute the titles while I will go inside to finalize the needs for the school buildings here in the province of Rizal.

Thank you very much and congratulations to the new landowners.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Program for the Distribution of Land Titles to Farmer Beneficiaries of Jala-Jala, Rizal. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412200802/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6474&Itemid=38