Thank you very much, Secretary Bayani Fernando representing the MMDA, a partner of PCSO and Ricky, Ricky Reyes Foundation, here at this wonderful CHILD Center.

I also greet, of course, his partner, PCSO Chairman, Honeygirl De Leon. Happy Anniversary to PCSO! The various NGOs that helped here, the various government agencies and then our host mayor here, Mayor Sonny Belmonte. And to all of you, a warm greeting.

I give… Ah! I give tribute — not life, because they gave life — but I give tribute to CHILD House, the Ricky Reyes Foundation, the MMDA, the PCSO and the various NGOs that went on stage earlier for their efforts to make this CHILD house a reality.

Thank you for your generosity, especially for those who need it most.

We face threats from killer diseases like SARS and cancer, but the deadliest of all is apathy, and CHILD house is medicine against apathy. CHILD house shows why we must keep on working together. As Honeygirl said, a good example — government agency, NGO foundation — working together instead of fragmenting. And it’s good that this was chosen for the youth… No, children who are victims of cancer. I asked Ricky Reyes, why did you choose to care for cancer? Well, more than three percent of cancer cases in our country victimize children. And more than seventy percent of cancer patients are poor. And eighty percent come from far-flung areas.

Earlier, a child asked me, “Do you live here?” “No.” “Where?” “In Makati.” It’s okay if you’re from Makati, but what about those from far-flung areas and they come here for chemotherapy. Aside from the sick child needing more attention from their parents, finding clean and affordable accommodation is also a big problem. This now, CHILD house is clean and affordable accommodation for CHILD cancer victims.

Here at CHILD house, they will have temporary housing that, in addition to being affordable, can also provide moral support to patients as well as their parents. Because for the parents, they can be taught various livelihood skills.

Every effort that we expend to promote our people’s health contributes to our advancement as a nation.

When the poor have health problems, their ability to participate and join in the progress of our society weakens further. They are the ones who need our care the most.

Since I took office in the government, and even now that I am president, I believe that the health of the people is a major priority. And my priority is Universal Health Insurance and half-priced medicine.

That universal health insurance, you know, that law of Universal Health Insurance has been around for a long time, I was still a senator when that law was formed. But for a long time that it has been a law, when I became president, the poor covered by health insurance that I inherited was less than half a million poor families, and there are six million poor families. But now, in two and a half years of my presidency, from less than half a million, almost two million poor families are now covered by health insurance. And because the average family in our country has five members, that means almost ten million poor people are now covered by health insurance. And if Philhealth continues at this rate, in three more years we will include all six million poor families.

Many in the payment of the health insurance premium… Because the premium is 100 pesos a month per family. That means an average of 20 pesos a month per family member. But there are so many free treatments. Many here are expenses of local governments and the national government. And from the national government, the biggest contributor is none other than the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office.

So every time Honeygirl has a project that she gives me for my approval, I say, “Honeygirl, don’t reduce the premium of health insurance, we have a target.” but around Christmas, the tax reform on alcohol and cigarettes will pass, and the performance of Universal Health Insurance will speed up even more for all the poor.

Well, that’s not so difficult, the workers, that’s already included in the premium paid to the SSS. So if you add the workers to the poor helped by the PCSO and then our local governments, now more than half of all Filipinos are covered by PhilHealth insurance.

Under our half-priced medicine program, there are forty-two imported drugs, antibiotics, high blood medicine, asthma medicine, diabetes medicine that we can now buy in more than seventy government hospitals, let’s also put here, Honeygirl, pharmacies in barangay pharmacies, in some NFA rolling stores. In barangay pharmacies, we can buy cheap herbal medicine.

And this is being done by the government also through investment that I said to give by the PCSO to the Philippine International Trading Corporation. Now I said to Honeygirl, “Honeygirl, add to the investment of PITC for half-priced medicine, give also 100 million pesos.” so members of the board of PCSO — there, Tony Abad is my student — okay. That’s what I always tease my student about. Now, since PITC I no longer tease him and I really support him in his program of bringing in cheap medicine for our poor people.

We want free or almost free treatment. We want half the price of medicine, that’s what we’re doing to uplift the status of our countrymen.

The problems of our country are not the fault of one president alone, it is rooted in our economic and political system. So that our economy can develop and our republic can become stronger, we need to change the system through reform — reform in health care, reform in leadership, reform even in the type of our politics.

This is the result of my experience in the past two and a half years of the presidency in perhaps the most complex time in our world. Not the most complex but one of the most complex times in our world. Imagine that, we started with the 1997 Asian crisis; there was an impeachment crisis with Estrada; there is another impeachment crisis with Davide now; we had the collapse of I.T., of the computer industry in early 2001, the whole world was hit; we had 9-11, terrorism, the whole world was hit; we had SARS, the whole world was hit, but thanks also to the work of the DOH, local government, all agencies, and the funds of the PCSO, we overcame SARS.

In my two and a half years as president, I have had experience to understand on the ground and not just in theory, what we need to do to change our society in a way that will bring about economic growth and end poverty.

I ask for your continued cooperation in all the endeavors of our government to stop poverty.

So I am once again calling for the unity of all Filipinos, if we want to end poverty and achieve a prosperous life under a strong republic.

Meanwhile, I’m still hopeful that a principled compromise on the impeachment raps against Chief Justice Davide can be reached. For the sake of national unity, I am keeping a positive attitude that would help bring about a meeting of minds rather than a hard impasse. Let’s not further divide the nation amid the heavy rhetoric of a continuing institutional battle.

Looking back at past events will show us how such controversial confrontations between powerful institutions have a way of setting back our economy and driving more of our people into hardship. Let us heed the supreme welfare of the people. Let’s not lose our faith in our capacity to unite in crisis and hurdle our challenges together.

So this CHILD house — it is a model of our ability to unite and overcome the crisis. I hope we can do this throughout the entire Filipino nation.

Thank you very much, Ricky Reyes. Thank you very much, PCSO. Thank you very much, MMDA. Thank you very much to all who helped with the CHILD house.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Inauguration of the Center for Health Improvement and Life Development (CHILD) House Project. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615141241/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7179&Itemid=38