Thank you very much, Mr. Go.

Please sit down.

Honorable Bishop; other officials of the Chinese-Filipino business club; other officials of St. Stephen’s high school; students of the various Chinese schools; ladies and gentlemen:

We are very happy. It is a pleasant good morning to everybody. Good morning to all of you.

Please excuse my somewhat clumsy Chinese. But I want you to know how close the Chinese are to my family. As you know, my beloved spouse, Atty. Jose Miguel Arroyo has strong Chinese blood. His ancestor, Son Tua, was a Chinese businessman who became close to the Spaniards during the 17th century.

I mentioned in my speech last Friday to the Federation of Filipino Chinese chambers of commerce and industry — and the entire Filipino-Chinese community — at the PICC that if our constitution mandates that Spanish and Arabic be made optional languages in colleges, we need to study including Mandarin. The Chinese language is the most widespread language in the world. It is used by more than one billion Chinese. It is the language of millions of Chinese in the Philippines, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and Indonesia.

Go to many countries and almost all of them have a Chinatown. Every nation has its own Chinatown. There is a little China in every corner of the world. One of the prides of Chinatown is the one here in Binondo, a historic district of Manila.

Therefore, I plan to direct the Commission on Higher Education or CHED to study the teaching of Mandarin in all colleges and universities as an optional language, along with Spanish and Arabic.

In truth, the CHED should promote Foreign Language Education in our country. It is no longer enough for a Filipino to be proficient in three languages – Tagalog/Filipino, English, and his/her regional language. The modern Filipino should know many languages, such as Spanish, Japanese, Arabic, Bahasa, and Chinese.

A foreign language is important in international trade, foreign relations, global security and defense. It is important in research and scholarship. It is important in person-to-person relationships.

We need many experts in languages. But let us start with Spanish, Arabic, and Chinese. Let us make this the foundation of our “linguistic literacy.” Please help me implement and succeed in this.

But before I forget, allow me to greet the leaders and members of the Chinese-Filipino business, club, inc. And the teachers, students, and administration of St. Stephen’s High School.

I congratulate you for your celebration of our Independence Day. I am pleased that you thought to carry out “a grand salute to the Philippine Flag.” And I am also happy with your great contribution to our soldiers who died or were seriously wounded in the war in Basilan.

The freedom of the Philippines, which we achieved on June 12, 1898, came from the sacrifice of Filipino heroes and their allies during the revolution of 1896 and other uprisings before that.

These allies came from different races. They recognized our dream and helped us to be free. Among them were Dr. Ferdinand Blumentritt of Germany and General Pawa, a Filipino-Chinese who wielded a bolo and rifle during the revolution.

But before the revolution, there were centuries of friendship and trade between China and the Philippines. Because of trade, the two races became close. Many Chinese took a chance in the Philippines, lived here, established businesses, and raised families here.

And there was a small Chinese community that grew in the Philippines over time. Their businesses flourished and their children grew up here. They became leaders in the business community and in civic life. They became an important pillar of the economy and of the country.

You, Filipino-Chinese, are a model not only to fellow Chinese but especially for many Filipinos.

The Chinese are a model in your work ethic – diligence, perseverance, thrift, sacrifice and planning for the future.

You are a model in business. You are not content with being an employee. The usual step is entrepreneurship, being self-employed instead of a 9-to-5 employee. Being an employer of people instead of being an employee of others.

So in whatever industry – be it banking, insurance, transportation, communication, energy, media, service, manufacturing – there are Chinese leaders.

You are a model in civic service. Like the Binondo volunteer fire brigade. Similar to civic leader and crime-fighter Teresita Ang See.

You are a model in culture and art. It is an honor for the country to recognize as a hero or National Artist, Ang Kiu Kok – the famous painter – as a National Artist. Ang Kiu Kok’s parents were 100 percent Chinese, but he grew up in the Philippines and demonstrated a talent for painting that many envied.

Therefore, define any field and you will find a Chinese model.

I also want to see the Chinoy as models of unity, in bridging races, helping the government in building a Philippine nation.

We already have many Filipinos of Chinese descent serving in the government. I hope their numbers increase.

I hope we have many second-generation Chinese in the executive and legislative branches like Congressman Harry Angping of the third district of Manila who was re-elected on May 14 for his second term.

Meanwhile, I urge the Chinese-Filipinos to continue your role in our society. Strengthen your businesses and expand the number of jobs in the community.

Help in inviting investors. Encourage them to bring their capital here.

Expand your community involvement further. Increase the number of medical and dental missions. Establish additional volunteer fire brigades in many parts of the Philippines.

Further introduce your cultural heritage to Filipinos. We want you to be members of society but your native culture should also be enriched. Many Filipinos or native Filipinos learn from you, and you from us.

I am pleased to inform you that the day before yesterday I signed the Naturalization Act of 2001. Many ideas in the law came from Mr. Dante Go. He was a great help in drafting the naturalization law. Thank you very much, Dante.

The Naturalization Act will grant citizenship to qualified and deserving aliens who want to legalize their residence here and want to participate in society. Your citizenship will be expedited – perhaps many of the students here are not yet Filipino citizens, so your citizenship will be expedited with the help of this law.

But citizenship is not lived on just one piece of paper that grants citizenship. You are not a true citizen if you only boast about your naturalization papers. You are not a citizen simply because your stay here has become legal.

Citizenship is worked for, citizenship is earned. Citizenship is not hanging up your residence papers on the wall but living day to day as a true Filipino. It is earned by fulfilling the obligations of citizenship – like voting, paying taxes, obeying the laws and – if necessary – bearing arms and fighting for your country.

I know that most aliens – including Chinese nationals – who will opt for Filipino citizenship will honor their status and reciprocate the goodness of their new country. This is as it should be. And the Philippines welcomes its new citizens. Together, the new citizens and the nation can work in unity – toward a single purpose, under one flag, the flag that we honor this morning.

I learned that this law, in order to pass in the House and the Senate in one form and to avoid having to go through the Bicameral Conference Committee again, did not include a budget to run the office. So I will look for a budget in my discretionary fund so that the Solicitor General can immediately begin the process of citizenship application papers.

So many of you here are Filipino in spirit and Filipino in heart, but not yet Filipino on paper. I hope that soon, when we have already celebrated Filipino-Chinese Friendship Day, I will see that you are fully Filipino in your hearts and even in your papers.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the Grand Salute to the Filipino Flag by the Chinese Filipino Business Club. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409213610/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8644&Itemid=38