SPEECH DURING THE 102ND ANNIVERSARY OF THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION AND CONFERMENT OF 2002 LINGKOD BAYAN AND DANGAL NG BAYAN AWARDS SERVICE COMMISSION 2 October 2002, Ceremonial Hall Malacañang Palace, Manila

I warmly greet all the personnel of our government as last month we celebrated the 102nd anniversary of the Philippine civil service.

This day, we have once again seen these outstanding civil servants whom we have honored, so to you, congratulations to all of you for being so outstanding.

When I became President of the Philippines last January 2001, after my speech at EDSA, my next speech was addressed to the civil service. This was done on my first working day as chief executive of the country. In that speech, I wanted to stress one thing, as Chairperson Karina Constantino David mentioned, my great respect for the people in our bureaucracy. This respect, for me, is not really shown in ceremonies. It is shown in respecting the rights of our civil servants.

I inherited the great respect for the civil service from my father, the late President Diosdado Macapagal. He was a civil servant before he became a politician before he became a lawyer.

When he was in high school, he decided that he would seek higher education by getting a job in Manila. For that purpose, he took the civil service examination in Pampanga, second grade, and passed with the highest grade in the country. But when he went to Manila, he could not find a job despite his eligibility.

His grandmother, Escolastica Romero, was a midwife in their hometown in Lubao. She had a German patient whose relative, named Vicente Mills, was a division chief in the Bureau of Lands. My grandmother asked her patient to help her grandson get a job. It had to take an influential foreigner to enable my father to land his first job. This reflected the state of our lopsided society and our underdeveloped country.

Sadly today, this is still the plight of many civil service eligibles because there are more civil service eligibles than the rough jobs available. What is important is that we must be able to increase the GNP of our country so that there will be an increase in the services needing public servants; so that all who apply and get a civil service eligibility will be able to have a job.

My father worked as a civil servant under four administrations. His first jet was in the Bureau of Lands where he earned P30 a month. He was able to supports law studies and get his second topnotch examination result – the topnotcher position in the bar. Then he was able to do legal work for Presidents Quezon and Laurel in what was the equivalent of the Presidential Management Staff.

Later, he served President Roxas and President Quirino in the foreign service. They had the search committee look for the best and the brightest all over government, because they wanted to form the foreign service and show the world the best that the Filipino can show. After that, he ran for congressman.

When I was in government, during my first months at work, my father would counsel me about respecting the civil service and the civil servants. His wise counsel enabled me to have many fulfilling years working with civil servants in my stints as Undersecretary of Trade and Industry, and as Secretary of Social Welfare and Development.

And because of the honors of my father, and my own experience in the DTI and DSWD, I truly greatly value and recognize the enormous role of the civil service in formulating and implementing government programs.

In my State of the Nation Address, I said that our goal is a Strong Philippine Republic, and I said that a Strong Philippine Republic has two essential attributes: one, the Republic must be autonomous of dominant classes and sectors, so that it represents the people’s interests and not the interest of only a powerful minority or powerful minority groups. Second, the Republic must have the capacity, represented through strong institutions and a strong bureaucracy, to implement its policies and deliver its services.

A strong bureaucracy. That is a requirement and essential attribute of a Strong Republic and that is what the civil service is all about. This is what the civil service can contribute to good governance which is an essential institution in a Strong Republic.

When I first made my speech before civil servants, I defined the three pillars of good governance: first pillar is a sound moral foundation to guide our leadership at all levels; second pillar is a philosophy of transparency in all government actions; and third, an ethic of effective implementation throughout the bureaucracy.

I see these pillars as standing on the first and foremost cornerstone and institution of a Strong Philippine Republic: an effective government. If we are to be a Strong Philippine Republic, we must have an effective government from the local governments to the national government and a professional and dedicated civil service. Those are the elements of an effective government. Such an effective government delivers basic services for everyone – the most important of which are an environment of peace and the rule of law and the necessary infrastructure. No wonder then that we have several awardees today from the rule of law including two judges.

Not only must an effective state help its poorest and weakest citizens, empower them, and dismantle the structures that make them poor and weak. An effective government rest on the rule of law, and our justice system must be strengthened to become an efficient institution for all, not just the powerful.

Today, once again, we honor exemplary public servants. Those we honor today prove that there is an abundance of good men and women in the public service. I give my special congratulations to the civil servants who consistently render their duties with the highest integrity, morality, and decency. Those of you who are here today have passed that test. May you continue to serve as models and trailblazers for the rest of the bureaucracy, the rest of the government including us – the public officials.

Many of our outstanding civil servants work far from the cushioned comforts of air-conditioned offices. Their work stations are in the open fields where they develop new plant varieties to shore up the incomes of farmers.

I’m happy to have given an award to our gentleman from the Philippine Coconut Authority who developed a fungus to improve productivity in the coconut sector. Civil servants work far away from buildings as grand as Malacañang; they work in the classrooms where they come up with innovative tools for molding young minds.

I am also happy we have so many teachers who received their awards today and I am happy to learn about the innovations that they brought to the classroom. Our civil servants are found not only in the metropolis but also in the rural communities where they render health care to the women and the children in the countryside. They are there in far, far away towns like the town of Dinas in Zamboanga del Sur. You don’t even have a good road from the main highway to Dinas. It is closer to the pirates coming from the seas in Ylana Bay than from what you would call civilization. But we have an outstanding civil servant who came from there. My special congratulations to the community of Dinas.

Our honorees have done their job with nerve, with vigor; unmindful of obstacles like the young lady from Caraga who does the work of a prosecutor but has the item of a stenographer. Our honorees are focused on serving the people rather than what is their item, what is their perk, what is their salary grade. This is how things should be in the entire public service. I don’t only mean the bureaucracy, I also mean those who were elected to public service.

Truly, we need to face the challenge and call of the people that the ranks of government personnel are always clean and the prompt response to the needs of the citizens.

A republic must be a republic in reality and especially in the difference it makes to better the lives of its citizens.

Your theme for this year’s celebration, “Lakas ng Serbisyong Sibil: Lakas ng Bayan” reflects this idea – that a Strong Republic has a strong bureaucracy, a strong civil service.

It is important that we take care of and maintain the good image of all government agencies, especially the integrity of the people who represent our government. We must be a good example to those we serve. Yes, I believe in leadership by example. We should promote solid traits such as work ethics and a dignified lifestyle. I’m glad that among the criteria is simple living or simple lifestyle, because we must have a dignified lifestyle. In addition, part of the ethic is matching action to rhetoric, performing rather than grandstanding.

Our work must go beyond logging in and out of the bundy clock daily. One, according to Acting Chief Justice Bellosillo, is very productive because she always works up to midnight even on Sundays. Well, not everybody has to work everyday until midnight, even on Sundays. But the point is, that there is more to being a public servant than looking at the clock. And so, therefore. I ask all of you to sign onto this vision of good governance.

Let’s all work together in making every government worker a living example of trustworthiness; of a keen orientation towards results and performance; of viewing the fight against poverty as our supreme goal. We may not achieve it this year, next year, the year after. But at least we must do what we can do today so that we can lick poverty in a decade from now.

An ethic of working always improves ourselves and of respecting others the way we want to be respected, and as your criterion said: of living simply according to our means.

I am pleased that many are giving a good example in our ranks.

It is important, even as we give honor to these individuals, to remember that we give them honor not only because they are personalities, but because they represent values. They represent certain focus and adherence to important issues. As civil servants, let us focus on issues, less on personalities. And as being all part of one government, let us focus on commonalities rather than controversies. Let us focus on a broad front of service rather than parochial interests.

The 102nd anniversary of the Philippine Civil Service gives us an opportunity to rededicate ourselves and reaffirm our oath of office. Let us strengthen our commitment to uphold our responsibility of rendering efficient, effective, and quality service to our people.

The civil service truly plays a big role, especially in formulating and implementing government programs. I hope that each government employee will become an even stronger pillar of the civil service in achieving a strong Philippine Republic.

Our honorees this afternoon are testimonies to the nobility of the calling of public servants. We are proud of your achievements. You set the example for us, even for me, to follow. You chart the course for us to take so that our voices too may ring with pride when we say that we work in government.

Let us make it a habit to ask for guidance and gratitude from the Great Creator. He has given you, me, grace so that we may remain in good work; and to our awardees, so that their work may truly rise to be recognized by all what it means to be a good civil servant.

What we need now is simultaneous action, simultaneous response. Collaborative action in one direction and one goal – providing assistance and service that can uplift the lives of our countrymen. Only in this way can we give true meaning to the words public servant.

Congratulations, and may your work be recognized not only in the awards that we are giving this afternoon, but in the better life of our people. Hopefully, not very far from now, can we say that they have been achieved. Congratulations and thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library