Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the Second National Convention of the Leagues of Barangays (National)

Thank you, President Echiverri, for your introduction and your very impressive speech which was substantial because the full benefits are indeed happening for our barangay leaders. (applause)

Our other officials: Mayor Peewee Trinidad, our host city mayor (applause) and the other officials here today; the other officials of the League of Barangays and all of you, barangay leaders throughout the Philippines, congratulations! also because there are two thousand of you here, more than last time. (applause)

I am happy and have had another opportunity to gather with you. As President Echiverri, Captain, said, the barangay leaders, you are the grassroots leaders who are at the forefront of delivering service from the government. That is why I thank you all for your help, this latest resolution of support from you.

Thank you for your help in supporting the programs of our administration. Thank you very much. (applause)

As you know, the world economy has weakened. We have many challenges to face simultaneously in order to maintain our economy and maintain our way of life. On the part of the government and including the barangay, we must we must live within our means and run a lean efficient government, including continued fiscal prudence, including working to balance the budget, while on the other hand, we must simultaneously invest in key programs for our people.

Thank you for what President Rico Judge Echiverri mentioned, your support for my ten-point program. One of these in the ten-point program is bringing electricity to all barangays. So if there are still barangays here that do not have electricity, let the Liga headquarters know so that the National Electrification Administration can address your needs immediately. (applause)

Another one of the ten-point programs is achieving just peace. That is why I am pleased that included in the program — in your Resolution of Support earlier — is your help in the fight against insurgency and terrorism. And there, our barangay officials are really needed. That is why the alliance of LGUs and the Armed Forces of the Philippines is a great pillar of our administration. You complement the efforts of the Armed Forces of the Philippines under the National Internal Security Plan. The AFP looks to you, looks to the strong and active participation of our local leaders in the fight to end insurgency in the country. The AFP looks to you and recognizes your local initiatives, peace initiatives.

Therefore, I also appeal to the barangay captains, because you issued a resolution supporting the fight against insurgency, you should lead and engage in local peace talks and in the campaign for rebel surrenders. (applause)

We are here in Pasay City, and I cannot avoid mentioning the model programs of Pasay City regarding Solid Waste Management, which I have already visited, and that is also what I expect from our barangays – to implement our Solid Waste Management law. Because there is a provision that each barangay should allocate land for a Materials Recovery Facility or MRF. This is a storage facility for waste where biodegradable waste or waste that decomposes, such as food and leaves, can be turned into compost, charcoal briquettes, or other things that can be reused. And the recyclable ones, the non-biodegradable ones like plastic, can be recycled into various products.

For example, in Boracay – I don't know if the three barangay captains of Boracay are here – they use plastic waste to make bricks, and that is what is now used for the walkways in the beautiful resort of Boracay. And I know… how much are these Materials Recovery Facilities, it depends if it’s simple or elaborate. The simple ones cost less than 200,000 pesos. The elaborate ones reach two million pesos, so it depends on how rich your barangay is. But the government, the national government, will help. We are, said the Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources, ready to contribute 20 percent of what you will spend. For example, if you will make a 200,000-peso MRF and you will spend 160,000 pesos, the national government is ready to contribute 40,000 pesos so that the whole country (applause) will have MRFs.

And this MRF has a process for biodegradable waste, and a process for recyclable or non-biodegradable waste. So that it is easy for you to put the waste into one machine or another machine that is needed to easily use the MRF. I also appeal to all of you to participate in the campaign for proper waste disposal – separate the biodegradable from the recyclable. That is a big thing you can do because if you have an MRF and you produce compost, fertilizer, bricks – what else is it? – those charcoal briquettes, you can sell them, so you will earn and you can recover the capital you put in.

Many barangays are already doing this, so one thing the Liga can do is show how those barangays are doing their various Solid Waste Management practices. The League of Municipalities is already doing this. They are showing Best Practices.

For me, I said, ‘there is no need to show the best practices, it is a bit expensive. The Pasay City practices are the best practices. But for the barangay level, especially the poor barangays, they might be dismayed by the cost of the best practices being done by the more capable barangays. Just show the minimal practices so that it can be seen that every barangay can have a clean environment.

I also call on the barangays to intensify your anti-drug campaigns. The LGUs that can declare a barangay a “drug-free zone” will be rewarded with development projects to sustain your efforts and ensure a bright future for our children and communities.

Now is really the time to strengthen our unity and focus on family and community. We need to start a new era of volunteerism and community spirit. It is important for the government to come together, and this includes the barangay, the church, civic organizations, and NGOs harnessing our people to engage in coordinated volunteer activities. We should focus our initiatives on activities such as cleaning up the environment – that solid waste management I mentioned earlier, or building parks and planting trees, especially in the barangays located in the mountains, distributing food to the poor, teaching adults who cannot read to read so that they can have dignity.

In these challenging times, the Filipino spirit of commitment to care should inspire us to count our blessings and give back to those who are less fortunate. Our country needs us to move in the same direction, which is why I am even more grateful for the resolution you have once again given me. And this time, volunteering time, skill and resources is a noble undertaking that we should all take seriously.

More than ever, the barangay is capable of these tasks I mentioned. Because forty percent of the Value Added Tax goes to local governments, with a three-year interval for computation. So, because in 2006 the VAT increased by 100 billion pesos due to our law; three years later, 2009, this year, don't you notice that the IRA of local governments is jumping by 40 billion pesos, and that includes the increase in the income of the barangays. (applause) I expect you to understand that your IRA has increased this year because the country's revenues from the Value Added Tax have increased.

And I assure you, as always, the IRA for local governments because you are the first to face the people to provide government service. Even before when we didn't have tax reforms and we were short of funds in the national government, you remember we still looked for funds to pay your IRA in full. We even paid the IRA debt of previous governments.

So now, through your large increase in IRA income, let us encourage every Filipino to participate. We must promote the participation of all citizens to help improve the lives of the poor and to provide protection for our environment.

We cannot neglect the welfare of our country any longer. Working together as one nation and people, not only will we survive, we will prosper in this time of global crisis.

Let us unite as one nation bound by our common origin and shared aspirations for the future. Barangay captains throughout the Philippines, thank you for your continued support of our unified goal. Thank you very much to all of you.

Thank you. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 2nd National Convention of the Liga ng Mga Barangay National. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412102600/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25133&Itemid=38