Thank you, Speaker De Venecia, my compadre. Because if I’m the godmother of aquaculture, you are the godfather of aquaculture, Joe.

And of course, I’d like to congratulate and thank Congressman Louie Villafuerte, the chairman of the House Committee on Aquaculture and Fisheries, for inviting me to be here with you and putting this together with the D.A.

Secretary Panganiban who put this up together jointly with the committee; my other colleagues from the D.A.; our other congressmen who are here not only Congressman Villafuerte but we have also Congressman Zialcita who will go with me afterwards to the Northrail relocation site, Congressman Baterina, Congressman Kintanar. And I’d like to greet all the implementors of the government programs for Aquaculture, all the players in the aquaculture industry, all the academe and the researchers, all of the representatives of the LGUs, the NGOs, everybody who wants aquaculture to develop, good afternoon and congratulations! On putting this together.

The work of the House Committee on Fisheries and Aquaculture resources is very good in bringing together producers, researchers, and policymakers to create a guide for the government and private sector towards self-sufficiency in fish, both locally and in the global market.

The buyers of fishery products are continuously growing not only here in the Philippines but also in other countries like Europe and America. The future of aquaculture is truly bright.

To say this is something quite significant because I remember when I was in the Department of Trade and Industry, aquaculture grew. I remember that sugar weakened in Negros Occidental but all those in coastal areas turned their sugar plantations into aquaculture plantations and they earned a lot. Later, the industry suddenly collapsed and many aquaculture plantations closed. Many processing plants for aquaculture also closed. But now the future of aquaculture is good again.

Our medium-term Philippine development plan recognizes what Speaker De Venecia said earlier, the sea bass, lapu-lapu, pompano, bangus, cobia, tilapia, whether freshwater or saline, red snapper, sea bream and others, the market is assured, Joe says, in the frozen and live fish markets in China, Hong Kong, Japan, Taiwan, Singapore, America, Europe. It brings in a lot of dollars, a lot of income, a lot of jobs.

And you know, should I tell you, you are in the industry. Congratulations! Because we are number one in the export of processed bangus. Congratulations! Because we are also number one in seaweed. Congratulations! We are number two in tilapia, following China.

In fact, you, some of you probably always hear me say that the galunggong (round scad) is what they call the common man’s fish. No, the galunggong is imported. Let’s make tilapia the common Filipino’s fish because we can culture it.

That’s why in our medium-term Philippine development plan, we plan to develop two million hectares for agri-business to provide jobs for at least two million workers, farmers or fishermen. And this will be the contribution to the ten million jobs we want to create by 2010. When I say two million hectares of agri-business, it doesn’t just mean farmland, it also includes hectares for aquaculture.

Joe advised that we should promote aquaculture in areas near coastal areas and also in the seas because we should implement the fish cage technology. I remember in Sual, Pangasinan when I visited the Sual power plant, before I arrived there were so many fish cages providing jobs for the people there but as a matter of aside, parenthetically. The power plant was there, the fish cages were there, meaning the coal-fired power plant is not bad for fisheries and aquaculture.

But that’s what we put in the medium-term plan but we need a detailed plan. And I congratulate all of you because I see in front of you a one-inch thick detailed, comprehensive fisheries and aquaculture development plan for the next five to ten years. So I congratulate the committee and everyone who made this because of the good output, the detailed, comprehensive aquaculture program for the next five to ten years.

So now that plan is there. I am directing Secretary Panganiban to implement it as soon as possible and let’s do it… Let’s implement it through the active role of the aquaculture industry and give more value to the poor sectors in the countryside.

I am also directing the D.A., the National Food Research Institute and the National Statistics Office to create information, geographically, on production and consumption so that we can plan for the future location by location.

I remember the fisheries code of 1998. Because during that time the debate was complicated. When the law came out, the law that came out was still complicated. Maybe now is the time, let’s look at the fisheries code again, we probably need to adjust it to the current needs of the industry. Because the world is competitive even though we have many markets for our sea bass, bangus (milkfish), seaweed, etc. The competition is severe, we cannot take chances in the market.

The fisheries lease agreement can be used for the need for funds for research. And earlier when I was mentioning the different kinds of fish, I heard Joe say ‘Vannamei.’ Finally, we made a decision, should it be legal or not? Because this is a new species of shrimp that might give new life to our shrimp industry.

All I can say is – because you are more experts in aquaculture than I am – I see the macro opportunities and macro aspects. All I can say is that we should come together. Let us combine our efforts for unified progress.

Our economy is poised for take-off. Let us not allow poison politics to spoil that take-off. And above all, let us make aquaculture a central part of that take-off.

Thank you very much and congratulations! To all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the National Aquaculture Congress. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092222/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5191&Itemid=38