Many thanks to Vice President Tito Guingona of the country. Son of Misamis Oriental. In the history of our country, two presidents chose as their Vice President, a son of Misamis Oriental. Diosdado Macapagal chose Emmanuel Pelaez from Misamis Oriental as his Vice President. Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo chose Tito Guingona as her Vice President, also a son of Misamis Oriental.

The honorable First Secretary of the Japanese Embassy Mr. Shi Mermuri; Chairman of PHIVIDEC, Boy Abadia. You know it took me a year to look for a job worthy of Boy Abadia. And when it was time to nominate the new board of PHIVIDEC I said, Boy Abadia usa pa nga anak sa Misamis Oriental kay ang iya nga asawa nagikan sa balingasag. And so I said the best place for boy to be in is the PHIVIDEC Industrial Authority.

Our Congressmen here in Misamis Oriental. My friend, Congressman Oscar Moreno; and Congressman Baculio, the Congressman of this district; my new friend, Governor Bong Calingin; our various Governors of Region 10. Here now is Governor Romualdo, also my friend but more of a friend to the queen of Spain. Because Queen Sophia of Spain is his favorite place here, his favorite beneficiary in his projects is none other than the province of Camiguin; Governor of Bukidnon, Governor Joe Zubiri, who is also our Chairman of the Regional Peace and Order Council; and of course, I want to express my great thanks to Mayor Dongkoy Emano, the current Mayor of Cagayan de Oro and the Governor of Misamis Oriental, when I was the Undersecretary of Trade and Industry, we also started this project here in PHIVIDEC, as he told me.

And I would like to thank our friends from JBIC, Chief Representative Mitsuru Taruki, because this project is funded with a loan from JBIC but let me say that even loans cannot proceed — oh, I see Congressman Jaraula is still here, in the back. Why are you there congressman? He was with me already all day including whitewater rafting in Cagayan de Oro. I thought he would be tired already but he’s still here — anyway, speaking of JBIC let me explain that even if a loan is available if it is not put in the budget and if the special allotment and the release is not provided for by the national government that project cannot push through. And that is what Mayor Emano was saying that in the past administration it was his idea — the story is that the Phividec led by administrator Evangelista went to Mayor Emano and told him about this project which would complete the requirements for the Phividec industrial estate, and the mayor brought it to the previous president. The paperwork started but the final release of making availability of the funds to make the project actually move did not move. There was no signature. There was no approval in the previous administration. So therefore, though it was conceptualized by Mayor Emano in the previous administration, a project starts when the money starts flowing. And the money started flowing under the administration of Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo.

Our much esteemed foreign investors and local investors, Mr. Allen Roxas; and our friends from Germany. I believe this is a project for the coal-fired power plant. This is a very much coveted project even by other foreign investors. And I would like to greet also tanan mga laing-laing mayors sa laing-laing lunsod sa Misamis Oriental labi na ang mayor diri sa tagoloan, Mayor Bambi Emano. And we have tanang atong mga barangay officials and together with me as members of my national delegation, we have the Secretary of Trade and Industry, Manuel Roxas; and the Presidential Adviser on job creation from Bukidnon of Region 10 Secretary Cito Lorenzo; with us also today because he was able to make available in our administration again the funds for the westbound terminal in Cagayan de Oro, Landbank President Gary Teves; aton mga… Oh, there is here a… There is here an insertion, “don’t forget to…” No, not “don’t forget.” Anyway, is they’re standing very — ah no, sitting down already — very humbly by the side, south commander and soon to be Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, General Roy Cimatu. We have him until Saturday. Saturday he takes over as Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces; aton mga laing-laing members sa board ng Phividec industrial authority let me tell you I went through a lot of work to make sure that the Phividec board would be a board that represents a very broad range of concerns and stakeholders in the Phividec. And I’m very proud of the composition and I hope that indeed under your leadership, your collective leadership and especially the overall leadership of Boy Abadia and the good legwork of administrator Evangelista this international container port would make Phividec not only an industrial center, it will make the whole Region 10 truly one of the major industrial centers of the whole Philippines.

Because today we had earlier our Regional Development Council meeting in Oroquieta in Misamis Occidental. And we were looking at what NEDA had in mind for Region 10 as well as what the RDC has in mind for Region 10. NEDA’s presentation gave us its vision for region 10 agro-industrial center and food basket. I said, “no.” Agro-industrial center is a demotion. Region 10 must be industrial center and food basket. And not only for Mindanao but for the entire Philippines. Because if we talk about industrialization in the 21st century we talk about petrochemical and we talk about steel. The petrochemical industry will be in Bataan or Batangas but the steel industry will be in Northern Mindanao.

Busa Kanina Gyud, ganina sab gi-present ang atong flagship projects in order to promote the vision of Region 10. And the big projects, the big ticket projects mentioned were the Pangil bay bridge which will connect Lanao del Norte and Misamis Occidental; the Bukidnon integrated area development program; the Mindanao International Container Terminal, which is what we are doing today; and the Langindingan airport. You noticed two of them are in Misamis Oriental.

So if Bong and Dongkoy say that they are already mine, I guess that should be so.

But I also said that if we are to correct our vision from being just an agro-industrial center to an industrial center, a fifth major project must be the rehabilitation of the National Steel Corporation. That’s why Mar Roxas is here because he is my man to do those things.

Therefore, to all of you, my brothers and sisters, good afternoon, my friends here in Cagayan de Oro because now, there are our oro chamber and various businessmen in Cagayan de Oro and throughout Misamis Oriental. I am always happy when I visit you here: first of all, because it’s like Vice President Guingona, I am also a son of Mindanao because I grew up in Iligan City. And secondly, because the Phividec Industrial Center and the Cagayan de Oro-Iligan corridor are very close to me. Because it’s really like City Mayor Emano said, in the Phividec Industrial Center and the Cagayan de Oro-Iligan corridor, I was the one who started this project when I was Undersecretary of Trade and Industry, way back in 1989, thirteen years ago.

This is the last part of my trip to the three provinces of Northern Mindanao. I came from Surigao, then Misamis Occidental earlier, and now in Misamis Oriental.

As a young man who grew up sometimes in the city of San Juan, Rizal and sometimes farming with my grandmother in Lanao, I saw the world differently in terms of life between the middle-class suburbanites in San Juan and the poor tenants and farmers in Lanao. I saw the severe poverty in Muslim areas just like the poverty in the Muslim provinces of Mindanao which is undoubtedly the poorest area in our country. There is no doubt that poverty is the root of our problems in national security in Mindanao. Poverty even in our most problematic areas of our country, just like when I was young here in Mindanao.

So whenever I visit Mindanao, I reaffirm my principles for Mindanao: first of all, peace and progress go hand in hand and should not be separated; secondly, our pursuit of peace must be within the constitution and principles of territorial integrity; thirdly — well, wait let me go… Before I go to the third one — that territorial integrity. Good that General Cimatu is here. Because there is this misperception, misconception or maybe a pre-fabricated and really intended misinterpretation of the agreement that we signed, that our negotiators signed in Kuala Lumpur regarding the MILF. There is nothing in that agreement that says that the camps, the former MILF camps will be returned to them. Nothing, nothing, nothing. There is nothing in that agreement that talks about the MILF at all. It is an agreement about how to rehabilitate the former Wartorn areas. And what it says there is recognizing the right of the evacuees to go back to their original homes or to their new homes of choice which is fait accompli because there are no more evacuation camps, they have all gone back to their homes. And by definition, evacuees are non-combatants. So if you say we help the evacuees go back to their homes, we are not talking about the MILF. Therefore, all of these interpretation being peddled are wrong interpretations and I hope that they are just honestly wrong and not maliciously wrong. Thirdly in Mindanao, we need to understand that our country is a multi-ethnic society where there should be social justice for all and institutionalized accommodation of various cultural traditions.

Ug sa pangita sa kauswagan nga kinahanglan alang sa kalinaw, we are here to mark another achievement of Misamis Oriental and Cagayan de Oro as a lead player in Mindanao’s development. As we break ground for this Mindanao container terminal project phase I, we also launch today the Mindanao container terminal port phase 2. These are a testimony to Cagayan de Oro and Misamis Oriental’s leadership in regional development as they are turning points in the country’s battle against poverty. Mindanao’s gain is the country’s gain although without doubt the people of Mindanao stand to benefit most from it.

Cagayan de Oro’s leadership in Mindanao development is highlighted by the fact that in Region 10 unemployment rate is the lowest in the whole country. The unemployment rate in the country was 11.3 percent when I started my presidency in 2001 and it is now 10.3 percent. But it is in region 10 — while the rest of country is 10.3 percent — the unemployment in region 10 is 5.74 percent. And that is why sa kining atong jobs fair diri sa tagaloan, sa town plaza, sa akon nakita diri sa atong records ang mga jobs available 2,326 apan ang mga applicants 537. So nakita nato na for every job seeker dunay 4 to 5 jobs available diri sa tagaloan tingali sa tibuok region 10 ug Misamis Oriental. Busa sa atong mga awardees — asa man atong mga awardees diri? Sa high school leadership awards? — kung mangita kamo ug trabaho maadto kamo sa town plaza sa tagaloan kay naa pa jobs fair until 5 o’ clock pm this afternoon.

Now, it is said nga usa ka rason ngano that gamay ra ang unemployment rate diri tungod sa micro-finance and the success of small and medium enterprises. This confirms the strategy that our administration started early last year. When we saw early last year that exports would decline due to the world slowdown, we decided to strengthen the domestic market. And i remember asking Mar Roxas, “so, how do we strenghten the domestic market?” And mar said, “first, by strengthening the small and medium enterpises.” Nahimo gyud diri sa misamis oriental ug Region 10. Unya by agricultural expenditures and housing programs followed by the decision to pay the local governments your IRA in full, on time without deductions and even to pay part of the debt of the previous administration to the LGUs. kauban sa mga debt sa previous administration kining atong project gyud diri karon.

Because of course, I became president because of God’s will and I know that I became president in order for us to find a solution to the problem of poverty in our country.

Poverty is the country’s foremost enemy and our battle plan is contained in our medium-term Philippine development plan. At the core of our plan are four strategies, namely: first, a philosophy of free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century; second, agricultural modernization with equity; third, a social bias for the poor and disadvantaged sectors; and fourth, high moral standards in government and Philippine society.

In line with free enterprise suitable for the 21st century, we chose tourism as one of the sectors for future progress for clear reasons — we have many natural wonders and the natural warmth and hospitality of Filipinos is beautiful. We have an advantage in beach and eco-tourism from the shores of Boracay, in the Visayas, and the shores of Camiguin — which I’m sure has more than 100 percent occupancy rate in Camiguin — up to the perfect surf in Siargao and the Mambuaya river for whitewater rafting which I can now guarantee from personal experience is perfectly delightful.

Under agricultural modernization, Mindanao plays a big role. We all know that the climate and soil of Mindanao have made Mindanao now a natural food basket for the entire country. In fact, right now, according to Secretary Cito Lorenzo, even if El Nino is certain to hit North Luzon, the shortfall in North Luzon can be made up for by the additional agricultural production here in Northern Mindanao.

In fact, I was very happy to get the report earlier in the regional development council tanan mga crops, tanan mga agricultural products region 10 is a net exporter. So you are truly a food basket and you truly need a container port like this one.

Ang MCTP siguradong tabang sa kauswagan sa Mindanao. 30 hectares space? For phase 1, 60 afterwards. 400-meter wharf that will initially handle 270,000 container vans per year, this project will facilitate the transfer of food and other cargo from this part of Mindanao. It will accelerate trade and industry and encourage the construction of more facilities for business and for leisure.

MCTP’s rationalized and organized cargo handling will push forward the efficient transport of more agricultural products from this part of Mindanao to the Visayas, to Luzon and even to foreign lands. This will ensure that products arrive at destinations fresh and on time. New markets will be opened to the farmers of Northern Mindanao. This will encourage even small farmers to produce more. It will have a multiplier effect on development.

The MCTP will likewise play a major role in providing a social bias through the jobs it will generate. Beyond the 2,000 people it will hire directly during its 24-month construction, this port will become a hub of commerce and attract many small entrepreneurs in the food and services industries.

The MCTP is expected not only to complement the 100-million peso Cagayan port, but it will also serve as the main gateway of marine transport for Northern Mindanao and a major business location for the whole island. It will eventually be the trans-shipment hub serving the BIMP-EAGA region.

More business means a greater number and variety of jobs for people of various skills levels. I foresee that with just phase 1 completed in January 2004, as Phividec chairman Boy Abadia has promised, more than 10,000 men and women from the Cagayan de Oro-Iligan corridor and the whole of Mindanao will find jobs here.

This very important infrastructure project costing 85 million dollars for its first phase alone, is a vital part of the development of the Phividec estate into an industrial estate. And I am glad that the LGUs of Tagoloan and nearby towns have expressed full support for the speedy development of the Phividec industrial estate.

Because our anti-poverty medium-term plan includes a social bias for the poor, it is also heartening to note that the Phividec industrial authority offered a humane relocation package to affected families, which is being implemented ahead of schedule. By the way, this port is implemented ahead of schedule. It’s suppose to start in October. But it started now because the funds have already been made available by this administration.

But speaking about the relocation, I immediately remembered my experience when I was undersecretary of trade and industry, the story of Mayor Emano and I saw then that there was a lot of resistance to the progress of the Phividec industrial estate back then. I came to find out why there was so much resistance. I learned that in the past years, whenever there was a new locator in Phividec, families were moved from the land until the next locator came along, and they moved again. So they kept moving. Moving and moving like cattle.

Until I came as undersecretary of Trade and Industry and I received feedback here when I was at the DTI and I told Manila that we will not proceed with the entry of new industries until we find a permanent and acceptable relocation site for those displaced by Phividec. That’s why this occasion now is just continuing my work since 13 years ago.

Mindanaoans have been asking for a fair share of the national budget. And I wish to point out so that, once and for all, you can dispute another accusation that Mindanao gets less than the other areas. Let me tell you that Mindanao has the highest per capita budget allocation at 4,878 pesos per capita. And furthermore, region 10, which as for the budget I inherited had the lowest per capital allocation among all regions in the country in the last administration, Governor Calingin. Now, it enjoys the highest growth rate in per capita allocation in 2002 — 25 percent growth rate.

And from the 450 million-peso agricultural modernization budget for hybrid rice — which we will distribute today — of the 450 million pesos, 200 million — almost one-half — is going to Mindanao. And this will go so Mindanao is receiving 200 million or almost one-half, where will this go? This will go to seed subsidy like these seeds that we are distributing today and training for 82,500 hectares of hybrid rice planting, of which 25,000 are being planted right this April and may season and the rest in October-November next season. Morever, there is also again — thanks to Gary Teves — 250 million pesos credit being granted by the Land Bank through Quedancor at 10,000 pesos per hectare this season. Unta mubayad maayo ang atong mga mang-uuma sa ilahang utang, aron unya kung maayo ang repayment naa pa sa October-November additional 525 million pesos for a total of 828 million pesos for the farmers of Mindanao.

Katong pagbayad daghan ang gihimo nga ang problema once there are bad payers because they are irresponsible. But there are bad payers because of force majeure, the world’s slowdown, September 11, the BW scandal, El Nino, etc. And I figured, and this has been… It was in fact formally taken up at the regional development council meeting this morning to request that because in the past hangtod karon if you have arrears you cannot borrow again. What a pity, because our interest rates today are at their lowest in the history of our country. But they can’t go to our poor farmers because of this rule that if you have a pending arrear you cannot borrow. But Gary Teves has said that he is willing to restructure the present arrearages, and part of the restructuring will be additional working capital. Therefore, the funds will be made available to the farmers even if they have current arrearages.

Because I said earlier to the past administrations, if they can give amnesty to tax evaders, why can’t we give amnesty to our farmers. So the amnesty is with regard to their being prohibited from borrowing again. So Gary will speed up the restructuring and make available additional funds.

Karon sa 200 million pesos hybrid rice for Mindanao, 24 million pesos will go to region 10. Ug sa 825 million-peso credit for Mindanao, 100 million pesos will be available to farmers in the region, again let me repeat, from Land Bank through Quedancor. Daghan salamat Gary Teves.

We join you in the relentless drive to attract investors like our German friends. And I congratulate PIA for the 6 new locators in 2001 that have given jobs to close to 1,000 people. This year’s two additional investors are bringing in approved investments of 100 million, while six more have signified their intention to come in together with our German friends.

Most importantly, I would like to thank, in behalf of the Filipino people, the Japanese government, represented here by the charge d’ affaires of the Japanese embassy… By the first secretary of the Japanese embassy because we have no ambassador yet from Japan. The previous ambassador just left and his replacement is still to come. The MCTP has been made possible through I said earlier, a special yen loan package under our official development assistance. This project will remain a long-lasting symbol of deep friendship between Japan and the Philippines and the special concern that the Japanese people hold for the Philippines’ sustained growth.

Let me say that there were times in the past years that the Japanese loans here in Mindanao did not push through due to the problem of peace. But during the last visit of Prime Minister Koizumi to me here in the Philippines, he told me that they are ready to go back to Mindanao. They are ready to contribute to peace and development in Mindanao.

Let me reiterate that not even the MCTP or any other project can fully guarantee equitable growth in Mindanao. However, only long-lasting peace can assure us of sustainable development. And peace can be achieved only through the concerted effort of the people of Mindanao. Achieving peace and progress is in the hands of the people of Mindanao.

Let us, therefore, strive together for peace and development. Let us be united in relentlessly pursuing unity, harmony and solidarity behind our dreams for all Filipinos. In that light, I accept Dongkoy and Bong saying they are now mine.

Daghan salamat kaninyong tanan.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). During the Groundbreaking Ceremonies of the Mindanao Container Terminal Project (MCTP) Phase 1 and Awarding of Projects to Beneficiaries. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225529/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8285&Itemid=38