Thank you.

Thank you, Secretary Puno.

Ambassador Donald Dee and the leaders of the private sector; Commissioner Leones; General Calderon and the officers and men and women of our police force; our awardees; local government officials; representatives of the five pillars of the justice system; ladies and gentlemen.

Thank you for attending our celebration of crime prevention. Those of you present represent the very important components of our national security system, those who enforce the law and maintain peace and order.

Because of your efforts, our streets, communities, and nation are more peaceful, calm, and secure.

Our efforts are focused on suppressing crime and eradicating poverty.

We do not lose focus on our work.

That’s why the state of our economy as we celebrate Crime Prevention Week brings hope and excitement — our growth is the highest in a generation, revenue is now on track and job creation is strong. Our deficit is down, consumer confidence is up and inflation is holding steady.

The 7.5 percent GDP increase in the second quarter and the 10 percent gain in capital investment are in line with what the ADB says the country needs in order to replicate the poverty-eradicating growth of Asia’s economic success stories.

The foundation of our economic comeback is wide, deep and solid across the board, in all the areas represented by our winners here. The nation’s economy is pointed in the right direction and for all the right reasons. The elements of these broad-based success are built on many things and with the help of many people, institutions and economic contributors. Notable among these is the community of the five pillars of criminal justice.

Emerging regional and global imperatives involving trade, security, the environment, and information technology place a high premium on the rule of law.

When political stability reinforces economic gains, we gain a quantum advantage in competitiveness. That is why we must stop political noise and sustain the momentum of our efforts.

This government has stayed focused on what Filipinos yearn for most: a good job, steady prices, and a healthy family. We’re tired of political drama and social instability. We’re entering an era where the vast majority can have a predictable future, a steady job and a calm political climate.

Our economy has created six million jobs in six years, helped raise wages, lower the rate of poverty, invest in education and healthcare and invest heavily in roads, bridges and vital services. This is what the people of the nation deserve, and that is what our government is working for every single day.

The world is taking notice, from the lofty heights of the prestigious Wall Street Journal, to the billion dollar investments of Texas instruments and leading Asian firms like Hanjin, Marubeni, Tokyo Electric, and others. The Philippines is on the move.

And lest we get carried away with our success, we must be humbled by what remains to be done. And while we must never take a step back in our development, we must always reach back and lift up those who have yet to live outside poverty.

Our campaign to stamp out criminality is tied up with the war against poverty. Crime prevention policies therefore have been incorporated in national economic development plans.

Under our administration, reinventing the bureaucracy and achieving the millennium development goals of the U.N. have become living priorities aimed at a more equitable distribution of the fruits of development, bridging rural-urban disparities and increasing people’s participation in all aspects of governance.

May we continue to lend our respective, valuable experiences and expertise for a safer Philippines, especially those who won awards. That is why you are brought to the stage so that everyone else can learn how to bring lasting peace to our communities.

Once more congratulations to our winners!

Thank you very much and long live us all!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the 13th National Crime Prevention Week Celebration and Awarding Ceremonies for Best Peace and Order Council. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412142813/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2159&Itemid=38