Thank you very much Secretary, Artie Yap, whose grandmother, grandmother?... great grandmother was from Sulu, Jolo, Sulu. So a grandchild of Mindanao.

Thank you very much Congressman Nur Jafaar for this very good idea to help the people of Tawi-Tawi.

Thank you very much Governor Sahali for your welcome and your explanation about another very important project, the hatchery.

And I would like to greet the officials of Tawi-Tawi, the officials of Sibutu led by Mayor Pajiji, the officials of Sitangkai led by Mayor Ahaja, our various Cabinet members are here as well as my family. And although some have already been mentioned, I will not mention them again. I will just mention that we are also with the first Armed Forces Chief of Staff coming from Mindanao, General Alex Yano. (applause)

To all of you, Assalamu alaikum Tawi-Tawi!

Congressman Jaafar mentioned earlier my State of the Nation Address last year, July 27 was it? 23. And there I said and I quote: “We will establish mariculture or offshore fisheries in Sibutu. This is a request from Nur Jaafar.” (applause)

And here we are launching that project, and we are happy that we are in the midst of the leaders of the community. And I bring you the greetings of the dignitaries from Muslim nations who are in Bongao who would have wanted to come to be here but they are waiting for us because we will launch yet another mega-project as Governor Sahali calls them. These are the countries supporting the peace process, they greet you and I greet the beneficiaries of this development project — the people of Sibutu and the people of Sitangkai. (applause)

This project I very heartily agreed to to put in the State of the Nation Address not only because it was proposed by our very important ally and leader Congressman Jaafar but also because this project is in line with our Super Regions plan, the creation of five major regions including Agri-business Mindanao to spread development away from an inequitable concentration in Metro Manila.

As explained by Congressman Jaafar, this project is a good way to increase the income of the people here while taking care of the marine life that your children and grandchildren will inherit. In other words — sustainable development. Not only fishermen will benefit from this, but also those who harvest pearls and agar-agar or seaweed.

A large income is expected from this project. The fish to be raised here are high in market value such as the mameng. The mameng is an endangered species (applause) but if raised in fish cages it is still not allowed according to my environmentalist son. But grouper is still okay, abalone is still okay. Okay. So one piece of advice because we want to take care of the future — grouper, abalone, pearls, agar-agar. (applause) So in the fish farm alone, if you can produce five hundred kilos per harvest, it is not far-fetched to reach one hundred million pesos in income for the community. This does not yet include pearls and agar-agar.

This project benefits from the inherent knowledge of the locals regarding aquaculture and marine resources. I even asked Congressman Jaafar earlier why you call it modified mariculture. He said it’s not just scientific knowledge from elsewhere, but also the inherent knowledge of the people here that is included in your technology. This is combined with scientific methods stemming from the research of Mindanao State University Tawi-Tawi College of Technology and Oceanography. (applause)

We discussed the Tawi-Tawi College of Technology and Oceanography. I think I saw a check here for two million pesos from CHED. This is for the scholarship program of your school here because we want… I don’t know how many are enrolled in fisheries here. How many? We want to double it, (applause) we want 2,000 students here, so you have a scholarship fund here of two million pesos to help increase your enrollment to 2,000. (applause)

The way to peace begins with providing a person a job — this will provide jobs for you. Providing a person food on the table — this will provide food for you and, therefore, human dignity. Central to that success is to invest in the people — in education like our scholarship, in healthcare, roads, bridges that we will launch later in Bongao.

Spending on physical and human infrastructure network remains central to the ability of Tawi-Tawi to break out of what Congressman Jaafar described — the poverty, the historic cycle of despair, and to prepare and to meet the challenges of the future. So we have and will continue to invest heavily in new spending. (applause)

Later, it will be in Bongao, right Jess? Jess Dureza will update us on the development programs in Mindanao. That might be Secretary Jess Dureza’s last report because he is leaving as Office of the Adviser on the Peace Process. Perhaps my next visit here in Tawi-Tawi with Jess Dureza, he will come here not as OPAP but as Press Secretary of our country. (applause)

Anyway, Jess has done a great job, as OPAP and as BIMP-EAGA head where Tawi-Tawi is very important. Through him we have worked closely with out allies on an amazing number of public works projects. I talked about the bridges and roads.

Later today, we will launch the 324 million-peso Tawi-Tawi Bridge-Road Partnership Project, which is funded by the USAID, the DPWH and the ARMM government. It is a long road in the Tawi-Tawi mainland with a bridge to connect the five towns of the mainland to Bongao. This is important because we need infrastructure in Tawi-Tawi if we are going to bring Tawi-Tawi out of poverty.

And we are happy that our allies are only too willing to help Muslim Mindanao. When we were coming to Bongao in the airplane, the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia, Ambassador Wali gave me a note. Saudi Arabia has a loan with us of 20 million dollars which we are already implementing. But he also said that Saudi Arabia is willing to loan another 80 million dollars for priority projects in Muslim Mindanao. (applause) But we need not new ideas but those we already have, those that already have feasibility studies, those already in the pipeline, those already in the GAA budget. And so I have instructed, for one, Secretary Arthur Yap to put the projects in the pipeline, submit it for Saudi funding including the four phases of the Mariculture project of Tawi- Tawi. (applause)

And then because we want to double the enrollment of students in the schools of agriculture and fisheries in Muslim Mindanao, I asked Commissioner Ricafort and Commissioner Omar also to present a full-blown feasibility study and proposal to the Saudi fund for doubling the enrollment in the schools of the Autonomous Region for agriculture and fisheries. (applause)

Investing in vital infrastructure also includes building up our environment as a reflection of our commitment to our quality of life. So, with regard to the road that’s being built now or going to be built now in Bongao and in mainland Tawi-Tawi — although it will be implemented by the private sector — I count on Governor Sahali and the mayors of the towns directly benefiting from the Tawi-Tawi Bridge-Road Partnership Project to ensure that construction will be done with the least damage to the ecosystems of the project area.

Speaking of the environment, I am glad also that Congressman Jaafar mentioned the strategic location of Tawi-Tawi in the coral triangle. This is the largest almost contiguous collection of corals in the whole world. And the reason why I was asking my daughter Luli for her opinion on the mameng is that in the World Wildlife Fund she happens to be the policy officer of the coral triangle. (applause) So, please follow her advice on how to make mariculture here sustainable. In return, I will ask her to help you to also prepare project proposals for sustainable fisheries in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao that we can submit to funding for the Saudi fund. (applause)

Later today also in Bongao, we will visit a Madrasah being spruced up for the opening of classes because before the students can enter the Tawi- Tawi College of Technology and Oceanography they must first be able to finish grade school and high school. So, we will inspect the desks and the chairs which are part of the one billion-peso national budget for school furniture to prevent ‘standing room only’ or SRO schools.

ARMM being autonomous has his own DepEd. It has his own budget for education. But because we have provinces in the Autonomous Region that are very poor we are also providing help from national government budget including helping repair the Madrasahs and helping make sure that your school furniture is complete.

These investments in people and in physical infrastructure will in turn attract more of the private investment that Governor Jaafar says he is hoping for and it will create more jobs, ultimately improving the lives of the people of Tawi-Tawi. Congressman Jaafar has already mentioned the 2006 figure says Tawi-Tawi is the poorest province in the country. It has a poverty incidence of 7.89 percent, and we must do something together to bring that percentage down.

We are aware that no matter how much improvement there is at the top of the economic ladder, many of the people in Tawi-Tawi still struggle mightily. Because of this, we will also launch the Conditional Cash Transfer program later. It will be in Bongao as well, I think. Three thousand of the poorest families in Tawi-Tawi will receive money monthly. But there are conditions. For example, children of elementary age must attend school. That’s one example, they need to attend, it’s monthly but with a condition, children of elementary age must attend school.

And to further encourage parents to send their children to school, and to reduce hunger in Tawi-Tawi, we established the Food-for-School program. In this program — I don’t know if it’s already here, I hope it’s already here — elementary students will take home one kilogram of rice every day (applause) so that — isn’t this already being done here? Oh, it’s already being done — so that hunger can be avoided and there is an incentive for children to attend school.

Mamaya pupunta tayo sa NFA bodega. We will help segregate rice for Food-for-School in a National Food Authority bodega.

I like to call what we are doing today our focus on three areas. The three “Es” — the Economy like this mariculture project, the Environment where we have to make sure the mariculture and the road projects all conform to the requirements of the coral triangle, and Education which I have mentioned several times in connection with the Tawi-Tawi College of Technology and Oceanography, the Food-for-School and the Madrasahs and the desks and chairs. These are central to lifting up the people of Tawi-Tawi.

Earlier, Governor Sahali mentioned that I have already visited Tawi-Tawi four times. Those four times were with him. But in reality, I think I have visited here about six times.

Earlier, Congressman Jaafar mentioned that in 1949, or 48, my father was here. During that time, he was Assistant Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs. He negotiated for the return of Turtle Island to the Philippines from Malaya. (applause) When he was Vice-President, around 1958, he went to Tawi-Tawi again, went to the Turtle Islands again and brought his son with him, that was me. So (applause) I remember during that visit, I was given a gift, a large turtle. It was tied like horses or carabaos with a rope, it was given to me. Then I saw the turtle crying. Turtles can cry. I said to my Mother, “Ma, the turtle is crying.” My Mother said… because at that time I was with them… my father brought my mother and me. Now I brought my wife and I also brought my son. So Nur said, history repeats itself. (applause) I said, “Ma, the turtle is crying.” So, my Mother went to the… I don’t know if it was the Governor of Tawi Tawi or — Sulu back then, right? Sulu — or the Mayor of Turtle Island, she said, let’s just release the turtle. So, the turtle was released, we were on the beach. Well, when the turtle was released, it ran quickly towards the sea. I thought the turtle was a symbol of slow movement, but it knows… the turtle not only knows how to cry, it also knows how to run. But since then, we have really seen that we must take care of our nature. So the Turtle Islands, although I will not visit there today, let us take good care of them. This is also part of what is called the Turtle Islands Heritage Park, also a project of the World Wildlife Fund.

I remember my second visit here was in Balimbing, during the recent elections and when I had just been elected as Senator. And the local officials were still celebrating because they were also newly elected. I didn't go there, and they said, “Here, here, eat with us, we have — what’s it called? — roast calf.” Oh, there’s so much roast calf in Manila. So, “no,” I said, I was looking at the lobster. Wow! They sent me home with a basket of lobster. The marine resources of Tawi-Tawi, that’s what we will harvest now through your mariculture so that the lives of our people will improve.

I also remember when I was Vice-President, or perhaps even Senator, perhaps even Senator, one more. I went to Mapun in Cagayan de Tawi-Tawi. That’s why I am happy that aside… and of course Bongao many times, as Governor Sahali said, and when I was Vice-President in Sitangkai — the brother or father? — the brother of Mayor Ahaja was the mayor, the Vice-Mayor now, and now — ah, Sibutu was still part of Sitangkai then, now it’s separate — and I am happy now that we are here in Sibutu. So, I have visited six towns out of your more than ten towns. But I hear about the next phases, the names mentioned by Congressman Jaafar are towns I haven’t visited yet. So, for the next phase of mariculture, invite me again so I can visit your five towns of Tawi-Tawi. (applause)

To all of you, Congratulations! Now is the start of the rise of Tawi-Tawi.

Thank you all very much. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Launching of the Tawi-Tawi Modified Mariculture Development Project, Sibutu-Sitangkai (Phase 1A and B). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412121608/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1366&Itemid=38