Thank you very much Secretary Ronnie Puno for your introduction and explanation of what we are doing here today.

I would like to greet the chairman of the league, Board Member Alan Zulueta; as well as the presidents of the league, Board Member Vincent Piccio and Board Member Edward Joson, and all the board members who are here. And I would like to greet your fellow local government officials, future senators, ‘Magsaysay is my guy,’ Vic Magsaysay and Chavit Singson, the large Ilocos Sur delegation is there. Let's also greet the one who made many laws about local government, the power of local government, because he also came from local government, a former vice mayor of Quezon City before becoming a senator, the champion of the Filipino family, our uncle in the senate, Tito Sotto; and the advocate of our peace, unity, understanding, the sultan of Sulu, Sultan Kiram.

In the midst of the intensifying political campaign, this is a good opportunity to further strengthen our agreement on economic growth and establish politics above partisan issues. I think I see the one who made your law to increase your IRA because the value-added tax increased, Senator Ralph Recto. His policy is correct so your IRA is growing.

And because of these kinds of reforms, I am full of hope for the future of the country and the good of the people. Our national agenda aims to advance the country towards more stable politics, a more prosperous economy, peace and security of the country.

And we have advanced the country through our strong partnership with local officials like you board members of the province, local officials like you who are the backbone of the government. Because you are the backbone of the government, you are the reason why our communities, provinces and country are safer, more peaceful and stable because of your help to our leadership.

This afternoon we discussed security and peace. This afternoon, when I return home, I will sign the Anti-terror Law. The Anti-terror Law is a landmark in the battle against evil waged by all freedom loving Filipinos and allies in the world. It upgrades our preemptive capability to check the conspiracies of harm and murder, and contain the movement of arms and funds to sow mayhem. This brings to a higher level our successful campaign against the Abu Sayyaf, J.I. and Al Qaeda cells now being carried out in a broader front of national and regional vigilance.

We will keep bombers at bay as we drive up confidence in the Philippines, grow jobs, increase incomes and lift the people from poverty. Now there is a current Anti-Terror Conference in Indonesia and the Philippines is being praised for its achievements especially against the leaders of Abu Sayyaf, Janjalani and Abu Sulayman. And because today this law against terrorism will be completed.

Our message to the world is to have no safe haven for terror in our country, and to have a strong democratic society driven by freedom under the rule of law. Law abiding Filipinos have nothing to fear in this law for it is a weapon that shall be wielded against bombers and not protesters. Let us all unite behind a renewed campaign against terror and drive out this scourge to a modern Philippines.

In this great struggle, I trust in you again, board members, that we will continue to work together on the path towards reform, social justice, and economic development. You local officials have shaped the centerpiece of Philippine democracy. You are at the forefront of great change.

We in government have made difficult but necessary decisions to strengthen our economy. Now these sacrifices are bearing fruit.

Part of the social payback of our efficient fiscal management and good fiscal reforms in the law is the 15 billion pesos additional Internal Revenue Allotment intended to all local government units. Because you have a share, 40 percent of the VAT goes to local governments.

And since we took office in 2001, we have also been fully giving to the LGUs your IRA even if the new budget has not been passed. We obtained a DOJ ruling that this is automatically appropriated, so that even with or without a budget, the computation of your IRA is given to you.

Now it’s election time again, we hope that the election in May is focused on a prosperous future, not on the turmoil and hardships of the past. On my part, I will focus on the national agenda that includes more jobs, stable prices, and peace and order. Therefore, I will leave our team unity to you. You just take care of them.

We will strive to promote education and health care. We will promote the green Philippines agenda to take care of our environment and beautify our communities. And we will do this in partnership with you, our provincial officials, to ensure that the benefits of the new economy reach every corner of the Philippines, not just Metro Manila.

And we will not stop in seeking the support of our local leaders like you, the board members, and the Filipino people to gather around the nation’s brighter future.

I’m confident that the strong partnership between the national government and the provincial officials, between you and me, is the key to achieving our common vision.

Thank you very much and congratulations! On your 15th national convention.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’S Speech during the 15th National Convention of the Provincial Board Members League of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151307/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1989&Itemid=38