Thank you very much, Congresswoman Connie Dy, for your introduction of me. And thank you because you always pester me for proclamations and for those proclamations to progress until the actual giving of the document to each family.

Thank you very much, Mayor Pewee Trinidad, for your support of what our administration is doing. Thank you also Mike Defensor, and then GM Ed Manda, and GM Pamintuan. Thank you, USEC. Gerochi. And I hope all the papers there at DENR, Dick, we’ll just have you follow up on them. Of course, thank you to Chairman Percy Chavez whom I always call when there’s a demolition problem. I want to introduce Secretary Milt Alingod who will report on our event today. Where’s Milt? There he is!!! You know, Milt is very low profile so I always introduce him. I also greet Vice Mayor Calixto and the entire council of Pasay City. And earlier, my Presidential Assistant for housing, Nestor Ponce, a former Congressman, was mentioned. To all of you, those receiving titles, those who have been granted proclamations but don’t yet have the individual title, those who will be proclaimed, I am happy and finally we have begun to fulfill the long-held dream of the families living on land covered by NAIA. With the papers being distributed now, the land on which you are built will be yours.

To the approximately five hundred beneficiaries – five hundred now, right? The first step – from the Balabag area, Don Carlos Village, Barrio Pilipino Putol, Maricaban 3, now you each have your individual Certificate of Lot Occupancy. Now, you are no longer squatters in your own country. So, congratulations to all of you.

For you, because the first step, as Mike Defensor said, was E.O. 114, the proclamation. Now, knowing you have your own land, the next step is that. The MOU that was given to me earlier, that is the next step. So, this is just the beginning and the next step is the “MIAA Sites Socialized Housing Project.”

With E.O. 144, it was ensured that you will not be evicted. Now, each of you is assured of the specific land on which you are built. The next step, housing.

And all of this is part of the good work being done by our local political leaders like Connie and Pewee. By our agency representatives for housing and urban poor like Mike and Percy. And also the good work being done by our airport officials, not just GM Manda. I want to inform and recognize that a big help in the paperwork done by Ed Manda for this was the paperwork taught to him by the slain Lilia Diaz. So while Lilia is lying in state, let us pray for her because she did a lot of paperwork for what is happening today.

I’ve already instructed the PNP to do their job. Let us allow the authorities to do their part in unraveling the motives and suspects behind this heinous crime. Let us pray for justice for Lilia Diaz.

Yesterday, I visited her. I also visited some of the beneficiaries of our efforts like this. Yesterday, I visited Smokey Mountain where more than two thousand five hundred condominium units have been completed. We are just waiting for the septic tank to be finished so they can be occupied by our poor countrymen.

Yesterday also, the turnover of cement was held in Baseco in response to my call to the cement manufacturers association of the Philippines to the private sector. They gave ten thousand sacks of cement for the construction of the drainage system and septic tank.

Last Friday, I was at the lighthouse where I also distributed, like what we are doing here, it is being done there too, specifically a comment on each piece of land being built on. I gave certificates for the assurance of the land being built on by the people there.

I am not unaware of your problems. Not just the problem of land security but also your worry that the price of – oh, it’s already rising – the price of oil will rise. That’s why, at my request, more than forty gas stations in Metro Manila agreed to give a discount on fuel prices for jeepneys. And the operators of public vehicles have put on hold their plan to ask for a fare increase. This is for you, so your transportation expenses won’t increase when you go to work and your children go to school.

And I want to take this opportunity, this time, to appeal to you. You have seen what we are doing, proclamations but not stopping at proclamations. Until the security of land for each family, until the expectation that fares will not rise with our policies. Surely, you see that your current government cares for you. So I appeal to you, do not easily succumb to the urging of others to rise up against the government. Do not, ever, allow yourselves to be used by the overly ambitious in their desire to seize power.

Your needs, such as housing that the government is working on, like the land that has been worked on for paperwork because you know the land we proclaimed in our two and a half years has reached six hundred thousand families being given land security like our papers. Now it’s three hundred thousand. So if you compare this to what others have done, this is a record high in history. This is what we do every day in our work to provide, especially for the poor, what we should take care of. This is what I am taking care of and not politicking.

So again, my heartfelt greetings to you and to our new graduates from being squatters, congratulations! And to those others, while you don’t yet have… Some have been proclaimed but don’t yet have titles. Some have not yet been proclaimed. I assure you, our paperwork continues.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the MIAA sites Socialized Housing Project MOA Signing and Awarding of Certificates of Lot Occupancy to Beneficiaries of Presidential Proclamation No. 391. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194428/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7121&Itemid=38