Thank you very much Secretary Yap for your introduction of me and thank you for joining me in honoring our farmers here in front of our mayors.

To the very diligent president of the League of Municipalities, Mayor Monching Guico, and to all the different mayors who are here today, good afternoon to all of you, Mabuhay! (Applause)

City Mayor Lim, thank you for welcoming all of us and I also like to greet Mayor Escalante of Negros Occidental and all of the other officials of the different municipalities coming from all over the Philippines to be here today.

I’d also like to greet the members of the House of Representatives who are here today and also the members of the Diplomatic Corps who are here with us today, thank you very much for being with our mayors.

And to our awardees of the Gawad Saka, congratulations to you, our outstanding farmers! (Applause)

I requested that the LMP and Gawad Saka be combined in one event to emphasize one of the important tasks of the mayors today — food security or ensuring the supply and distribution of rice.

Clearly demonstrating the LMP's commitment to development is the theme of your Congress today: “LMP Achieving Greater Heights, Strengthening Local Governance Through Collective Action to Address Issues on Food Security, Climate Change, Local Economic Development and Peace and Security”; And we are all engaged in battles on all these fronts.

You will be discussing all of these in the coming days. But you are all discussing these but at this point in time, it is very obvious to everybody that we continue to battle hunger. As Artie said, “The global spike in the price of rice, food and fuel has put a tremendous strain on all Filipinos.” And obviously as public servants, you and I — our main concern, our first concern is for the people particularly the poor. The high prices have put more pressure on our people kaya one of the things that the government is doing is to help alleviate the pressure on the salary or income of the citizens. One of the things that we try to do in spite of the increase in the price of gasoline and world oil in the past months we try to keep the cost of transportation down. And we thank the transport sector for having been so cooperative.

But we also told them that we will help them, including those who are salaried, the drivers, the conductors. So earlier, we distributed initial microfinance checks under the D.R.I.V.E. program. This is the additional income for bus and jeepney drivers and conductors through microfinance loans and for their spouses and their families, their relatives. That’s one of the things that we are doing to help ease the pressure on the paycheck.

During the particularly difficult times earlier this year, with a huge spike in prices on a global level, we work extra hard to keep prices in check like the price of transportation and to ensure the supply of basic food, fuel and rice for people continues.

We had to respond to this global challenge in a swift, measured and targeted manner. Our first priority was to stabilize the supply of rice as harvested. Batid naman natin na mula pa noong panahon ng Kastila, ten percent ng ating kinakain ay nanggagaling sa ibang bansa dahil ang ating bansa ay bulubundukin, konti lang yung malalaking ilog kagaya ng Mekong. And so, we saw early on that rice prices would climb; so we went to the rice exporter such as Vietnam and put in early bids to buy rice before the major rice surge hit. And once we secured the needed supply, we needed to make sure we had a distribution mechanism in the right place to get the rice to the right people at the right price. And we achieved this by working through churches, schools, civic organizations and you, the municipal chief executives.

Thank you for your help in bringing food to the tables of the poor.

(Applause)

We also needed to ensure that no price gouging occurred. We have done that by prosecuting unscrupulous vendors and the officials conniving with them. And Artie Yap had to file cases against officials within his own attached agencies.

We will continue to work tirelessly in cooperating with the NGOs, the faith-based groups, the farmers organizations and our municipal chief executives to make sure that our people don’t go hungry. It is important that the poorest among us continue to receive assistance with the rice they purchase. It is part of our commitment to share the results of economic success with all Filipinos.

As a matter of good public policy, we must target those who need it most and not get in the business of a general subsidy that hurts the true marketplace and allows for free riders who can afford market rate rice or to take advantage of subsidized rice that should only go to the poor. That's why the role of local governments is so important to ensure that those who are capable do not buy the subsidized rice. So the local chief executives remain an important part of our rice distribution program. But this is as far as the situation this year is concerned, and we don’t want this to happen again, so that what happened will not be repeated. The most important measure taken by our administration with your support and the support of our model farmers is to move to rice self- sufficiency.

To that end, we are investing heavily in our farmers. That's what Monching Guico said should be done with the budget of the DA and the technology transfer of the DA, and Artie said, “He will fulfill that, the request of our LMP.”

(Applause)

If you will remember, in July we increased it from 11 pesos to 17 pesos—isn't that right, congresswoman of BUTIL?—the palay we buy from the NFA, but at that time we only bought less than 100,000 metric tons. So, to encourage farmers to plant more palay, this high price of 17 pesos paid to farmers, we ordered the NFA to buy not 33,000 metric tons but one million metric tons from our farmers.

Kaya yun, we hope by continuing to provide this financial support to our farmers we hope to be rice self-sufficient within five years. But remember, agriculture is a devolved department kaya napakalaki ang papel ng mga mayor because at the end of the day, your IRA is supposed to include agricultural services. So therefore, food security in your jurisdiction must be addressed by the local chief executives.

And I thank you that you recognize that responsibility based on your program of showing best practices in agricultural productivity. But I am also glad that you have not placed your obligation to the environment and to peace and security in the backseat.

Let me speak about peace and security. War is never the answer. We must provide security and order and protect the people especially in Mindanao from renegade violence. At the same time, in Mindanao, we must reach out in authentic dialogues with the people in the communities to move forward with the peace process.

Our new peace policy for dealing with armed groups is the framework of “Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration” which is in fact part of the Hague Convention. And as espoused by the communities, your communities, the DDR will be a notice to armed groups that the force of arms does not entitle them to representing our people. Who represents our people, those with arms or those they elected like our local chief executives? So you are the true representatives of the people, not those with arms.

We hope that this new policy will restart the peace process and move our country closer to lasting peace. In the search for peace, it is really essential that the voices of our people, your people be heard. Armed groups claim to speak for the people when in fact they only speak for themselves. In the authentic dialogue to the people in the communities, the government is not even the one taking the lead– the national government anyway. We’re assuming a supporting role and we are letting credible non-government institutions that are supporting the peace effort spearhead the discussions and consultations on the problematic concerns. We hope that this will strengthen the final outline of a peace agreement which I hope, and I’m optimistic, we can achieve with the support of the local governments.

Indeed, we long for the day when we finally have lasting peace in Mindanao, when we are self-sufficient in rice, when our children are sure that we have preserved our resources for their use as well. And when going abroad for a job is not the only choice for a Filipino worker. That's what is needed. So you also take care of local development.

To hope that Filipinos no longer need to go abroad for a job is a tall order because it is a longstanding problem. But let us together through your governance, through your local development try to break a cycle that has been part of our economic situation for so many generations. We are making progress.

The first thing we needed to do was to acknowledge the problem that we cannot continue to send our people abroad as the only choice for employment. It is essential to create good high-paying jobs here at home so that going abroad is a career choice and not the only option. It will take maybe another 10 to 15 years to break this offshore cycle but it is happening. These eight million Filipinos abroad, the number has not increased during our administration, while some are leaving, some are returning, they are also here, so their income has doubled. So, it is now more for going abroad for a good salary as a career choice, not those who have to go abroad for starvation wages there.

And I am pleased that the progress, the progress we have made in establishing the Business Process Outsourcing sector and in successfully competing for value-added BPO business is a good example of our ability to address this challenge. We want to have many call centers throughout the country. We cannot put one in all of your towns but hopefully in all of your provinces. So, I have instructed the Commission on ICT to make a technical study on the resources needed to transform every province in the country into an ICT-enabler.

In addressing these issues of most concerned to you, you are not without armor nor artillery. These proposed laws that Monching Guico mentioned, we hope to certify as urgent because your capabilities will improve when they come out of the Committees, Monching, we will certify them as urgent. (Applause)

In the meantime, perhaps if you recall, our administration is the one that ensured that you get your IRA in full. (Applause) In fact, we’re even paying what previous administrations owed you. (Applause) Oh, I remember Joey Lina when… and Joey and Don Emilio when he was DILG secretary because he was a governor, that was always what he nagged at me about, to remove—what was it called, the LGSEF?—and give it whole to the mayors and governors like Governor Cerilles and Governor Sally, who is here today.

The national government strives harder so that you will get your IRA in full and on time. And I know that you have been following up the IRA differentials for the years 2001 and 2004 when we were on a reenacted budget, and so I signed EO 723 last May to give the LGUs a choice between monetizing your differentials in advance at a discounted rate or receiving them in full spread over seven years. We have fast-tracked the EO so that the IRA differential could be used as an additional shield against inflationary pressures, and majority of the LGUs committed to their differentials to increase agricultural production. And we hold you to your promise. You can really play pivotal roles to ensure supply and distribution of rice in your own municipalities.

During the LMP Assembly last year, I directed the PMS — if some of you remember — to make sure that the best high school students from every municipality will be assured of a college education. And to allocate at least one ambulance, fire truck or patrol car to every chapter for a town that does not have any ambulance, patrol car or fire truck, you remember that? (Applause) So, the PMS informs me that based on the choices you have made, seven fire trucks and eight patrol cars have been distributed, and 67 ambulances shall be distributed within sixty days. (Applause) In the course of serving which towns have no ambulance, we came across the information that there are many municipalities that have ambulances but they are no longer serviceable. So many, about 2,000. Well,… and so what we are doing for these towns, you already have an ambulance but it’s in an advanced state of disrepair, with bridge financing from the Land Bank, the PCSO shall make available to every municipality without a serviceable ambulance, on a cost-sharing basis, one ambulance each. So yun ang gagawin natin — LMP, PCSO and Land Bank para makuha ninyo kaagad.

As for the town scholars, PMS shall convene the CHED, DepEd and DBM to implement the program starting this summer session. That’s why we can do so much together, ensure there is food on every table, provide education to the brightest children, and ensure the health of the citizens, especially during emergencies. There is so much to do now or for the future, so our local governments also take care of our environment.

So, I thank you for all of these, and I thank what Monching Guico said in his speech that you the mayors are not affected by the noise prematurely generated by the 2010 elections. (Applause)

Thank you for being focused on your jobs. Thank you for realizing that effective governing is not a popularity contest. (Applause) Thank you for understanding that, the people deserve for their leaders to deliver results. (Applause) And finally, thank you because you stand up and deliver.

Thank you very much. Congratulations to all of you! (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the 2008 General Assembly of the League of Municipalities of the Philippines (LMP) and Gawad Saka 2007-2008 Awarding Ceremonies. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134644/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8903&Itemid=38