Thank you very much Secretary Neri for your introduction and also, greetings to all the students, teachers, administrators who are here, and I know all of you are very busy preparing for the start of classes next week.

Today, we launched the second of the major components of the fruits to be made available this year by our lower than program budget deficit which can be attributed to VAT reforms. Congressman Abante, you can congratulate yourself and your colleagues because these things we are giving wouldn't happen if we didn't have value-added tax. Thank you.

From January to April, four billion pesos was generated from the value-added tax on oil products. And during the last Cabinet meeting, two billion pesos was allocated to provide cash transfers to the four million poorest of the poor and those using up to 100 kilowatt electricity consumption. That was our first program yung “ Katas ng VAT: Pantawid Kuryente .”

Now, this is the second program. The Cabinet also approved the amount that Nona mentioned, one billion pesos to provide interest free loans and scholarships to poor students. As Nona said, half a billion for the loans, half a billion for the scholarships, this is what we will call the Students’ Assistance Fund for Education or SAFE.

We congratulate the students who received loans for tuition from our new SAFE. Because of SAFE, there is a loan program that will not exceed 8,000 pesos per semester for tuition, books and other needs.

Aside from the one billion that we’ve set aside from our VAT – this is why we call it this, if the other one, the two billion, is “Fruits of VAT: Electricity Assistance,” this one for SAFE is “Fruits of VAT: Education Assistance.”

And aside from the one billion from the VAT, we have also from the Development Bank of the Philippines, advocating quality education for poor but intelligent students, that’s the difference, because the Fruits of VAT, even if you’re not very smart as long as you pass, that’s okay. But with DBP you need to be smart. Through its 10-year, one billion-peso program also to pay for the tuition and other fees of college students from poor families. DBP is opening a wide window of opportunity for 1,000 bright high school students who pass the program’s academic and other requirements. They are here, I think— to our first 125 who comprised the first batch of DBP scholars, and I understand you will take up nursing in the Bank’s partner schools. Good luck to all of you. Congratulations in advance!

Mona talked about our meeting with the SUCs a couple of weeks ago, so I would like to tie that up with what we’re doing today and I’m glad that Mona anticipated what I would want and she made the announcement. But I just want to repeat — for those in the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle and Agri-business Mindanao, indeed, the focus should be on student loans and scholarships in agricultural courses. And because we’re talking here about poverty, they’re the ones who bear the biggest brunt of the increasing price of fuel and power, there should be a special quota for the 10 poorest provinces in the country, namely: Tawi-Tawi, especially for the fisheries courses of the Tawi-Tawi College of Technology and Oceanography; Zamboanga del Norte, including their access not only to the state college in Zamboanga del Norte but also to the West Mindanao State University; Maguindanao, including their access not only to the state college in Mindanao but also in education in the good private schools in the vicinity like Notre Dame; Apayao and Abra, not only access to their own state college but also access to the education in the private colleges and universities of Baguio City; Dinagat Islands; Lanao del Sur, especially for agriculture education at the Mindanao State University; Northern Samar; Masbate, which I understand has the smallest state college in the whole country but with the scholarship they can have more students and can become more viable; and Misamis Occidental which is a very, very good state college.

There should also be a quota for those provinces which do not belong to the 10 poorest but are part of the 10 most food-poor provinces, namely: Agusan del Sur, Kalinga and Surigao del Sur, especially for agriculture because we want them to produce more food. And in the case of Surigao del Sur, especially for agriculture and mineral courses at the Surigao del Sur State Polytechnic College.

We’re doing this because everyone in this nation, public and private, has an obligation to meet the needs of the nation on education, food security and vital services like energy.

Because we are distributing Fruits of VAT which is paid by those who consume oil and electricity, 80 percent of whom are well-off, let's talk about energy and the government, government offices including SUCs, including DBP.

Starting today, all government agencies and entities, including government-owned and controlled corporations are directed to start electricity and fuel saving measures, using widely accepted practices and creative and innovative ways that can be employed to substantially lower fuel and electricity consumption. For this purpose, last June 2nd, I signed an Administrative Order to this effect:

1. All agencies shall reduce transport fuel consumption in liters by ten percent starting June.

2. Government buildings shall turn off airconditioners — EARIST has no problem, it’s not airconditioned — government buildings shall turn off airconditioners at 4:30 p.m., except those with 24-hour work. For example, hospitals, that’s not necessary.

3. Agencies shall implement, starting July, plans to replace all incandescent bulbs and make them fluorescent.

4. Agencies shall convert twenty percent of their vehicles in major cities, not in the provinces, to liquid petroleum by September 2008 because LPG is cheaper.

5. Agencies shall install and/or adopt other energy saving technology with the help of the Department of Energy and/or the Department of Science and Technology.

We are also appealing to the local government units to undertake similar saving measures.

The era of cheap and plentiful fossil fuel, the source of much of our fuel and the fuel of the world and a major generator of electricity in the Visayas and Mindanao, is definitely over. In this context, cutting down on fuel and electricity consumption is an economic imperative, a moral duty and a global obligation. Let us not forget that the whole world is suffering from high oil prices and high food prices. Therefore much of the world has adopted stringent measures to cut down the consumption of fuel and electricity.

We are celebrating World Environment Day, so we can add that reducing our use of fossil fuel is also ‘a direct boost to our environmental programs, specifically efforts to mitigate the impact of climate change.

Adhering to this directive, or going the extra mile to be creative and innovative in cutting down fuel and electricity, will have its rewards. The savings, translated into peso value, shall be given back to the personnel of the complying agencies in the form of additional rice and transportation subsidies. This will provide immediate relief from the rising price of rice in the whole world and adjusted transport fares.

You know, earlier, I spoke with some congressmen, and they said, can we increase the price of rice from P18.25? I said, it depends on what we will sacrifice in our budget and at the same time, not make the deficit too large, which will raise the interest rate. How much is it? And I said, whatever the difference is between the commercial price and the NFA price, all of that is almost a subsidy. The congressmen said, so that's how it is, we didn't know, we thought that P18.25 from the NFA was really the price. That's not the price, the NFA buys it expensively and sells it cheaply. The congressmen thought, they said, we thought you had a special price. That's true, we have a special price. For example, if they sell it for 1,200 dollars to other countries, our friends, maybe they will sell it to us for 800 dollars, but that 800 dollars is double what the whole world was buying it for at 400 dollars that day, so even if we have a special price, we still pay a large amount extra, so the subsidy is large. That's why it is very important that we all save.

A breakdown of the household expenditures of employees, public or private, shows that a sizable portion of a family’s household income expense goes to rice and transport fares.

So, I direct the Chairman of the Philippine National Oil Company Development and Management Corporation, si Waldo Flores, and the Department of Budget and Management, Nonoy Andaya, to monitor the compliance of government entities with the directives I gave in my Administrative Order.

The PNOC-DMC and DBM are tasked to submit quarterly reports on the compliance of government agencies, so that we will know how much additional rice and transport subsidies can be released to their employees every quarter at kasama doon ang ating mga state universities and colleges.

What we are doing this afternoon is in line with the three “E’s” — the Economy, the Environment and Education. These are central to lifting our nation up and getting it ready for you — the next generation of leaders.

So to all of you, our scholars, our beneficiaries of the loan program, Congratulations!

Thank you all very much.

Source: Adamson University Library