His Excellency President Teodoro Obiang, President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, Vice President de Castro, Speaker De Venecia, Senator Manuel Villar and Congresswoman Cynthia Villar and the other elective officials of the Philippine Government, excellencies of the diplomatic corps, members of the Cabinet, Los Miembros Delegacion de Equatorial Guinea, members of the Philippine business community, ladies and gentlemen.

Tonight we celebrate the meeting of two countries that share a common heritage, but for many years have been unable to get closer as they should have, due to the geographical distance that separates them.

The Philippines and Equatorial Guinea both have extensive aquatic resources and rich agricultural lands. Both of our countries and our peoples come from aboriginal ancestors. Both were under the Spaniards for many centuries and thus are Christians in majority.

The Philippines recognized Equatorial Guinea in 1968 when it became an independent country. However, almost forty years later, relations between our two countries have not flourished as much as we would have wished.

Hoy dia cambiaremos todo aquello. We are honored your Excellency that you have brought so many of your Cabinet members, your distinguished cabinet here with you, so that we could explore cooperation in all possible fields.

In accordance with our fruitful meeting today, I hope that our officials will duly follow up on the areas of our significant collaboration, from energy and human resources to agriculture, education, fisheries and culture and finance.

We also witnessed the signing of several memoranda of understanding between your government officials and our private sector for projects that, for example, include banking and finance. And also I’m very happy about the agreement that was signed earlier on the development of the insurance industry in your country by Filipino companies.

In recent years, the discovery of oil resources drastically changed the nature of Equatorial Guinea’s economy as it had previously consisted chiefly of agriculture. Now, with the blessings of oil and with the leadership of your Excellency, Equatorial Guinea has achieved a tremendous improvement in its economy. And I wish to congratulate your leadership for this, your Excellency.

We are also proud at the same time of the contribution of some of our great Filipino workers to the development of Equatorial Guinea. The Philippines depends on oil imports for energy, but as you have seen, we are blessed with the best knowledge workers in the world.

Our two countries must have a chance to discover each other and deepen a friendship ordained by a common history and culture and complementary resources.

Por tanto y siera ofrecer un brindis a su excelencia, and I ask everyone to join me in a toast to His Excellency President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, for his continued good health and success and to a dynamic and energetic partnership between our two countries.

Mabuhay!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during a State Dinner in honor of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo and Doña Constancia Mangue de Obiang. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213258/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2768&Itemid=38