Thank you. (applause)

Thank you Secretary Teodoro for your introduction.

Vice President Noli de Castro and the other civilian officials who are present here today; Superintendent of the PMA, Vice Admiral Calderon, congratulations! on your first graduation as superintendent of the PMA; (applause) administration, faculty and staff of the Philippine Military Academy; AFP Chief of Staff General Yano; the other major service commanders; all the officers and men and women of the Armed Forces who are present here today.

Officals of the area: Congressman Domogan, Mayor Bautista, Governor Fongwan, and I’m sure they all welcome their colleague Governor Bella Angara Castillo and all the officials of Aurora who are her to greet their favorite son. (applause)

Members of the Diplomatic Corps, other local officials, other Local Government officials present; AFP and PNP officials present; and to all of you, members of the PMA “Masiglahi” Class of 2009, as well as your parents and friends, congratulations! to all of you. (applause)

Congratulations! sa ating valedictorian and also condolence on the untimely demise of your grandmother, but I’m sure that she is very happy that you are the first PMA graduate to be both valedictorian and the recipient of the athletic saber — brain and brawn combined. (applause) Congratulations! also on your sister, topnotcher in the Medical Board examination. (applause)

I congratulate all our graduates, as well as the teachers, parents and other relatives. And to those who will be getting married soon, congratulations and best wishes to your spouses! (applause)

It is a great honor to be chosen as a cadet at the Philippine Military Academy, where thousands of students aspire to enter every year. It is an even greater honor to graduate from here, whether it’s four years, five years or six years to take you to graduate. Your parents and other relatives sacrificed so much to ensure that you are among those receiving diplomas today.

Now is the time to share this honor with your loved ones and to share it with the country, which worked and spent to educate you. So to all of us, congratulations and good luck! (applause)

You have chosen as your class goal to bring back the finest glory of the Filipino soldier. MASIGLAHI (Mandirigmang Sigaw ng Lahi), the name you have chosen to respond to the call of the people for soldiers willing to make sacrifices to protect the people and our Constitution, uphold our sovereignty, and join the main catalysts for national development.

You are recipients of the reforms introduced into the Academy You belong therefore to a new breed of military officers equally adept in the battlefield as in community building. You have been thoroughly trained not only by your commandants and his experts in the science of warfare, but also to be role models equipped with the mind, discipline, professionalism, drive for excellence, and the heart to stand for what is just and right for our country and our people.

The kind of officer you have been trained to be is crucial at any point in time but more so now for meeting the challenges of a deepening global economic crisis.

We must continue to focus on creating jobs and keeping prices low. The Armed Forces of the Philippines is one of the areas of government expanding its recruitment, together with the police and the Department of Education. But it is in the private sector… it is primarily to help the private sector to keep and create jobs that the government must provide incentives for. The government must also continue to come to the rescue of the poorest among us with targeted subsidies of food, fuel and rice.

Some of the poorest among us are the disabled soldiers and the families of soldiers killed in action. For their families, our special rescue comes in the form of housing assistance. In this regard, yesterday, I instructed the release from the President’s Social Fund of more than 125 million, the biggest release I’ve ever had from the President’s Social Fund. (applause) This will be for housing assistance for over a thousand disabled soldiers and families of those killed in action to whom we will give a 180,000 pesos each. (applause)

But even as we help provide homes for the families of the disabled and the slain, in these challenging economic times, the government must tighten its belt and live within its means, just like the average Filipino household. To that end, the government is taking a series of actions to stop unnecessary and wasteful spending. The taxpayers deserve no less from their government and public servants, just as the taxpayers deserve no less from you than the utmost courage, integrity and loyalty.

With regard to belt tightening in government, I have issued an Executive Order to all government agencies — and this should include the Department of Defense, the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and the Philippine Military Academy — to reduce their respective Maintenance, Overhead and Operating Expense budgets by 1.5 percent. Government-wide, this shall translate into a savings of 7 billion pesos.

I also take this opportunity to remind all government agencies and entities including the DND, the AFP and the PMA that as early as last year when the price of fuel started to go up. I had issued a directive to start electricity and fuel saving measures, using many already widely accepted practices as well as creative and innovative ways that can be employed to substantially lower fuel and electricity consumption. And the government, including the DND, the AFP and the PMA, must pour all savings and revenue into programs that help the poor and the middle- class. Thus with regard to savings from MOOE, in my Executive Order regarding that, I said that savings must be allocated to emergency employment for the next six months. Secretary Gilbert Teodoro has been designated as Emergency Employment Champion for Region XII, Central Mindanao, with priority to that towns in that region that belong to the 100 poorest towns in the country.

Helping the poor and the middle-class includes also more and more investments in education, healthcare and infrastructure. There will be those among you who will be called upon to help in these investments: building classrooms or serving as soldier teachers, conducting medical missions, building bridges and roads especially in conflict areas. You will be called upon to win communities away from the insurgents and provide the means to live peaceful, productive lives for those communities through the Kalayaan Barangays.

And whether in conflict areas or in the communities in which you are located, we must all support programs for providing meals for our children in school, and job and training opportunities for our young graduates. On jobs and graduates, PMAyers are among the fortunate few who have jobs waiting right after graduation. Your colleagues in other colleges are now anxious about finding jobs in April or May. Thus, we have escalated our jobs matching program to make information about job vacancies available to more people, simultaneously with accelerated skills training program.

I mentioned meals for children in school, so from your savings, from the savings of the military camps, I asked them, including PMA, to spend part of the savings for providing breakfast for the day-care, pre-school or Grade One children in the school within or nearest the camp.

We must tackle many challenges at once to keep our economy and way of life going strong. On the part of government, we must live within our means and run a lean, efficient government, including the DND, the AFP, the PMA and the units that you our young graduates will soon be commanding. Running a lean and efficient unit includes continued fiscal prudence while the national government, undertakes efforts to work towards a balanced budget. But all the while, we must also simultaneously invest in key programs for our people. For the DND and the AFP, the most key of these programs of my ten point agenda is to arrive at a just completion of our peace process.

Peace conduces development and development conduces peace. Armed conflicts slow down growth. Conversely, a long period of extreme economic difficulty is a powder keg that threatens the community’s security. We must move fast to stop the conflicts and I will need your greatest military skills there. But we must also move fast to promote growth. Therefore, you play a vital role in winning battles and winning the peace.

At the first PMA graduation rites I presided over as President, I said that the peace process is a function of Defense, especially as it proactively seeks to transform conflict into dialogue and consensus and thereby strengthens the ramparts of our internal security. Indeed, peace is always our preferred choice but we also need your military skills to make sure that it will be the preferred choice of all parties in the conflict.

For armed groups, we have adopted the U.N.-approved framework of Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration.

Our new paradigm for peace is community-based and recognizes the needs of various stakeholders of the peace process. The men with guns do not speak for the people. That is why we are conducting authentic dialogues with communities. They have a bigger stake in peace and deserve a stronger voice.

The peace we seek is anchored on Peace Talks for All, and Projects for Peace many of which it will be the AFP that will implement.

So, young PMA graduates, as new officers you are expected to be a unifying force to bring together your fellow soldiers and the civilian communities where you will serve in endeavors that will win battles but also further peace and development.

Be proud that you are among the few who have been molded especially to make a difference in our people’s lives as you rule your own life with “Courage, Loyalty and Integrity.”

Congratulations and make good! (applause)

I now pardon the outstanding punishment of the cadet corps of the PMA as may be prescribed by the Superintendent.

Congratulations to all of you!

Thank you. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 104th Commencement Exercises of the Philippine Military Academy (PMA) “Masiglahi” Class 2009. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412104305/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=22035&Itemid=38