Thank you very much Secretary Romulo for introducing me. You know Secretary Romulo, with the amount of paperwork he does, because almost everything that reaches me passes through him first, he almost doesn't leave Malacañang. But here he is, that's how important the League of Mayors of the Philippines is.

The people of Binalonan, Pangasinan, Mayor Ramon Guico, thank you very much for your leadership in putting together the agenda of the Mayors League; I also want to greet the other Executive Committee Officers, our very young mayor from Bogo, Cebu, Mayor Celestino Martinez. I was with him in Japan, right? And I hope that upon your nomination… And I hope that he’s been able to help also the other mayors in disseminating the opportunities that there are for Japanese ODA.

I also want to greet Mayor Melchor Nacario, the EVP for external affairs. Where is Mayor Nacario? My fellow Cabalen Mayor Boking Morales, from Mabalacat, the home of Clark; Mayor Jose Salonga, our Vice President for Luzon. Where is Mayor Salonga? There he is. What's up, Mayor, how are you? Mayor Elizabeth Delgado, our very young mayor from Surigao; Mayor Armando Sanchez from Batangas; Mayor Sylvia Adame from Bohol, how are you mayor? Mayor Melquiades Azcuna; Mayor Francis Olbis; Mayor Julio Uy, our legal counsel; and Mayor, the one who announced the results of your workshops earlier.

And here also – that's how important you are – you know, I tell my Cabinet members, that's why usually in other affairs, sometimes the host sets up an entire table for the Cabinet members. But no one is seated there. Because our agreement is, they have a lot of work, they shouldn't always come with me. But here they are not here to join me, they are here to connect with all of you. So these are our Cabinet members.

Here is Secretary of Defense, Angie Reyes. Because you are very important especially now in the fight against terrorism and various disasters whether natural or man-made; Nani Braganza, whose job whether it's for re-distribution or for conversion requires the quick action of local government executives, if not the complaint about the length of the process will fall on him, so you urgently need Nani Braganza; and here is Secretary Ging Deles, she is your partner in Kalahi. That is our partner in the fight against poverty; and she is not a Municipal Mayor but she is our host, City Mayor of Manila, Mayor Lito Atienza; and she is also not a mayor, city mayor, nor is she a municipal mayor but she is also our host, the head of Manila Hotel, Don Emilio Yap; I also like to thank USAID Mission Director Michael Yates for your support to the local government; and to all of you, the town mayors of the entire Philippines, I warmly greet you all, the honorable local leaders from various parts of the Philippines who are here now to collectively outline programs that will address poverty, create livelihood activities and revitalize our economy.

Our local governments have truly come of age. The DILG reported to me recently that by and large, the municipalities you stand for now collectively exceed the national government in performance. I hope it helped and I hope you haven't forgotten that perhaps many of what you have done is because I gave you your IRA in full. And not only that, I also paid off the debt to you from the previous administration. When it happened that we had a budget deficit just recently, there was a proposal to reduce your IRA because the national government was reducing its allocation. But I said, let's find a way to keep the IRA of local governments intact. Let the national government sacrifice and add more, but strive to keep the IRA of local government intact, because our administration loves the local governments.

You are important to the administration because you are the direct link to the people. The credibility and motive force of a strong Philippine republic largely rests upon your shoulders.

A strong Philippine republic has two essential attributes: first, the republic must be autonomous of dominant classes and sectors, so that it represents the people’s interest and not only the interest of the powerful minority groups; second, the republic must have the capacity, represented through strong institutions and a strong bureaucracy, to implement its policies and deliver its services.

The first and foremost strong institution of a strong Philippine republic is an effective government from the national to the local governments with a professional and dedicated civil service. Such a combination for an effective government delivers basic services for everyone the most important of which is an environment of peace and order and the rule of law and the necessary infrastructure. In addition, an effective republic must help its poorest and weakest citizens, empower them and dismantle the structures that make them poor and weak. An effective government rests on the rule of law, and our justice system must be strengthened to become an efficient institution for all not just for the powerful.

This is what we are striving for – an effective government that performs.

A strong republic makes sure that essential services especially peace and order and the necessary infrastructure reach the people, whether these services are provided for by government or by the private sector.

That’s why earlier today before coming here, I was in Batangas City to witness the completion of the largest natural gas-run power generation facility in the Philippines. What I did this morning was a milestone event for our country, because now with the opening of the Ilijan natural gas power plant now more than 52 percent of our total energy requirement is supplied by resources from right here in the Philippines. Prior to our administration, we were importing most of our energy resources. And this Ilijan power plant not only accelerates the development of our indigenous industry, but also enables the increase utilization of environment-friendly fuels, because natural gas is environment friendly.

The Ilijan plant is also the largest investment of South Korea in the Philippines with a total project cost of 1 billion dollars. And the good news is that the investors told me they are still looking for other investment opportunities in the Philippines. So, I invite our mayors to court them and other prospective investors for your localities.

I also arrived last week from the APEC Summit in Mexico and the ASEAN Summit in Cambodia. These leaders’ meetings underscored a significant new trend among nations and leaders, namely: the recognition that we must fight terrorism hand-in-hand with the fight against poverty.

The best antidote to terrorism and poverty is political freedom and economic opportunity. That’s why as the leader of a developing nation like ours, I cannot achieve one without the other. That’s why my fight, our fight against terrorism on our own soil must be accompanied by efforts to bring jobs, education and opportunity to our people at the same time.

In the fight against terrorism I would like report to you that this morning, AFP Chief General Benjamin Defensor presented to me the top, the very top bomber of the Abu Sayyaf, the leader of their bombing and terrorism group. Their group was planning a series of bomb attacks against government installations, foreign embassies and shopping malls in Metro Manila. The self-confessed bomber is implicated by his own cohorts who were arrested earlier and this bomber, this number one bomber of the Abu Sayyaf, the number one bomb expert was the mastermind of the bombings in Zamboanga last October, and also he was personally present in the dos palmas kidnapping last year. He carries a one million-peso reward for his capture. That’s why we need to work with one another. Because we must make sure that the rest of his kind are put behind bars.

That’s why let us continue to be united in our vision cost-effective.

Earlier in the speeches of Mayor and Mayor Guico, I learned that in the past few months you have also conducted a similar large-scale planning in three major island conferences that you held in Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao.

The programs you approved, municipal mayors, are in response to our campaign to maintain peace and fight poverty by promoting food, jobs, life and education for your constituents. I am happy with your prompt and appropriate action in response to the challenge in my state of the nation address and during the last league of mayors general assembly. Your newly-created working agenda will ensure concerted and cohesive support by the local government units of the national government’s efforts to fight terrorism and criminality. Local action moves the nation and local victories eventually become national triumphs.

Let me stress that under the provisions of the local government code, local chief executives are automatically deputized as agents of NAPOLCOM, thus, because you are deputized by NAPOLCOM, you are empowered to exercise operational supervision and control over the police forces in your respective territorial jurisdictions. This is aside from your being chairman of the Local Peace and Order Council.

However, I was listening to the presentations of Monching Guico of your agenda and it seems you like the amendment of the Local Government Code the most. So our government supports that.

In the meantime, the DILG has a police-community anti-terrorism plan with the following four points of LGU participation:

First, the governors, the city and municipal mayors, and the punong barangay must immediately convene your respective Peace and Order Councils or Committees.

Second, these peace and order councils or committees must adopt or implement your respective public safety plans, including a provision on reporting and feedback mechanisms, to ensure regular monitoring of unusual and suspicious movements of people in your localities.

Third, barangay assemblies all over the country under the guidance of the mayors — if the barangays don’t do it themselves — must convene to educate their constituents on how to deal and cope with terrorist threats in their respective barangays. Also, please take note that the other day, the Cabinet approved the draft of the NDCC Under Secretary Reyes that will incorporate in all our contingency plans the management of the consequences of terrorist incidents. And this include the local government, the mayor. In other words, when an incident actually occurs — how to rescue, how to make sure that the place is safe and all that — it is the mayor who will be in charged.

And fourth and last, all public safety officers under you must undergo mobilization and training through distance education on intelligence gathering and on the reporting system. They should conduct regular daily “rondas” and searches in accordance with law within their respective areas of jurisdiction.

I commend your workshops for tackling head-to-head on the issues concerning the use of a municipal identification system. Maraming salamat sa inyo doon. I commend you for tackling head on the issue of the selective arming of barangay tanods in high-risk areas. The condition for this is they must be accredited as CAFGUs with the commensurate training.

And I am also glad that because the fight against terrorism must go hand-in-hand with the fight against poverty, I’m glad that you are supporting the Kapit-Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan or Kalahi program that was put together by Ging Deles as our common strategy for poverty reduction. The war against poverty and the war against terrorism are two sides of one coin. Poverty provides the recruits for terrorism, and terrorism strengthens poverty. Because we spend all our time and resources fighting terrorism instead of fighting poverty.

And in our battle against poverty for the next six months, even as we are resolving the terrorists threats in our country, I’m focused on a tightly consolidated work program to push private sector-led growth. Because we have a deficit and your IRA is not being reduced, many things that the national government would have done will be left to the private sector.

The first item of this program is to strengthen our small and medium enterprises. To do this — to make the thrift banks and the rural bank bring out their funds to your SMEs — the central bank is relaxing its financial document requirements for loans to small and medium enterprises. And the field office of the department of trade and industry are now mandated to concentrate their services on assisting your SMEs with how-to-do project proposals required to access bank money.

Last year, I hope you remember, that you and i pump-primed the economy by having a sharing — one million from the national government and one million from you per town — that was for agricultural modernization.

You know, this project of ours last year, together with giving you the IRA in full and also paying the IRA debts of the last administration, this pump-priming we did with your full IRA and your extra IRA and the one million per town for agricultural modernization, this was identified by the economists as a major source of domestic demand which gave us one of the highest growth rates in Asia even if our export growth was negative.

Now, this year, we have the “one town, one product, one million-peso loan” for SMEs. The key to greater activity in the domestic market is the accelerated development of small and medium scale enterprises which have proven to be more capital-efficient than the larger business concerns.

Under this project, a loan of one million pesos will be lent to SMEs for one product in your town. In each of the 1,500 or so towns, municipalities in the Philippines, to encourage greater economic activity in the countryside. We have so far released 90 million pesos for this project.

That means, 90 towns have availed of this. But there are 1,500 of you. So I hope you connect with the DTI to find out – because the DTI is not devolved, there is a DTI provincial officer — connect with the DTI on how your SME can access this fund. You can also include the importation of affordable medicine under the “presyong tama, gamot pampamilya” program. I urge municipalities once more — because many municipalities are already using this. You are already selling half-priced medicine — I encourage more municipalities to join the half-priced medicine program that’s being administered also by the department of trade and industry through the PITC, so that affordable quality drugs will be available to your constituents. With this program, complemented by the national health insurance program, our local officials can serve more of our poor and needy people. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate all the mayors who have championed PhilHealth’s insurance program.

The head of PhilHealth is a fellow provincial mate of Monching, Dr. Tingkoy Duque. Because you mayors, many of you bring prescriptions, you bring doctors who need to be hospitalized. Well, instead of spending your own money, if your municipality invests in half-priced medicine and if the municipality invests in health insurance of 100 pesos per month — right, Monching? 100 pesos per month per poor family — that's a big saving. You won't take it out of your own pocket for their doctor's expenses and hospitalization.

So these programs should benefit more local governments so that the service to the people is good and not too burdensome on the personal pocket of the mayor.

I remember a newspaper supplement you released recently where you emphasized the saying, and I quote: “united people, strong towns. A strong nation, rapid development.”

Here, we encourage our countrymen to set aside discord – whether personal or political. This is the true challenge of our time. Therefore, let us serve our citizens and our motherland with dedication and utmost sincerity. They need us. And we need a strong Republic of the Philippines.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 12th General Assembly of the League of Municipalities of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210050/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8478&Itemid=38