Thank you, Secretary Romulo, for your introduction and congratulations! May I congratulate you for your excellent performance in the United Nations as my new Secretary of Foreign Affairs. Noemi, Bing, Cerge, Mike, Sammy, Robin, all of you, leaders of the Chamber, congratulations on your 30th anniversary.

I would like to greet Don Emilio Yap and all of the awardees in tonight’s honors. I would like to greet also my Cabinet members and the members of the Diplomatic Corps, the local governments who are here especially because they received recognition for their business-friendliness from the Chamber.

And thank you, Noemi, thank you to the whole Chamber for inviting me once again to be here. And, Noemi, congratulations for having Dr. Mahathir as your date yesterday.

Foreign Prime Minister Mahathir was invited by you because he left Malaysia with a legacy of a modernized economy. But over and above that, he is dear to us, to me, because he made a leading contribution to our peace process in Mindanao. And I think, he was happy to hear that, perhaps, because he was the keynote speaker of the first day, Mindanao’s delegation to this business conference is the biggest in history.

Thank you to Noemi for calling on all the PCCI members to pay the correct taxes and to help my administration resolve the fiscal problem. You see, we, in Malacañang, read your website. That is how highly we value the opinion of the PCCI. Truly, the PCCI is the voice of Philippine business.

And so, I hear you when you call on your members to do their share by paying the correct taxes, but I also hear you when you call on the government to reduce the red tape that stifles business initiatives.

And once again, I am instructing our government regulators, many of whom are here, to simplify and reduce the rules and regulations imposed on business and industry. Reduce them instead of multiplying them. I am also instructing my regulators to make it easier, rather than make it more difficult to do business in the Philippines. And I am instructing my regulators to encourage business, instead of discouraging investors.

These instructions are especially crucial today when we are at the crossroads. Whether to move forward, toward a modern progressive nation, like Malaysia, or fall backward to the failed policies of populist governance.

I, for one, am optimistic about our future, and so are many others who matter. Last Sunday, I was reading the Business Bulletin, and I read that a survey conducted by Jetro showed that the diffusion index, which is a measure of business sentiment among Japanese companies, declined in all countries in ASEAN and North Asia this September from the previous month, except for the Philippines. And the case of the Philippines that business index sentiment rose from 20.3 to 22.9.

Strikes have gone down to almost zero. And last Monday, some of your leaders through ECOP and three giant labor federations representing two-thirds of unionized workers in our country signed a “No Strike, No Retrenchment” agreement.

The IMF has raised its growth forecast for the Philippines. And the stock market, two days ago, surged to its highest level in nearly five years. Our GDP growth rate of 6.3 percent is our fastest since the Asian crisis, and one of the fastest today in the region. All these — GNP, stock market, “No Strike, No Retrenchment” — all of these are because of your work, the business community. Congratulations to you!

And now, may I ask you, help me to bring the exchange rate back to 50 to 1.

Tough odds, but many of you are already familiar with the acronym for my ten-point legacy agenda : BEAT THE ODDS.

B is for balanced budget. E is for Education for all. A is for automated elections. T is for transport and digital infrastructure to connect the entire country.

T is for termination of the conflicts with the NPA and the MILF. H is for healing the wounds of EDSA. E is for Electricity and water for the whole nation.

O is for opportunities for 10 million jobs. D is for decongesting Manila. And DS is for developing Subic-Clark. BEAT THE ODDS!

This legacy is the starting point of the Philippine development plan for the period 2004 to 2010, which Romy Neri will unveil this coming Monday. That is why he is not here tonight. He has to be there, writing it out.

The basic task of this Medium Term Philippine Development Plan that will be unveiled by Romy on Monday is to fight poverty and build prosperity for the greatest number of the people. We will focus on strategic measures and activities which will spur economic growth and create jobs.

Inspite of what I mentioned earlier, that should give us room for optimism, we must face the fact that the underlying growth components of our country while respectable have not been so robust. National savings, for example, hovered at 23.4 percent in the first quarter of 2004, not high enough to finance the investment required for the 7 percent growth rate that we would like to achieve towards the end of my administration.

Unemployment has stayed out the historical levels because even if I created more than a million jobs a year, I had inherited 4 million jobless, mainly, due to the fact that previous to my term, only a hundred-fifty thousand jobs were being created a year.

Thus, in my administration, creating one million jobs, which is what we did together, was like running on a treadmill. The pace is just enough to stay in place. So, we have got to run faster. Our inflation rate is up from the very low rates of my previous tenure, mainly because of the oil price crisis and because the budget deficit accumulated over many years is catching up with us.

Stiff global competition affects our exports in employment, and you know that even more than I do. And you know even more than I do that we must bring down the cost of doing business. That we must find ways to increase government funding for infrastructure project which we need to increase global competitiveness. The quality of infrastructure is perennially sighted as the main problem in the Philippines’ global competitiveness.

Mahathir was here. Many of you have traveled to Kuala Lumpur. You have seen how infrastructure has developed during the administration of Prime Minister Mahathir.

Meantime, the global economy especially our major trading partners like the U.S. and Japan, are showing signs of recovery. China’s strong growth is becoming a driving force for countries in the East Asia Pacific Region and it has been buying a lot from the Philippines. We must seize these opportunities, we must expand our market shares and attract more investments.

We want to increase the investment rate from 19% of GDP to 28% in the next two years. We want to increase spending on public infrastructure and private infrastructure, both of us, by an incremental hundred billion a year. We want to increase exports from $39 billion to $50 billion in the next two years. We want to support 3 million entrepreneurs, that is something close to the heart of PCCI. To do that, we want to triple loans to self-employed and small business owners.

To strengthen and sustain our global competitiveness and create 10 million jobs, we will focus on five strategic measures.

One, make food plentiful at reasonable prices to make our labor costs globally competitive.

Two, reduce the cost of electricity; to make the cost of running our machine and manufacturing process regionally competitive.

Three, modernize the physical infrastructure and logistic system at least cost to ensure efficient movement of goods and people.

Four, mobilize and disseminate knowledge to upgrade our technologies and increase our people’s productivity.

And, five, as you have said in your survey, reduce red tape in all government agencies to reduce transaction cost.

Our job creation thrusts are the following: high skill jobs in ICT like soft ware, BPO and call centers, fashion garments, Dina jewelry, Josie, medical services, automotive, electronics, health care – St. Luke’s award is great for that environment – also medium skill jobs in agri-business, mining, tourism – meaning hotels and restaurants -, and entertainment. And simple skill jobs in construction, SMEs, and micro enterprise.

Thus, we shall promote investments in agri-business, in entrepreneurship, and small and medium enterprise development, also energy independence, and investments in infrastructure as well as investments in exports.

We mention agri business and I am glad to hear from Raul Hernandez that that’s a major thrust of PCCI as well. Agri business is a leading element in our action plan to create ten million jobs. Agriculture accounts for 20 percent of the Gross National Product, one-fifth of the economy, one-third of the population is in agriculture or agriculture-related industries. During the past three years we saw the consistent growth of the agriculture sector. It created 1.87 million jobs or 623,000 per year of the 1 million jobs per year during the first Arroyo Administration.

This time we want to develop 2 million of hectares of land for agri business in order to contribute 2 million to the 10 million jobs targeted as my legacy by 2010. We want to reduce the cost of rice, corn, sugar and other wage goods through productivity and efficient transport and logistics. We will continue to promote and expand the roll-on, roll-off ferry logistic system for a more efficient transport of agricultural goods from Mindanao to Luzon. We will promote – good thing we have the Mindanaoans here, Jodi – Southern Mindanao as a Halal food production area and create a new class of farmers and fishermen.

How will we do that, create a new class of farmers and fishermen? We will organize a large-scale program of non-traditional high-value crops in farms and fisheries. The high-value farm crops, vegetables and fruits, have a much, much higher yield than the traditional staple crops of rice and corn. A program of aquaculture in the coastal areas including carrageenan and in the waters with thousands of fish cages in the seas of Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao, growing and culturing sea bass, grouper, pompano, milk fish, cobia, freshwater and saline tilapia, red snapper, etc. These fish have assured markets in the frozen and live fish markets of China, Hong Kong, Japan, Taiwan, Singapore, the U.S. and Europe with significant foreign exchange earnings, high-profit, and of course, job-creating potential.

Another major element in our plan to create 10 million jobs is entrepreneurship. Together with you, we will provide credit, technology and marketing support for three million micro, small and medium enterprises. We will also empower existing SMEs to generate additional employment through increased lending and the promotion of the big brother-small brother program initiated by former president of DBP, Mon Paterno, which I hope – I’ve instructed the new president Rey David — to continue. We would like to tap returning OFWs as sources of capital and continue product development as part of technology support.

For exports, we will draw up a more focused — has to be focused because of the budget deficit — a more focused incentives package with priority on the areas I mentioned earlier: ICT, automotive, electronics, mining, health care, tourism, shipbuilding, garments, jewelry and agribusiness. We will conclude trade agreements with Japan, Asean and China, and consider a trade agreement with the U.S., and strengthen our economic relationship with Europe. Tomorrow, I leave for the Asia-Europe summit in Hanoi, where I hope to tighten our economic partnership in Europe without going to so many countries in Europe because they’ll all be there in Hanoi.

After all, Europe has already overtaken Japan and the United States as the Philippines top source of foreign direct investments. The largest single investment in the Philippines is the British-Dutch development of Malampaya offshore gas, which is expected to provide the government with an estimated revenue of 10 billion dollars over the next 20 years. We hope to have more investments from Europe, for instance, in the field of ICT.

But, we can only finance the infrastructure required by these investors including you and the credit needed by the SMEs for investments from the fiscal position of fiscal strength.

As you can see from the road to fiscal strength for fighting poverty that I asked to be distributed here today, for over two decades, the Philippine government has been operating on a fiscal deficit except in the years 1994 to 1997. But even then the budget surpluses we posted in those years were mainly attributable to privatization proceeds. And since then, our total expenditures, including our debt payments, have been more than the revenues we could raise.

The government very soon could no longer afford to subsist on borrowed funds. Any government expenditure that’s financed by borrowing is a contribution to the budget deficit. For instance, I often go somewhere and I inaugurate a road and then they say, ‘but that road actually came from the World Bank.’

But when we say a road or a port is financed by ODA — yes, we should be happy we’re still creditworthy for the soft loans. Better payment terms, better interest — but we should also be sad that that road or port is contributing to the deficit because every project financed by a loan contributes to the deficit. On the other hand, we have no choice right now but to borrow for those roads and bridges, and therefore increase our deficit as long as our tax collections are less than our expenditures. And if we persist in sustaining national growth through relentless borrowings from foreign and domestic creditors, the interest payments will eat up a bigger and bigger share of the budget. And if this keeps happening, public services and social reforms, as we know them, would slow down or even come to a full stop.

That’s why we are determined to put our fiscal house in order. And the fiscal road map that I have distributed tonight or today here in your conference is part of our medium-term plan that Romy will unveil on Monday.

This fiscal road map has three policy objectives: one, balance the national government budget in six years; two, reduce the ratio of the consolidated public sector deficit to GDP from 6.8 percent to 3 percent for the same period; and three, reduce the ratio of public sector debt to GDP from a 136.5 percent last year to 90 percent by 2010. The legislative and executive actions needed to obtain these objectives are part of the medium-term plan that Romy will unveil on Monday.

Our objective to balance the budget within six years requires a gradual reduction of our deficits every year until we reach zero in 2010.

Fiscal discipline, austerity, rationalization, these are the by-words in the executive branch of government. The country’s fiscal problem requires sharing not only of goals but of burdens. It cannot be denied that in undertaking fiscal discipline while generating revenues, sacrifices will have to be made by both the public and the private sectors. And I’m glad your theme is ‘beyond business’ because business is supposed to be the profit motive — sacrifice for the good of the country and the future of the climate is beyond business.

We must do better, and we will. I thank you that you, the chamber, have thought hard about the kind of Philippines you want. And I thank you for, as Digna and Noemi said, joining me in the fight for change. I need you, the business leaders of our country to invest today in the Philippines of tomorrow. That is being one, being global, being Filipino, being together. One global Filipino, together we will beat the odds.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 30th Philippine Business Conference and Exhibition. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133132/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5706&Itemid=38