Thank you very much.

Thank you very much Secretary Favila for your introduction.

Outgoing president, Mr. Lee, congratulations! On your two years of very fruitful administration of the Chinese-Filipino business club; incoming president, Mr. Siy Yap Chua whom I’ve known a long time ago and always reminds me to keep coming today, so here I am today; Secretary Artie yap; Don Emilio Yap, our awardee and benefactor of the Chinese-Filipino Business Club; Congresswoman Naida Angpin who represents not only her district but the Chinese-Filipino community in Congress; other leaders of the Chinese-Filipino Business Club; Ambassador Benedicto; ladies and gentlemen.

Happy 10th anniversary! (Applause) it’s good to be with you again, my partners in building a progressive Philippines, on this your 10th anniversary truly a jubilee anniversary which is why I’ve come here today. Not only because Mr. Siy Yap Chua always reminds me to come but also ten years is a very important jubilee.

And I was recalling as I was preparing my speech about the many times we’ve been together. For instance, I remember six years ago, we celebrated together Filipino-Chinese friendship day.

In 2001, we celebrated together the salute the flag. And also seven years ago on your recommendation, I pushed for and signed republic act 9139, the administrative naturalization act. (Applause) And because that was mainly on the advocacy of the Chinese-Filipino Business Club, I hope you, the members, will work hard to convince many of our local Chinese to avail of that law and become Filipino citizens. (Applause)

After all, you in the Chinese-Filipino business club have shown yourselves to be good Filipino citizens in your unceasing and many activities for national advancement and the upliftment of our less fortunate countrymen. Congratulations to all of you! (Applause)

Congratulations! For helping the government provide more school buildings, materials and facilities, including two classrooms that you put up in the former MILF headquarters in Camp Abubakar.

Congratulations! For your “Van Aralan” which teaches computer know-how to children and even adults in the remotest areas.

Thank you for helping the government provide urgent services through many projects, including your “Poso Mula sa Puso” which provides water to depressed areas, and your operation brotherhood donating cash and relief goods in calamities.

Thank you for your palugaw feeding program, for your medical and dental missions, for your anti-dengue campaign.

Thank you for last week’s donation of police cars to the Manila Police District. (Applause) your help to our law enforcers will go a long way to help the PNP repeat the double-digit drop in crime last year.

Thank you for your SME center, your joint undertaking with the DTI, which helps entrepreneurs through counseling in various business centers. Entrepreneurship is one of the most powerful engines of growth and prosperity, as many of you have shown with your self-made success. You have indeed been practicing the virtuous principles of Confucius: generosity of soul, sincerity, earnestness and kindness.

And I hope you shared the optimism of 90 percent of our people that we will have a peaceful and successful year in 2008 as mentioned by President George Lee. (Applause) in 2008, we look forward to this year, as we’re bringing with confidence on the resilience of our economy, hopeful for peace and security for our people.

2007 was the year the Philippine economy turned around. Through the tough choices we made and in which you supported me. The tough choices we made to enhance revenue, raise tax collections and run a tight budget, we are now on a path to sustained economic growth. We have the highest growth rate in a generation, the lowest unemployment, a surge in investments, high job creation and a budget coming into balance. And the peso is strong.

As a result of our focus and discipline, we have been able to take the hard-earned revenue and savings and put it to work for the people by investing in education, health care and infrastructure. We have been setting our sights on a modern Philippines, ready for joining the ranks of first-world nations in 20 years. In 2007, we made a huge down-payment toward that day. We aim to make sure we keep it that way throughout the duration of my term.

Of course, let me be realistic: 2007 was not always smooth sailing, not least of which is the political sector. The November coup attempt fizzled, but it still gives a black eye to our nation. Half of our battle in the Philippines is to overcome the self-indulgent political theatrics that send the wrong messages.

The reality is that we have become a stronger, more stable nation as these types of political shenanigans fall flat with you and with the people. I have had chance to meet with many of you not only during our events of your club but many times in small groups or one-on-one, and I can see that you, the members and leaders of the Chinese-Filipino business club, are tired of the political sideshow. And you and the Filipinos want peace and order and security. The Filipinos want a good job and a good education. Perhaps, especially pressing today are the issues of energy independence and the price of foreign oil.

We are bound and determined to move the Philippines toward energy independence based on heavy investments in biofuels, geothermal, wind, solar and other alternative energy sources. We are equally determined that conservation must be an essential part of the equation. To that end, we are holding a series of high level meetings this month and next. Out of these meetings we will develop a blueprint, or more aptly a “greenprint” for the energy future of our nation.

The poor among us suffer the most due to the high price of global oil. So any program we initiate will focus not just on energy independence in the long run, but to relieve the pain of energy cost in the short run. How this will be carried out is an open question, but we will do everything in our power to share the burden and relieve the poor from bearing the biggest burden.

Let me also touch on our peace efforts in Mindanao where you have helped us build education in Camp Abubakar. We are close, yet sometimes the closer we get, the farther the distance seems to be. We are determined that peace in Mindanao is one of the most essential building blocks this nation can achieve to secure its future.

With the continued support of the Chinese-Filipino business club, this administration will focus on working for peace in Mindanao and other areas. With your support, we will remain focused on the national agenda of more jobs, stable prices, peace and order and a better life for all Filipinos.

I look forward to the Chinese-Filipino business club continuing to be a true partner for development in the years ahead. Together, let us make a progressive, modernizing Philippines a reality.

Once again, happy 10th anniversary! Congratulations to the new president, Mr. Siy Yap Chua! And to all of you, thank you very much to all of you. (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the 5th Biennial Convention and 10th Anniversary Celebration of the Chinese-Filipino Business Club, Inc. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412124137/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=937&Itemid=38