Thank you very much, Secretary Esperanza Cabral.

President Goquiolay, Mr. Arsenio, Ambassador Beckingham, Mr. Mohammed, Miss Bamard, Kate Fermin, my old friend, and all of those who care for the persons with disabilities, and the persons with disabilities who are here with us today.

Thank you very much for this opportunity of being with you. And as we heard earlier, during my experience as the secretary of DSWD and as president, I have tried my best to give a special opportunity for persons with disabilities.

Persons with disabilities in the Philippines are our partners in nation building, and I have issued all those things I issued because I believe that you have… You should have full access both to educational opportunities and economic empowerment. And I would like to use this opportunity to congratulate the Philippine Council of Cheshire Homes for the Disabled for organizing this conference.

For our physically and mentally challenged men, women and children, you are an instrument of human dignity and self-sufficiency in a caring environment. And I would like to take this opportunity also to thank and commend the many organizations and institutions caring for persons with disabilities that I came across when I was secretary of social welfare and development.

The concerns of persons with disabilities have to be addressed not only by their own families but by the whole community as well. Disabled people are disproportionately found among the poorest of the poor in all parts of the world, and the disabled tend to be chronically poor. That’s a very sad vicious cycle. Which is one reason why I declared the period 2003 to 2012 to be the Philippine Decade for Persons with Disabilities, so that we can use that time, a whole decade, not only to work on immediate relief for persons with disabilities but also for their longer term empowerment. The Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan for 2004 to 2010 calls for expanded capacity-building programs for persons with disabilities.

In that chapter of the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan, there is a portion — and in fact when Espie Cabral had her job interview, she said, “What do you expect me to do?” And I told her, “Espie, I took the liberty of reproducing that portion of the Philippine Medium-Term Development Plan that relates to your work as secretary of social welfare and development.” — there is a portion of course about microfinance empowering the very poor. Others have portion about empowerment, political empowerment which is the basis of the KALAHI, the CIDSS. But I also told her that if we’re going to care about the more vulnerable sectors of our society, we work on strengthening the five fingers: the children, the most disadvantage among children including street children, orphans and so on. And then the youth, the most disadvantage among the youth, out-of-school youth and also the youths that are vulnerable to drugs and so on. And then the disadvantage among women, meaning the battered women or those women who’ve ended up in socially undesirable occupations and so on. And then the persons with disabilities and the older persons. The more disadvantage of the older persons.

So the persons with disabilities are one of the five fingers we call that are to be specially cared for by the Department of Social Welfare and Development and our whole government, in fact, at large. Because as I said earlier, there is that vicious cycle of disability and poverty. This vicious cycle must be broken and focus must be placed on ability rather than disability.

And I am glad to be able to meet you today because now I can face you with an increase in revenues through new taxes and savings from the debt service from the fiscal reforms we have implemented. Now, we’re able to make targeted investments in job creation.

You know, in the last two days, our stock market jumped up by 70 points and we have been able to cross the twenty-three hundred barrier. Our peso strengthen again to 51.34 something and our bond prices have improved again which means we’re paying lower interest payments because of the confidence in our economy. And this lower interest payments results in freed money that we can spend on education, better health coverage, infrastructure, especially job creation which is what our persons with disabilities need more opportunities for meaningful work.

Our job creation thrusts include high-skilled jobs in I.C.T., as well as tourism, including hotels and restaurants. Why do I mention these two things? Because when I was still in DSWD, I remember that many of the wheelchair-bound were very welcome additions to the labor force of telephone companies or telephone operators in companies because you don’t need to be mobile to be a good telephone operator. Why not call centers, if you can be a good telephone operator, as long as you have a good english speaking skill. And if you don’t have that, you can have additional training for that. But if you can be a good telephone operator, why can’t you be a good call center agent with that very, very high paying job.

So I don’t see why those who were welcome in the telephone operator occupation should not have the same opportunities in call centers and business process outsourcing. You don’t need to be mobile to do the accounting of some firm that is in England or in the United States right here.

And while we were speaking of I.C.T., there’s the other boom that we are enjoying now — marami ang inyong occupancy? — the boom in tourism where February which was not a peak season experience a ninety percent occupancy rate in our hotels. And eighty-five percent is considered full occupancy.

Well, let me go back to what I observed when I was also in DSWD. The hearing impaired were a very, very welcome workforce in fastfood chain and also again in doing computer work. So I don’t see why they cannot be given more opportunities now that the restaurants are booming, especially the ones catering to tourists, and also we continue to have bigger opportunities in I.C.T. so Kate Fermin is coaching me on what I should remember when I was in DSWD.

I mentioned these specific opportunities so that we can with our hope, at least, we have a countervailing, a countervailing feeling to the problem we are facing, demands… The demands for the jobs and the problem we are facing which demands that we work hand in hand to end the vicious cycle of disability and poverty. And I hope this one-day event can clearly define the challenges and opportunities ahead of us.

For instance, it’s been… I thank… I’m very grateful that you remember that I said that the government should try to spend one percent of its budget on empowering persons with disabilities. And speaking of call centers, I have just in fact authorized even mandated that TESDA, that they should allocate 500 million pesos for call center finishing schools scholarship. Now, what’s one percent of 500 million pesos? That’s five million pesos. So I’ll ask Espie Cabral to make sure that of that scholarship fund of TESDA for 500 million pesos for call center finishing schools, five million of these scholarships should be for our wheelchair-bound persons with disabilities.

The month of May is the month of labor, and almost everyday we are having job fairs. May 1st, the City of Quezon, Quezon City kicked it off with job fairs with 30,000 jobs available. Prior to that, a few weeks before that, there was a tourism jobs fair with oh! 50,000 jobs available I think. And yesterday, I opened another jobs fair with 70,000 jobs available. I mentioned about tourism itself having very, very many jobs available. So I called up Artie Yap, my new PMS head, who had been in charge of coordinating all efforts on job creation. And I told him, because he was the one who orchestrated yesterday’s jobs fair. I told him, “Artie, for this month of May since we’re having jobs fairs almost every day, I want you to organize a jobs fair especially for the hearing impaired and other persons with disabilities, ’cause there’s so many job opportunities available for them.”

So we have those two things: the call centers scholarships and the jobs fairs that we would like to dedicate especially to our persons with disabilities. And this is one of the things that Espie Cabral in the DSWD can work out together with other opportunities before she gets very busy with the calamities once the rainy season comes over. So the month of May is the month for labor but it should also be the month of greater economic power for our persons with disabilities.

Thank you very much and long live you all!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Multi-Stakeholder Conference on the State of Philippine Disability Movement and Challenges. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213840/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2790&Itemid=38