I am very happy to be here with you on the 25th or silver anniversary of PCIERD, an organization that I used to be a part of in the past. And using this day, I thought that instead of honoring these distinguished gentlemen in Malacañang, I thought that we should honor them as part of our 25th anniversary celebrating research and so today therefore we celebrate part of our celebration of scientific research to honor the pillars of Philippine science both natural science and social science in the modern age.

Earlier when we were sitted down, Undersecretary Yumul said, “you made so many people happy/’ I said, “what, by coming today?” I said, but of course, because it is a reality and it is a chance for me to reaffirm what I said in my very first State of the Nation Address in 2001, that technology is the foundation of future economic development. And having been a part of PCIERD in the past, I know the role of PCIERD. It is the link between research and applications in industry and energy. In my time, it was only industry that was on the focus, but today energy is just as important.

But being the link, it dramatizes when we celebrate the 25th anniversary of PCIERD that if we want technology indeed to be the foundation of future economic development, the investment sector must lead in the creation of a science and technology-based Philippine model. And that is the mission of PCIERD. And if we want indeed the technology will be the foundation of future economic development, it is also important that a good science education must be within the reach of every Filipino, which is the reason why among the reforms in Education that I also stated in my very first State of the Nation Address, one of the things I said is that we must strengthen math and science in basic education.

We are resolved to review all policies to forge broader coordination among public and private institutions and moving the S & T public and private budget allocation closer to the UNESCO-prescribed one percent of GDI. And PCIERD is what can put all of those efforts together, both private and public sectors.

On the part of the public sector, among the things we have done in order to increase and make more efficacious the spelling on S & T, in our last meeting with the scientists – that was with the Philippine-American Association of Scientists – I announced that I have authorized the Department of Budget and Management to release 200 million pesos for masteral and doctoral-level scholarships in science and engineering. This is in addition to having put in the 2006 supplemental budget of 500 million pesos to build a science complex in U.P. Diliman. Actually, Nina it’s already ongoing, isn’t it? The construction?

Well, I could mention other things we are doing to spend on S & T, but I suppose Nina will let you know about that in the different technical meetings that she is conducting. But I can say that our spending on science and technology, these kind of spending as an example, the strengthening of basic education in Science and Math, the masteral and doctoral scholarship and research programs, the science complex that we are putting up, all of these are funded by the savings from our economic reforms.

Through hard-fought economic reform battles, the Philippine economy has finally broken loose of its lethargic economic legacy. New revenues, better collection and a crackdown on tax cheats, along with fiscal discipline has put the Philippines on a path to permanent economic growth and stability.

For the first time in a long time, the budget is under control. We are lowering our deficit and raising unprecedented amounts of revenue. And I do not want to, and will not go back to the days of large deficit spending.

Our commitment to economic reforms has proven effective. There has been a surge in investments. Just now, I came from Calabarzon where I ground broke a 100 million-dollar Toyota investment in a transmission plant. There has also been therefore a surge in job creation that I believe is permanent and must be sustained. And I am committed and I hope you are committed with me to consolidating the gains in new revenue by making long overdue investments in human infrastructure, including the human science infrastructure and physical infrastructure including physical infrastructure in science and technology like what we are putting up here in the U.P. campus.

These kinds of investments in human and physical infrastructure includes billions of pesos in education, health care and training along with billions in new bridges, roads and ports to upgrade the competitiveness of the Philippines.

And I am optimistic that we will balance the budget within my term while also cutting our debt ratio and investing in this vital social and economic needs, including science and technology. I’m a prudent, disciplined economic leader. And they say, how come people were not spending so much before on math and science education, on science complex, on scholarships in the upper levels, maybe because they did not give about immediate results that could be seen right away. But precisely that’s the meaning of being a disciplined, economic leader. I will not sacrifice long-term gains on short-term political expediency.

And now that we are beginning to have the wherewithal to go into research, science and to technology research or industry and energy as we are celebrating today, Undersecretary Yumul has talked about some of our research agenda. We must spend to develop indigenous and clean energy sources to reduce our dependence on price-vulnerability to costly fossil fuels, and rid the air of carbon emissions and other pollutants.

We have the Biofuels Act, authored and sponsored by Migz Zubiri. We still need to obtain public acceptance for a 10 percent bioethanol blend in 2010 and ensuring an adequate source of biofuels as mandated by that Biofuels Act. And getting public acceptance for this is more daunting a challenge than we might at first imagine. There are those who say, for instance, that ethanol will make my car go slower. Or there are those who say, why are we pushing so much for ethanol and biofuels when we are going to end up with less food on our table which is going to go into fuels? I have heard those kinds of arguments and that’s why that sort of slow down the Biofuels Act.

But it is you, the scientists and those who will adopt scientific findings to production that can answer these challenges, like meet the needs of energy through biofuel at the same time meet the continuing and growing needs for food of our population. And we are hopeful that this group, the scientist and private sector in industry and energy together with the Department of Energy and the Department of Agriculture and of course the Department of Science and Technology and other agencies, will push that horizon forward.

Undersecretary Yumul talked about disaster management. And last year, again, a fruit of our tax reforms, we were able to release 236 million to purchase doppler radars for Subic, Tagaytay and Cebu. So it is not a coincidence that our weather forecasting is much more accurate today. And on top of that now, here in 2007, PAGASA’s budget has another 200 million for two more doppler radar stations in Mindanao as well as the upgrade of equipment for natural hazard monitoring.

And of course, I’ve talked about carbon emissions earlier when I talked about energy, we do need more work on climate change which has become a keen global concern. Related to all of these, I have already ordered the DENR to finish the mapping of the hazardous areas. I remember I gave that instruction for the mapping of hazardous areas in a meeting that I presided on right here in this building a couple of years ago. Bibeth Gozun was still then the secretary of DENR. And now I am rushing the DENR because we need that hazard mapping as soon as we can have it. We already have some aspects but we’d like to complete it as soon as we can because global warming has really produced a lot of hazards more frequently.

And I look forward to your own findings on how to carry our vigilance forward and avoid loss of lives and property.

Industry. I saw the exhibits on virgin coconut oil, and I had just told Nina Alabastro, she was so surprised when I said Nina, I have just signed an Executive Order putting the Technology Resource and Livelihood Center under the Department of Science and Technology. Because the last time we met with the scientific community we talked about business incubation.

When I went to the TLRC and I took the occasion to examine their mandate, they were originally organized as TRC (Technology Resource Center). We already have other livelihood institutions: we have the PCFC, we have the NLSF So what makes TLRC unique should be the technology. So the livelihood should be incidental. So I put the name back to TRC and I’m putting it with DOST so they can be Nina’s arm in business incubation.

Maybe that way we can really see to it that Philippine food processing and packaging can be span into the global market on the back of small and medium-scale entrepreneurs. And now that you have TRC with you, I ask you to develop more technologies applicable to micro entrepreneurs with limited capital.

We are both comfortable and confident that our discipline will allow us to continue on a balanced path of targeted investment and overall restraint. Our medium-term plan budget is to balance the budget by 2010, although our economic managers have moved it forward to 2008, because they believe we can do so. And that is their plan, they believe if s a realistic goal.

Our fiscal performance in 2006 is a reflection of the significant progress that we have made over the past two years in putting our fiscal house in order. Our commitment to making the difficult decisions to reform our economy has been a major contributor to these achievements. We will continue to demonstrate that this is a government that delivers on its commitments, including its commitment to make technology the foundation of future economic development.

And so on this 25th anniversary of PCIERD, let us unite for Philippine S & T. Let us support those who believe in our reforms.

Long live science and technology!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].