Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the Third Annual Golden Grain Gathering

Thank you very much and happy birthday Congresswoman Chavez. Your birthday is tomorrow, but thank you for holding it early because I won’t be available tomorrow. So, thank you very much, Nelly, for making this happen. We had the opportunity to all be together.

And congratulations also to those who won the Gintong Butil (Golden Grain) awards, as well as those who received the various benefits distributed today. And I greet all the members of Butil who are here from different parts of the Philippines. And of course, our hosts, all the people of Nueva Ecija led by Governor Oyie Umali, I also greet you.

I also greet our host congresswoman, Cherry Umali, together with her co-host congressman Congressman Violago. And they are here because there are farmers from their province and not only that, because they are friends of Congresswoman Chavez, Congresswoman Neneng Nicolas and Congresswoman Vicky Alvarado are also here; so I greet them as well. Mayor Capinpin of Palayan, good morning. Thank you for hosting us. Butil SecGen, my fellow provincial, SecGen Guanlao; my PA for Central Luzon from Palayan, Reli Fajardo; and my companion later in our work there at Fort Magsaysay, Secretary of Environment, Lito Atienza.

The Gintong Butil award is presented today amidst the current global economic crisis. Everyone is looking for a “magic wand” to save the world economy. Some say that the current economic system is not right. They say the current system should be dismantled. They say radical changes are needed. But there are lives at stake. It’s arrogant to think that we can wipe the slate clean for the common good if large segments of our population are to suffer in the meantime.

So before we make any radical changes, we must be sure we don’t inflict more damage, or neglect the hardships of those most hurt by the global downturn. In that way, before we use radical measures in our economy, we first ensured that we identify the government’s capabilities in programs to help the poor during times of scarcity. Yes, we need to adjust, to change, but not at the expense of those who can least afford it.

So the program of our administration, together with Nelly and the other congressmen and congresswomen here, together with Oyie and the other local government officials, our program is to stimulate the economy. So we allocated funds for priorities such as job creation and poverty reduction, agricultural businesses and rural development, infrastructure spending, reforms in various sectors, reducing hunger and social development.

The actions we are taking to achieve the Millennium Development Goals of the United Nations such as reducing extreme poverty, equality for women, education for all, maternal health, environmental care, global engagement, these and the other millennium development goals are actions that are good for the health of our national economy. And these are serving us and have served us well in the current global crisis. And we expect the developed world to understand that their continued contribution to aid to the developing world must be part of any effort to address the current crisis.

In our case, we are still fortunate until now – that’s what Governor Oyie Umali said earlier when we were sitting together – at least we, our economy hasn’t fallen as much as the economy during the collapse of two thirds of the world.

We took our medicine – our economic medicine – years ago through fundamental economic reform that included raising taxes. Thank you for the support of Butil and your congressmen and congresswomen here. Are you still a congressman then, Oyie? Also cutting down on smuggling. And this is a big program of ours with the farmers of Nueva Ecija, especially the onion growers, poultry, right? Reforming our tax collection system and improving our banking laws. And this was rewarded with new revenues for investment in human and physical infrastructure. And in our economic performance every quarter since our administration took office, 36 consecutive quarters of growth. Well, that hasn't happened in the entire history of our generation. Including our GNP growth of 8% in 2007 and 6% in 2008.

But we achieved this growth because our farmers had a good harvest. Thank you very much to all of you. But we are never complacent; we fully recognize that our progress cannot be separated from other countries of the world, from wealthy countries. We also recognize that part of the solution to this global crisis lies in broader cooperation in the region.

Now, I just came from Malacañang because the Sultan of Brunei is visiting us today. But I already told Nelly that I will go to his birthday party. In fact, he even postponed it today, that's why I'm here. Our neighboring countries in ASEAN are our allies. Our dialogue partners in ASEAN – China, Japan and Korea – are also our allies. As you know here in Nueva Ecija, there are many projects from China here in agriculture. We are working together to enhance cooperation and coordination in our region. And this includes the Philippines' proposal to have, in ASEAN, as well as with our three dialogue partners, Japan, Korea and China, a source of support for countries facing cash flow challenges.

You know, Credit-Suisse released a credit worthiness for equity investments of various countries. They ranked about three dozen. The Philippines was number one there; Iceland was at the very bottom because the entire country went bankrupt. So we don't want that to happen in our region. That's why the Philippines is proposing this in ASEAN. And earlier, the Sultan of Brunei said he would support the Philippines' proposal at the ASEAN meeting.

This crisis that the world is experiencing is unprecedented in history, whether in the size of the crisis, the depth of the crisis, or the scope of the crisis. But the world has also learned a lot from past global economic challenges. For example, the Great Depression, we weren't even there yet, we weren't born. Ah, Nelly isn't here, was she born then? But most of us weren't in the 1930s. But the world has learned, there are many policies that didn't exist before. Fiscal stimulus didn't exist before, during the Great Depression, but now there is. And for us in Asia, we have also learned important lessons from the Asian financial crisis in 1997 and 1998. So, we are using those lessons. However, those who say that there needs to be a radical change are right because let's make sure that we help the poor, we can think about radical ideas. What are these radical ideas that we need?

First, there needs to be a fundamental change in global financial regulation. Didn't the economy collapse because the sub prime collapsed, those who borrowed money in America to buy a house only paying 10 percent then it turned out their credit rating wasn't that good? Because of the number of papers, papers, the fundamental credit worthiness is no longer seen. So that's where the changes are needed. And before we get involved, we need to – it's not a change because the system works, in general — enhance it. That's why Nelly, since I sat here, has been constantly talking about cooperative banks, and that's something we need to enhance. And thank you to Butil and your cooperative bank, you are pioneers in enhancing our cooperative banking system.

Second radical thinking is that the wealthy countries can no longer dictate global economic policy for the world. Well, they are the ones collapsing, we are still standing. So the lesson there is to rely on our own funds, rely on our own policies. And that's what Butil is doing. That's why you continued and created these cooperative banking systems, and we gave examples of outstanding cooperatives, cooperative banks and beneficiaries of cooperative banking. So, the system you are building is a big help for us to rely on our own efforts. That's the second lesson, that's radical thinking.

But ultimately, trade must continue. Let us not close our doors to each other in the world. Because if we do not trade, each economy will shrink and shrink. That's what happened during the Great Depression, and it will fall even further, and we will fall with it. And we, as in the example I gave, what you are doing in the cooperative banking system, the various things Nelly mentioned that my administration did, the various assistance earlier, what the model awardees did, what those who received benefits are doing, we are doing everything we can for the people. And I am happy to see that most of you, the Butil, are working for the good of the many. And I see it in your diligence, in the diligence of our farmers. Oyie said that the best farmer in Congress is here.

So, with the effort of our best farmer in Congress and you, the various farmers you represent, who are striving to increase yields so that Filipinos have enough food, that is what I call radical thinking. Let us rely on ourselves. We should no longer buy rice from others in five years; we will plant our own rice. So now we are buying palay from our farmers, not 30,000 metric tons but one million metric tons from ourselves.

I also see your concern for the diligence of the various workers here in Nueva Ecija, as well as in other parts of the Philippines, and in the sectors. Thank you for understanding that with our combined diligence and strength, we can confidently face whatever challenges the world brings us.

Therefore, on this day, the eve of the birthday of our best farmer in Congress and on the day of the celebration of the farmer “Farmers Day”, my message to you is, the Philippines salutes our farmer. Thank you for feeding the entire country and earning income so that the entire country can rise.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). Speech of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo during the 3rd Annual Butil. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412105634/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=19408&Itemid=38