Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, to the United Hearts of the Basic Sectors

Thank you very much, Secretary Dinky Soliman, for your introduction.

Thank you also, Oca Francisco, for your good explanation of why People’s Organizations should vote for Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo.

Thank you very much, my colleagues in government. Thank you very much, leaders of NGOs and P.O.s who are very active in the National Anti-Poverty Commission.

Oca heard on the radio that I lost my voice during the campaign earlier. So, I will not prolong my speech.

I want to thank all of you. As Oca said, our 7,000 here today, you are already convinced to campaign for Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo who is running for president.

Therefore, I, Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo who is running for president, what I will do is not ask for your help to vote for me, I will ask that you help me explain to the people why they should vote for me.

Earlier during my tour in Rizal, many said, 'Hey! Gloria, Gloria, we are with you!' I also heard, 'Oh! That's Gloria.' She's so small. But my answer to that is, I am small, that's why I probably know the feelings of the small people. And in our government, the voices of the small people are those that pass through the National Anti-Poverty Commission. I know, because I was the main author of the Anti-Poverty Law when I was still a senator.

Therefore, in my short presidency, all of us together with you, we started the changes desired by the small people regarding their livelihood such as prices, jobs, income, housing, health, education, care for the various sectors often left behind by society.

Regarding jobs, please help me explain that in the three years before I became president, only one million jobs were created. That's why, what we inherited when I became president was more than four million unemployed. But in my short presidency, in our short time and truly organized by the National Anti-Poverty Commission, we created more than three million jobs.

Regarding prices. The supply and prices of basic expenses of the poor remained stable. And these are usually rice, fish, especially tilapia, and jeepney and bus fares. These remained stable during our administration.

Regarding livelihood. As part of the Anti-Poverty Commission, microfinance has lent to one million women. And in the past ten months, it has lent an unprecedented 21 billion pesos to small entrepreneurs at a reasonable interest rate.

Regarding housing. The widest — you know that because the urban poor, many of you helped achieve this — the widest land was empowered to be purchased by squatters, so because of that they are no longer squatters but homeowners.

And for the workers. The most housing-friendly policies in history, according to the developers themselves who build houses affordable for workers.

Regarding health, especially our senior citizens. Millions of poor people were given Philhealth, most Filipino families now have health insurance. And especially for the benefit of our senior citizens. We also started selling half-priced medicines in almost a hundred government hospital pharmacies.

Regarding education. We have enhanced math, science, and English so that our future workforce, our youth, can compete with the challenges of the twenty-first century. We have extended schools to remote barangays. And now we are helping students who are about to graduate so they don't drop out before graduating.

But these are just down payments. Down payments and fruitful experiences. But much more needs to be done. That's why Oca said, what if I'm gone? We need basic reforms that can create six million jobs in the next six years if I am not gone.

Basic reforms that can plant enough rice so that we no longer need to import and our farmers will feed our Filipino people.

Basic reform that can reach one million pesos in loans to small businesses in every barangay. It was done in Thailand, we will do it in the Philippines in the next six years.

Basic reforms that can expand land rights so that this land can be used by small people as capital and our urban and rural poor can continue to do business.

Basic reform that can provide health insurance to all Filipino families and affordable medicine in all towns and barangays.

And basic reform that can change the culture against corruption through meaningful education.

So, these are some of the things we want to do for the ordinary Filipino in the coming times, apart from those mentioned by Oca Francisco, special programs for various suffering sectors and suffering areas.

So, perhaps with these accomplishments, with this experience and with our very clear platform for the ordinary Filipino, you who come from special sectors, you have been convinced to campaign for me even if you go outside your sector, even if you go to the ordinary Filipino who is not part of your sector, perhaps you can explain that we should really not lose what we have started well.

So, thank you for campaigning. Thank you for the one million votes minimum that Oca said you can contribute to our upcoming election.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Sama-Pagkat Daupang-Puso ng Batayang Sektor. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090607/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5647&Itemid=38