Good afternoon to everyone.

Leaders of the League of Barangays; Congresswoman Carmencita Reyes accompanied by her ABC here; those working in the formal sector, workers; those who received housing benefits; those working in the informal sector, (applause) vendors; (applause) those who use and operate transportation.

And I would like to greet Secretary Ed Pamintuan, Secretary Panganiban and Undersecretary Soliman. And to all of you, you are leaders of the grassroots. Thank you very much for being here. (applause) And thank you for expressing your desire for the President and legislators to work for the good of the people.

And I thank Congresswoman Reyes and the other congressmen and senators for the budget that was passed, which is very good and which we signed on Tuesday. (applause) This budget emphasizes and values investment in the people. Our budget invests in what we call the three “E’s” — Economy, Education, Environment.

Isn't it true that the most important thing for every Filipino is a good job, food on the table, quality education for their children, and a clean and pristine environment with fresh air, clean water and fertile land.

The largest portion of the budget is allocated to social services, including schools; medical treatment, such as 11,000 Botika sa Barangay (Pharmacies in the Barangay) selling half-priced medicines, and this is a good program of ours, those from the barangays; (applause) upgrading of primary hospitals in your provinces to become secondary hospitals, to have surgeons, anesthesiologists and obstetricians, and expanding the coverage of PhilHealth to seventy million beneficiaries; and also allocated are loans for small businesses, especially microentrepreneurs like sidewalk vendors. (applause) Thank you vendors, from Baclaran, thank you for your support. You have a grocery store now, right? Okay.

The DSWD has 43 million pesos in this budget, but this is only part of the 50 billion pesos in our banking system for small and microfinance.

The budget also allocates funds for housing. Earlier, you spoke with Vice-President Noli de Castro, he is in charge of housing such as the housing project that benefited the soldiers in Taguig and others. And there, 30 billion pesos of the Pag-ibig budget is for housing, and there is another 5 billion pesos in the budget for housing for those not members of Pag-ibig.

Our budget also serves as a buffer to alleviate the hardship that may be caused by the global economic downturn and the relentless increase in the price of oil and rice worldwide, which affects the price of our food and transportation.

There is a program called Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino (Program for Filipino Families). It provides targeted cash payments to one hundred thousand of the poorest in our country – one hundred thousand families. And… I spoke with the World Bank earlier and they said they will also help to expand the Pantawid Pamilya program to more than 100,000 of the poorest of the poor in our country. (applause)

International news networks are now reporting a worldwide shortage of rice. There is already a problem with oil, and now there is a worldwide shortage of rice. In 2001, the price of rice in the global market was 200 dollars. Now, it’s 700 dollars, that’s how much the price of rice has increased worldwide. That’s why the NFA (National Food Authority) is spending billions of pesos so that despite the increase in the price of rice in the world like this, rice remains at P 18.50 per kilo in our Tindahan Natin (NFA outlets). (applause)

That is how we seek relief for our people who are suffering from the high prices of oil and rice worldwide. To alleviate the pain of high oil and rice prices worldwide, Manila Water and Maynilad will reduce the charges for the poor for water. (applause)

The SLEX-PNCC portion, meanwhile, lowered the toll by ten percent last Monday. (applause)

But regarding rice, I ask our leaders in the barangays (villages) to please assist Secretary Peter Favila and Secretary Arthur Yap in going after the rice hoarders so that what we have allocated to the NFA is not wasted. (applause) You know, there are already four NFA officials who will be prosecuted because they are conspiring with unscrupulous traders, selling cheap rice to traders and the traders selling it in the commercial market. Imagine how large our subsidy is given the current price of rice, so we must arrest those who are taking advantage because they are stealing cheap rice from the poor.

So let's work together on this, barangays. Because if not, not only will our NFA subsidy be wasted, but so will the farm-to-market roads we are building throughout the archipelago so that our harvest will increase and we will no longer need to buy from outside. Because we are putting funds in this budget for farm-to-market roads: two thousand kilometers in Mindanao; two thousand kilometers in northern Luzon, because these are agricultural areas; one thousand kilometers in Central Philippines, Bicol and Visayas; one thousand kilometers here in Luzon, in Southern Luzon, Southern Tagalog and in Central Luzon in Bulacan.

And these farm-to-market roads will be built because we have allocated seven billion pesos in the budget for farm-to-market roads. (applause) And to increase the harvest, we will also invest eight billion pesos allocated for irrigation. This seven billion for farm-to-market roads and eight billion for irrigation are included in the 23 billion pesos allocation for the modernization of agriculture.

This is also included in the two hundred billion pesos from the national budget, corporations, your share of what we call the development fund of the IRA of local governments that we will spend on infrastructure. This includes important roads, for example, many but I will mention a few: the Sibuco-Siraway-Siocon-Baliguian Road in Zamboanga del Norte. Are there people from Zamboanga del Norte here? Yes! There are. Okay; the repair of the Maharlika Highway on Samar Island. Do we have people from Samar here? Because wasn't it badly damaged, okay; the Halsema Highway in the Cordillera. Are there people from the Cordillera here? Yes; and here also is the connection of C-5 and NLEX so that SLEX, C-5 and NLEX are connected.

Ports like the one in Dingalan, Aurora; in Kawit, Marinduque; in Esperanza, Cauayan and Aroroy in Masbate; and other routes for roll-on/roll-off ferries that will bring food from Mindanao here to make food cheaper or not increase in price so much. And we will also of course put up ports that are better in poor areas like the province of Tawi-Tawi. So I asked President Echeverri, do we have people from Tawi-Tawi here? It's a very far place, the farthest from us…. Oh, no. Batanes is farther but because Batanes has very few people, the standard of living is high. In Tawi-Tawi it's far and life is difficult.

We will also build no-frills airports in northern Luzon so that their products can also come here and so that eco-tourists can also go there, like in Alaminos, Pangasinan. Are there people from Pangasinan here? Okay. And also where there are many tourists going, we will put up an international airport like in Panglao in Bohol, (applause) and I saw Board Member Conching Lim there.

We will also allocate money for connecting electricity to barangays that don't have electricity and water to towns that don't have water. (applause) And we will help with connectivity those that investors in call centers want to go to. (applause) Part of our budget is also the commuter train here in… Isn't our LRT here U-shaped, we will make it O-shaped so that you can get on anywhere, you can get off anywhere to also reduce transportation costs.

I was talking to Secretary Larry Mendoza of the DOTC earlier, he said it was finished… because they divided it into three packages, two packages have been awarded, one had no qualified bidders, so the bidding will be repeated. But in short, at least two or even they believe that this bidding will be successful this time. So at least hopefully 18 months from now we will have an O-shape and not just a U-shape or horseshoe-shaped loop here in Metro Manila.

Your IRAs, for you Local Governments, from the budget is P210.7 billion. (applause) May the local officials, together with the barangays, use 20 percent of your development fund for infrastructure and social services. In other words, (applause) let's all invest in the people. (applause)

We have already done a lot. You in your barangays but there is still so much that we need to do. So we will increase our efforts to achieve the goals of our Philippine Reform Agenda.

So you, barangay officials, you are the most grassroots leaders, so I count on you, I count on your help.

Thank you very much to all of you. (applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the Presentation of the 2008 Budget on the Economy with the Liga ng mga Barangay and the Working Poor. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412122951/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1063&Itemid=38