Thank you very much Chairperson Myrna Yao.

Ambassador Sutherland, the benefactor of Women’s Empowerment in the Philippines; our friends of our women, the wives of the senators of Team Unity: Here is the wife of the former Senate president. Her initials are GMA as well. Her first name is Gloria as well, Gloria Manalang Angara; the one beside her is a model of the Filipino family together with our uncle in the senate, Helen Gamboa; and my fellow provincial, from Pampanga but she is the heart and soul of the Pichay we are planting in the senate, Claire; and here is another very beautiful and young woman, the wife of Migs Zubiri; and here also is a princess of Sulu, the daughter of the Sultan of Sulu, her name is Princess Jasel; and the daughter of Chavit, Gina Singson. Have I introduced everyone?

To all of you, happy celebration to all Filipinas!

First of all, let us thank the government of Canada, through Ambassador Peter Sutherland for the 315 million pesos grant for our Gender Responsive Economic Actions for the Transformation of women. That is called, G-R-E-A-T — Great Women Project. Thank you very much and long live Ambassador Sutherland! and I also want to greet our women, our leaders, Myrna, Espie Cabral is not here yet. It is recognized in the United Nations that the Philippines is achieving the biggest progress in removing discrimination against women. Congratulations to our leaders! So congratulations to the Filipino team that worked for this. And more and more Filipinas are becoming aware like you and are ready to stand up for the power of women.

Twenty eight years ago, we had the U.N. Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women, C-E-D-A-W (CEDAW). So now because we are implementing that, the cry of our nation — “Cedaw of the nation: livelihood of women.” why livelihood? Livelihood is what I tasked Myrna Yao with. Do you remember, Myrna? When I made her head of the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women. I said, “Myrna, I chose you because you are a successful businesswoman. I also want to make the ordinary Filipino woman a successful businesswoman because my war against poverty is also a war against discrimination.”

My hope for the future of the country and the good of the people is strong. Our national agenda aims to advance the country towards more stable politics, a more prosperous economy, peace and order of the country.

Our national agenda focuses on creating jobs with good income, stable prices of goods because you women are the shoppers, and bringing the blessings of a strong economy to each of your families, women. This is our agenda — pro-poor, pro-development, pro-modernization.

We are tirelessly working to build a modern country that one day will take its place next to first world countries. We have a goal for the day when all Filipinas and Filipinos can choose to live and work here in the Philippines, close to family, close to friends, owning a home with a high quality of life.

We are hoping for the day when enough good jobs are created in the Philippines so that Filipinos, both men and women, no longer need to go abroad for work. To say it in English: “We see a day when going abroad for a job is a career choice, not the only option for work.”

We in government have undertaken difficult but necessary tasks to strengthen our economy. These sacrifices are bearing fruit: we now have funds to invest in job creation, such as microfinance for women. You women, how many of you have already benefited from microfinance? Or Myrna, what happened? What? Because Myrna said that those who provided the microfinance were not invited, she invited the NGOs but aren't many of the NGOs conduits for microfinance? Or who among you are conduits for microfinance? Or, Myrna? It's good for you too, perhaps this is your first time attending Women’s Day because before Myrna… Ha? Because last year almost everyone had microfinance. There, Ms. Nieto. Okay? There, DepEd. Microfinance is now at 97 percent of our towns. And the three percent of towns… that do not have microfinance, that’s where the DSWD is.

So perhaps it’s time to let you know to contact the DSWD if you need help with your members in microfinance. Who has already contacted the DSWD to find out about this? It seems Myrna, we need you to be more with these NGOs that you invited here today. What, Myrna?

NCRFW Chairperson Myrna Yao: to our women, you know, this is our program so we are launching the Great Women Project because this is where we will start. Because we worked on this last year to have a program and it will already start the Great Women Project.

That Great Women Project is something else. This microfinance is already there. In fact, is there anyone here… oh, there are some nodding in front. DSWD, come forward! Alice. Alice Bala. What Alice, eight thousand women here don't know about our microfinance.

DSWD Alice Bala: Our conduits, ma’am, are in the poor areas in different parts of the Philippines. And to those who are here, those who haven't yet, if you haven't contacted the DSWD, we are open to you.

What, can we agree on that, will the NGOs go to the DSWD? Or Myrna, how many NGOs are here now? Not the number, how many organizations? NORFIL, did microfinance help NORFIL? There. NORFIL helped some. The Local Council of Women, where are the Local Council of Women here? Go Negosyo? But we are talking about microfinance. The difference between microfinance and this great, this project now from Canada, microfinance provides funds, it lends them out. But for those who need to practice to set up a business and then train skills, that’s what the Canadian government will help us with, 300 million pesos. But these NGOs, what role can the NGOs play? That’s why we invited them here because they are supposed to be our partners, right?

DSWD Alice Bala: So that’s what we said, the NGOs here, let’s cooperate with our government and we want to tell you that we have many women who have been given capital throughout Metro Manila alone. But not just Metro Manila, throughout the Philippines. And if you want to contact us, the DSWD is ready for NGOs to be conduits. Thank you.

Here is also the Vice President of the People’s Credit and Finance Corporation. Where is Noel Poso? This is the one lending to NGOs that will also lend to microfinance. Are you already lending to your beneficiaries, you yourselves? Is there anyone, is there anyone? So you don't have a track record yet. Because the PCFC lends to those who already know how to lend. But if you don't know yet, the DSWD will start. Do we have a list of NGOs here? Is this it?

Where is the National Council of Women of the Philippines here? Do you engage in microfinance? Come on, tell us who your beneficiaries are. Where is the National Council of Women? Please tell me how to contact you.

Local Councils of Women Representative: Madame President, the women, the Local Councils of Women, we have 1,765 local councils of women in 1,765 cities and municipalities all over the country.

Do you not know the Local Council of Women? Do you know them? Who said “yes”? Who said “yes”? Many said yes. Who here knows the Local Council of Women?

Local Councils of Women Representative: The Local Council of Women, Madame President, is the umbrella for all NGOs in every municipality and city.

No. But if they are not members, how can it be an umbrella?

Local Councils of Women Representative: Ah, we will look into that, if the NGOs were invited here.

NCRFW Chairperson Myrna Yao: Actually, many here are also from government. That’s why they are career women, so perhaps the other NGOs have more government career [employees] here.

Ah, there are more government employees here. ah…!

NCRFW Chairperson Myrna Yao: Yes. That's why. That's why they say that most of them are government employees. But the NGOs are here in front, like that.

You government employees, don't you have employee cooperatives? Don't your employee cooperatives engage in microfinance? Don't they? Oh, that's it. How can we help government employees with microfinance? Do you want to? Do you want to participate… Do you want to or not benefit from microfinance? Yes, yes. Yes, okay. Who will be our conduit in the multi-purpose cooperative… Doesn't every government office have a multi-purpose cooperative? Has anyone among you been reached by the microfinance of PCFCO? Where is Noel Poso?

PCFC official: We at PCFC, the People’s Credit and Finance Corporation, are ready to help all cooperatives.

Wait a moment, I'll ask you because you are a multi-purpose cooperative. Your multi-purpose cooperatives are already lending, right? So you have a track record. You are qualified to be a conduit of the People’s Credit and Finance Corporation. Do you already have People’s Credit and Finance… Do you already have microfinance conduits?

PCFC official: There are cooperatives, there are.

No, employees cooperative.

PCFC official: Employees cooperatives.

Who are the employee cooperatives that are already members with you?

PCFC official: We are not very involved with employee cooperatives, ma’am.

That’s what we will do. That’s the project we will do now. Do you agree? This is in addition to the additional salary you received last year, right? The 1,000? Don't you have a 1,000 allowance per month? What is this? Didn't you receive a 1,000 allowance last year? Where is the DBM? Is that possible… Who from the DSWD is here, for example? Employee of… You didn't receive a 1,000 allowance a month? Oh, there is, there is. Now… Oh, isn't it 1,000 a month? Correct.

So, on top of what you received last year, we will add… There is… When the new congress enters, I announced that we will also introduce a law for additional salaries. But on top of that, can we make a project between now and March 8 of 2008, microfinance for government employees? So maybe next year, when I ask, there will be… There is microfinance, there will be many who will respond. Okay.

Thank you very much and Happy Women’s Day to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’S Speech during the 2007 National Women’s Day Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151241/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1980&Itemid=38