Thank you very much Secretary Gilbert Teodoro, secretary of National Defense and son of Tarlac.

Our political leaders in the region: we have here the governor of Zambales, Governor Amor Deloso; Congresswoman Mila Magsaysay of this district where we are now; Mayor Bong Gordon, our host mayor because a part of Subic is from Olongapo City but we have also Mayor Khonghun on the other side because a part is also from Subic town; and then, Congresswoman Iyay Coscolluela of Buhay Party List is very familiar with Subic having worked here for such a long time; and Congressman Violago from Nueva Ecija, thank you for being here.

We have Governor Tet Garcia with us and his son Congressman Abet and we have Congresswoman Herminia Roman with us. So, we thank all of them for being here at all the local officials that I saw, I greeted, the mayors of the different cities and towns here in Central Luzon, very happy to see all of you.

Soldiers and police officers who are here now, we’re very happy that you are here and participated in this very important assembly. And representatives of the church, I saw that almost all of the workshop leaders are leaders of what we call Christian churches. And civilian groups, thank you for the resolutions; and these resolutions will be scrutinized by Secretary Bert Gonzales’ group, who is not here now although he is the one managing these assemblies because he has an important meeting there in Davao in Mindanao and we cannot cancel this entire assembly just to wait for him. But his group, those sitting here at our front table, will scrutinize your resolutions, especially those parts of the resolution that also appear in the resolution of other assemblies. Because that is the most important thing to be answered or addressed by our national government, and your local governments should take care of the provisions of the resolution that are specific to your region. Thank you for the help you gave to the peace process here in Region III.

It is the duty of the government to ensure the safety of the citizens from the clutches of the enemy, whether rebels or criminals. And we are glad that the number of active rebels here has decreased. They are now almost half if we compare them to 1998, and there has also been a significant reduction in their weapons. This is a success of the combined efforts of the military, the police and the people. So congratulations to all of you! (Applause)

Even if the strength of these rebels has weakened, we still need to be vigilant to completely stop the encounters and recover 111 barangays from the influence of the left, many of which are in Bataan, Aurora and Pampanga. As far as I know, because I am Kapampangan, I always monitor that, I think we have no more influenced barangays, is this correct? But there are many barangays that are threatened barangays. We need to stop the sabotage of the rebels on cell sites. We need to stop their intimidation, extortion and recruitment of new members. From what we see in your resolution, there are underlying conclusions that lead to your resolutions. And an important conclusion, I think, in your workshops: lack of jobs, problems with land reform, whether in farms or with indigenous peoples, and the issue of social justice were the causes of the strengthening of the rebellion and this was also the problem in the fifties and again in the seventies. And all of this is rooted in poverty, which different administrations have been trying to address.

Here in our administration, a strong and growing economy has been the central pillar we have labored to create precisely to help ensure peace, order and stability in our country. And it’s paying off: our economy is more resilient today than ever before, thanks to our fiscal reforms and many of the congressmen here or their predecessors like Tony Roman, predecessor of Herminia and Tet, predecessor of Abet, many of them helped in what we can say are the reforms made in Congress that manifested in a 7 plus percent GDP growth last year. (Applause) And included in the GDP growth last year, every year, every quarter even when there is a recession in other countries — in 2001 there was a recession in Singapore, Korea and elsewhere — we were still growing. So, for the last seven years, we’ve created almost 7 million jobs in 7 years.

However, the strength and stability of our people and our economy compared to others, I know, is still not a comfort to the ordinary Filipino who is paying higher prices for basic goods.

Before the U.S. financial crisis, which we are weathering quite well so far, we were hit by a dramatic rise in the global price of rice, food and fuel. This hit all Filipinos; and it hurt us. It hit us where it hurts — at the kitchen table and in our daily lives. So even though we have created almost seven million jobs in seven years and provided a remarkable amount of human and physical infrastructure, at the end of the day, this remains a price-sensitive nation. When prices rise, people naturally feel the pain. And we don’t think in terms of overall macroeconomic conditions, we just think whether we can put food on the table.

In these troubling times, the role of the government is to help insulate the people from these price shocks and economic pressures. I know the burden you face from high prices and high inflation, which, thankfully, was reported earlier, has been significantly reduced. I know you are worried about job security and what you can buy with your salary. I am also worried. That’s why we are working hard to lower the price of food and gasoline, and to continue to increase jobs and investments to continuously increase opportunities for work for more of our citizens.

Thank you, investments continue to come in despite continued volatility in the global markets. For example, earlier, those on stage, almost all of us were with them during the inauguration of the Petron Fuel Blending Plant. What is this “fuel blending plant”? Well, one of its products is ethanol which is being mixed with their gasoline so that when you go to a Petron gasoline station you can choose, you can buy gasoline that is pure gasoline or you can buy gasoline blended with ethanol and the price of the blended gasoline ethanol is four pesos cheaper than the price of ordinary gasoline. That is the importance of the investment we came from earlier.

And from the plant to here, Armand Arreza, our SBMA administrator, is showing the various lands that are being acquired by the various investments coming here to Subic, so we have a lot of new investments to look forward to here in Subic. And thank goodness I learned that 85,000 people are already working here in Subic. That is the most important blessing that economic zones can give to our ordinary citizens — jobs, jobs, jobs.

As a result of our economic turnaround, we are also able to invest in key sectors to cushion the harsh impact of high prices for food and fuel on the poor. We are investing in modernizing infrastructure — we all know, the Subic-Clark-Tarlac Expressway and other roads and bridges on an unprecedented scale. Earlier I saw a list of necessary farm-to-market roads from the point of view of security and peace. So I am directing our generals here to include the farm-to-market roads in your program “Kalayaan Barangay.” (Applause)

We are also investing in education, healthcare and other social services. We expanded the scope of land reform. And I hope our congressmen will pass the extension of CARP. (Applause) And whatever shortcomings we may say in the implementation of land reform, we have exceeded our target of distributing two hundred thousand hectares annually.

We have exceeded the target. More people are acquiring their own land, including the indigenous peoples of Region III who have only now been given titles for Ancestral Domain. There are still some remaining, as you say, and that is really because before I became president, no one was giving Ancestral Domain titles. It only started with our administration. So, these areas placed here in the Regional Peace and Security Assembly, I will also ask our National Security Council or our P.A. for Region III, Relei Fajardo, to follow up with the NCIP on why it hasn't been done. And let's see how we can increase the funds. Although as I said, the target we gave for Ancestral Domain titles has been achieved, because we didn't say we would do 100 percent during our administration. Nevertheless, we will strive to increase the funds so that there will be more. (Applause)

And all the while, we are balancing these investments with a commitment to meet our fiscal obligations. Because if the government spends too much over and above our taxes, our credit rating will suffer. Interest rates will rise, our peso will weaken. Our people will suffer even more because the prices of goods will rise again. That is the balancing act that needs to be done in economic management.

We cannot predict the full impact of the current global financial crisis on the Philippines or any country next year. However, we can do our best to plan for any and all contingencies, which we have done. At ito nga ay in-unveil natin doon sa annual conference ng Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry. But indeed, we can say that our economy is stronger than it has been in generations. It has demonstrated that the hard choices we made regarding economic reforms — and I again congratulate either our congressmen now or their predecessors for helping us here — because these reforms have allowed us to have the resources to mitigate the impact of the global financial crisis and the high prices for food and fuel on all Filipinos. These efforts have served us well.

These actions are seeing us through this period of tremendous change as we prepare for the day which we see has already started to come with lower global and food prices. We are not insulated from events taking place internationally, so we will have to monitor developments closely and take action where for necessary to ensure that any impact will be minimal and short-lived.

Now more than ever, in this time of global economic turmoil, it is essential that we stay focused on meeting the challenges and helping our people. We would hope that our opponents would join us in putting the people first. Unfortunately, some will opt to put politics and even obsolete ideology ahead of the people. But for us, we will continue to protect the poor and move the nation forward during this challenging time.

Our priority is implementing the pro-poor and economic reform agendas that have given our country the strongest and most resilient economy in decades. This is a time when our nation’s leadership must give all its attention to managing the impact of the global financial crisis on our own economy, and part of that is addressing the insurgency.

The communist rebels have spend years as a low-level threat. But even if they are low-level, they impede the progress and development of a number of rural areas. If we want to become a first-world country in 20 years, meaning, when poverty has been marginalized or the marginal have entered the middle-class and institutions become strong if we are to achieve that we have to put a stop to the ideological nonsense once and for all. And the reason why we’re having all these Local Peace and Security Assemblies is that together with the citizens, we have to get rid of the insurgency now by 2010.

I thank the resolution for recognizing the new premise on our peace efforts. It focuses our peace processes no longer on mainly negotiating with armed groups but more importantly on authentic dialogues with the people in the communities.

These dialogues will be centered on ending all forms of armed rebellion in the country by talking directly with the people; and you are the first conversation in Region III on the part of the national government, and we hope to bring this all the way down to the grassroots. We aim to generate a national consensus against armed struggle as a means of achieving political and social change. Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR), is our overall framework now in our dealings with any armed group in the peace talks. DDR, as espoused by you, hopefully, by the communities will be a notice to armed groups of your rejection of armed struggle; and a way of showing that the force of arms does not entitle anyone to representing our people.

Through these engagements, you, our people will necessarily make all armed groups accountable to the people and the government for all their actions. And while we are having this assembly and you are discussing how to achieve peace. There are only fifty days left and it's Christmas. As we move into this holiday season, we should count all our blessings and look to the future with greater hope, confidence and optimism. Our people must come together this holiday season to celebrate faith and families. Our communities must pull together and set aside personal feuds and political differences. We must focus instead on what positive things we can all do together to improve the lives of the people.

I, for one, am optimistic about our future and the hope — optimism and resilience of the Filipino people. We will make sure our government is vigilant in bringing government services to the people. It is important that your government work for you. It is important that your government deliver the services you deserve. We must dedicate ourselves to the poor and unfortunate amongst us everyday, but even more so during the holiday season. We must work to bring economic opportunities and human dignity to every Filipino man, woman and child during this coming holiday season of hope, love and faith.

It is good that many of our workshop leaders come from our faith-based groups. And I hope that this coming Christmas, as we seek love and faith, we will include in our search for love and faith the search for peace and the stability of the security of our beloved Central Luzon.

To all of you, long live and thank you very much. (Applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Local Peace and Security Assembly in Region III. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134747/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=4553&Itemid=38