Thank you very much to our new secretary of the environment, Secretary Angie Reyes.

Good morning to all of you.

Mrs. Camacho, Mr. Catan and Ms. Myrna Yao who is here as assistant treasurer of your N.G.O. but she is also the chairperson of our Commission on the Role of Filipino Women. I greet Mayor Teves and all the officials here; junk shop owners; General Tolentino and our other colleagues in the government; our businessmen, Mr. Belton, thank you again for being here; and Boy Camacho and all those who are helping here with what Narda Camacho is doing, who has long been known for her recycling and was even praised by the United Nations. Congratulations! Narda and congratulations to all of you!

Welcome to Malacañang.

This morning, I was with Mr. Belton and Secretary Reyes at Smokey Mountain, where the poor were shown that poverty is not an obstacle to loving mother earth.

Now we are here, with N.G.O.s and some in the nature business who also want to show that love for mother earth is part of our weapons in our war against poverty.

The government can start advocacies, start programs like what my administration did by passing the Clean Water Act, passing the Solid Waste Management Act, and vigorously implementing the Clean Air Act. But you, N.G.O.s, businessmen, private sector, you have the commitment, you have the ability, you have the knowledge of technology that will really give substance to these programs.

They are not here now, but I want to point out, for example, the huge investment of the private sector in Clean Air Fuel. For example, coco bio-diesel, or for example, putting up ethanol plants, this is a big demonstration that the private sector can really find a way to make a clean environment a path in our fight against poverty. The policy of your servant's administration regarding the environment is greatly involved in one of the ten points of my 10-point pro-poor agenda, and that is the delivery of water throughout the country.

We are working hard to provide clean water to communities and to ensure this, we need a lot of water. So the Clean Air Act is very important, but the Clean Water Act is also very important, and so is the Solid Waste Management Act.

The Clean Water Act is one of the most important parts of the administration that was made into law. But the Solid Waste Management Act is just as important, which you are implementing. Because we need good solid waste management so that solid waste does not end up in our water and contaminate it. And so that we can deliver water to all communities that they can drink, we also need to take care of our watershed. That's why logging is prohibited in most of our country. Only a few provinces were allowed when Secretary Reyes' successor, Mike Defensor, allowed them, and he chose these provinces after consulting with various N.G.O.s.

And not only prohibiting logging, but also our capacity to revive nature must be strengthened through human intervention through industrial tree plantations and reforestation. So I expanded what was once called the Bukidnon forest — Angie, right? — but you've reached the name now is the Philippine Forest Corporation and we gave it a corporation under the DENR with the mandate to create a vast reforestation. And this is one area where the corporate sector can help and make a difference either investing in industrial tree plantations or contributing to massive reforestation.

This global warming has made our job more difficult. Because global warming over the past few years is now bringing heavier rains and more severe floods around the world — didn’t you see Katrina in America? — as well as in the Philippines. So we are investing in geo-hazard mapping along with the ecological restoration I mentioned earlier, the reforestation. This is a big project of Secretary Reyes now, the geo-hazard mapping.

In the past, this was done by NAMRIA inside the office, but it took a long time to finish. So Secretary Reyes has plans to possibly outsource it, maybe even sell NAMRIA's property which is now very valuable, in a prime location, to pay for those who will do the geo-hazard mapping faster so we can use it immediately for our nature conservation programs.

When… We have been flooded many times, there have been landslides many times due to the rain. I can’t help but think of the old saying, “water, water, everywhere and not a drop to drink.” All this water that is coming, instead of killing Filipinos, should be used to make Filipinos live.

So flood control masterplans in our major river basins are very important, this is one of the elements of the environment chapter of our Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan. So I also created a River Basin Task Force — right, Angie? — under the leadership of Secretary Reyes so that these river basins, instead of always being flooded, can use the water from these rivers, and the rains that go to those rivers, or the water coming from the mountains can be used by people to provide water to our communities — an adequate source of community water supply.

Meanwhile, until we can do that, until we fulfill the reforestation, until we can use the floodwaters for our drinking water or irrigation, we need to balance the use of the water we have now from various sources between the needs of the community and agricultural requirements.

There's an agency there in the DENR — actually, inter-agency — it's called the Water Resource Board. The problem with the Water Resource Board… I don't believe in committees. When there's a committee, all that happens is a lot of debating. And especially this Water Resource Board, who are the members? Those who represent those who drink water, those who represent the farmers to irrigate their plants. How will they make a decision on where the water will go? Well, they end up fighting with each other because each one has their own constituent. That's why there are often stalemates, often delays, it's not productive. As Angie said, what she noticed because of that system she inherited, when she goes to the Water Resource Board meeting, the high-ranking officials who are decision-makers don't even attend anymore.

So, I said: — I said it before and I say it again to Angie — “Angie, make me an executive order. Let's change that Water Resource Board. Let's make it a Water Resource Office under the DENR so there's one director who is responsible for his decision-making. He neither belongs to the agricultural sector nor Manila Water Supply or LWUA. He will calibrate how much will go to drinking water, how much will go to irrigating the farmers' fields.” In other words, he will calibrate the two important points in our 10-point pro-poor agenda. One is providing water throughout the country and the second is developing two million new hectares of land for agri-business.

Perhaps you see in my story of our policies, that all actions to defend nature are connected to our fight against poverty. And this recycling, this is one of the best proofs of this truth, that if we win the fight against poverty, it means we also win the fight against the waste of our nature.

So to all of you, solid waste managers, recyclers, lovers of the environment, a meaningful Earth Day to everyone.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Earth Day 2006 Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412214101/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2435&Itemid=38