LAND = WEALTH : AN INNOVATIVE CONCEPT

First of all, congratulations! Filinvest land for spearheading this innovative project.

Innovative, I thought, but as Mr. Yap explained not really that new, it’s going Lack to an old concept that has become important again in this day and age.

A long time ago, and still in some areas, you have the family residents in the second floor and you have the family business in the first floor. Then came the zoning development wherein residences must be in one village or subdivision, factories must be in another place or industrial park, and the shopping center must be still in another place.

But now that we have the era of high oil prices and expensive transportation, congested populations, heavy traffic, it’s really not that economical and efficient anymore to spend so much time traveling from work to home and home to work. And this is going to be especially difficult for our micro small and medium scale entrepreneurs.

So thank you to the Gotianun family and the Filinvest family for helping us in our aim to develop three million entrepreneurs by 2010. This is in addition to the two million who have already benefited from over 20 billion pesos in loans since 2001.

Thank you for your contribution to defining the major role of land in wealth generation. Thank you for bringing about an environment for wealth generation that is conducive to the needs of the 21st century with all its challenges, not the least of which is expensive and time consuming travel.

Your strong commitment to corporate responsibilities indeed a boon to our nation. Our nation must strengthen itself, first of all by reconciling with God and by counting our blessings from the Lord. I’d like to take this occasion to thank him not only because we have innovative, socially responsible and forward looking families like the Gotianun family but also I’d like to thank the Lord that Merrill Lynch has just upgraded the Philippine rating to overweight.

The highlight of the Merrill Lynch report says, and I quote some parts of it: “The fiscal outlook appears stronger for 2006. On the political front, President Arroyo’s position looks secure. Economic fundamentals are improving with positive prospects for economic growth.” Asia as I end my quote, we can say that indeed, the good prospects for economic growth are there not only in the analysis or the financial agencies but in the business decisions of very astute and very practical business families like the Gotianuns.

We will seize this opportunity, too to redirect the foe government so that its bureaucracy will be more responsive to the call of the times, the way that I think the Gotianun and other land development families and entrepreneurs have responded to what we did for the housing industries bureaucracy. We have cut down the number of signatures required for development projects to maybe one-third of what it used to be and interest rates have become much lower than what they used to be that is because we believe in housing not only in developing our entrepreneurs the I way Asenso village will but also because housing has the biggest multiplier effect of all economic activities.

Thus, in terms of land as a source of wealth generation and employment as to the multiplier, and in terms of developing our entrepreneurs, and in terms also of decongesting metro manila, Asenso village falls squarely under our Ten-Point Agenda. The Asenso parks to be developed, housing and business parks, in the nearby provinces, first Laguna and Cavite, I’m quite sure later Batangas and other provinces south of Metro Manila, will surely become bustling hubs of growth to spawn jobs in prosperous communities until someday, maybe fifteen years from now, we will see the provinces of Laguna and Rizal connected through the Laguna lake because of the development started today by enterprising families and corporations like the Filinvest.

Your idea of clustering industries or clustering activities together with, housing, economic activity, including your logistics support are indeed going to make these provinces feel the economic impact. And I can see the complementarity between this facility that you are providing the micro small and medium enterprises and the ‘One town, One product’ project that I have been calling for that finally the Department of Industry is actively executing.

And so I would like to take this opportunity to envision that each province will have a cluster of industries that will be borne out of the seeds that will be planted by Asenso villages.

I wish for the sustained success of the Asenso villages. And on this day I think, it is a great moment to call on everyone: “Let us strengthen our nation to promote our prosperity and development.”

Thank you, Asenso, for providing a good life, livelihood, and future. Congratulations!

Thank you all very much.

Source: Adamson University Library