Thank you, Secretary Ermita.

Members of the diplomatic corps, members of the Cabinet, Congressman Gidaya and the other veterans, members of the EDSA People Power Commission, Mayor Tinga and the other officials of the local governments, General Senga and the other officials of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, ladies and gentlemen.

Today, we remember the biggest stampede of people in our history including millions in which no one died, but democracy lived.

To us, EDSA is the temple of democracy won. But many of the excellencies of the diplomatic corps were there yesterday at the foreign correspondents association when I recalled that the world embraced EDSA 1 in 1986, tolerated EDSA 2 in 2001, and will not forgive an EDSA 3 but instead would condemn the Philippines as a country whose political system is hopelessly unstable and does not deserve to be a place to invest in even if the Filipinos are among the finest people in the world.

While we walked on EDSA highway those four glorious days in February, we wonder whether we marched forward or marched in place since then. This is probably the reason why at this particular time of the year, regardless of the official theme for the year, the spontaneous message is always the quest for the spirit of EDSA.

Where has the spirit of EDSA gone? Has become a familiar February refrain. And always we proceed to rummage inside the nations soul to look for its whereabouts. Some say it’s gone and proceed to issue obituaries for dreams lost, opportunities squandered, promises failed. Others contend even that we are worse off since the millions rushed to the barricades during those four days.

If the apostles of permanent revolution would have their way, they would dig trenches on EDSA to perpetuate its memory. But as the good book says in Ecclesiastes: ‘to everything there is a season, a time for every purpose under heaven: a time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck what’s planted; a time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to breakdown, and a time to build up; a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance; a time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing; a time to gain, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and a time to throw away; a time to tear, and a time to sew; a time to keep silence, and a time to speak; a time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of peace.’

I recited the whole Ecclesiastes phrase that’s so famous because I wanted to reflect on what is timeless. And I found one that doesn’t go out of season: the time to serve. And whenever we rush to the side of a neighbor in need, a community in distress or a stranger in despair, we relive the spirit which made EDSA possible. Whether EDSA 1 is what brought about what has been brought about is the spirit behind it that we look for.

And as I said yesterday, the spirit of EDSA is alive in St. Bernard where citizens use bare hands to claw through the earth to rescue kith and kin. The same people who relied on themselves to save democracy from being entombed are the same people using their own hands to save the lives of people buried by mud.

I also said yesterday that the spirit of EDSA is alive in the road to Guinsaugon as soldiers bivouacked through the night so together with the people trapped in darkness they can see the light of dawn. The same love for their fellow Filipinos which led our soldiers to rendezvous with the people for one final push 20 years ago is still what motivates our soldiers today to come to the side of the people when they are called.

The Filipino soldier has played a great role in peace as in war. The Filipino soldier plays as great a role in the mudslide of St. Bernard as in the jungles of Tagkawayan and the barricades of EDSA. And like the Filipino soldier, we don’t need a war to become heroes. We don’t have to wait for another EDSA, in fact, we shouldn’t wait for another EDSA to establish our heroic credentials. What we need to do is to remember our duties as soldiers are disciplined to remember their duties.

The reforms that were expected in 1986 were not meant to crawl in short lurches, but to hurtle through the road to freedom. Unfortunately, bumps slowed down the journey and it was even nearly halted by the same forces that would now like to steer the ship of state to uncharted shoals.

But today, there is something we can do that we may have wanted to do all this time. Now we have the revenues from our tax reform to redeem the pledge of safe neighborhoods and stable jobs, of more schools and access to modern medical care.

While the budget is being brought to even keel, we will make sure that if it does tilt, it tilts in favor of the poor and in favor of protecting the ordinary Filipinos. And that again is where the soldiers and their partners, the policemen play a heroic role.

I call upon our soldiers not to cede a single town to those who dream of breaking up the country into soviets, and I call upon the police not to cede a single street corner to those who plan to break into our homes.

As I said yesterday, higher value added tax collection should result in value added protection of those who pay them. Thus, we will put more cops on the streets, more guns in their armories, more radios in their hands and more vehicles for patrolling.

Defense will also be entitled to tax dividends.

An improved bottom line would mean more bottoms for the navy. The missing formation, the constantly missing formation of our air force on the ground will be gone the moment we have fiscal take off. But for us to be safe in our homes, for our borders to be secure, we the citizens should remember this dictum: we must pay taxes so crime does not pay.

Many events in the history of the last century pale in comparison to the significance of EDSA 1 in changing the shape of the world. But another event has also changed the world — 9/11. Since 9/11, the world has been made more aware of the destructive power of terrorism. And as our soldiers only know so well, however, the Philippines felt the bitter taste of terrorism long before that, especially from the communist terrorists.

We have stood shoulder to shoulder with the international community in the fight against terrorism. And we are determined to continue that fight. Even as we are determined to bring peace to Mindanao.

Peace in Mindanao will help heal the nation, and allow for the attraction of new investments. And it will narrow our focus on those few hardened international terrorists who still seek refuge in some of our distant jungles. Distant to the rest of us but the backyard of many of our soldiers who have been fighting for so long in those areas of conflict. The job of peace in Mindanao will be met with fear by the terrorists lurking there.

And as we approach the summit of peace, I hope to look upon a nation that is reforming itself through a new economic model and a new governance in place… System of governance in place to manage its way to modernity. Peace will be the final block that will make it all happen. And once again for that final building block to be put up the soldiers play a central and heroic role.

And so today, I thank you all for listening to my view of the vital role of the Filipino soldier in our nation’s current history. And we must honor them as we remember these four days of EDSA. Much hinges on our success, soldiers and civilians. There is much to be done. And on this morning, I thank our soldiers for being part of the Philippine story.

Greetings to all! Thank you very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Wreath Laying Ceremony in Commemoration of the 20th Anniversary of the EDSA 1 People and Prayer Power Peaceful Revolution. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412215138/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2400&Itemid=38