Thank you. Thank you.

Thank you very much Cerge, former National Chairman of the KBP, the first KBP Chair to be elected to six terms, the first broadcaster to rise from the ranks of the provincial reporters to become KBP Chair, and I just found out he still has a title in the KBP, KBP Chairman Emeritus. Congratulations, Cerge!

Greetings to our host officials, Governor Maliksi and City Mayor Tolentino. And of course greetings to the officers of the KBP once again headed by Butch, Herman, Rupert Nicdao and March, and all the other officials and leaders of the broadcast industry who are here. I say greetings again because as Butch is asking me how long have you been attending our KBP fellowships. Oh! from the time I was still a senator every year: national, regional NCR, Region III, sometimes other regions. I’m probably the one official who has attended the biggest number of KBP conferences.

In fact, as Butch said in his very nice way of putting it, what he said echoes what many pillars of the KBP say that no other president has been as close to this organization as me. So, I hope you will not begrudge me for wishing that the broadcast media will be kinder to me during the rest of my term as president. But although certain individual broadcast institutions and personalities have been very much against me, as an organization, I do acknowledge that KBP has been supportive. And I thank you for that.

KBP as an organization is the voice of moderation, reason and professionalism. Years ago you developed a code of standards and business practices. That is a good start for a self-regulating industry.

You meet in very challenging times today, as Butch says, as the broadcast industry prepares for wide-raging technological changes. These are brought about by the ICT revolution. If centuries ago there was an agricultural revolution, then there was an industrial revolution, now we have an ICT revolution. And there is no stopping ICT from becoming the wave of our future, whether in your industry or in any other industry. Our country should use it to enhance our competitiveness. And I know you will use it to enhance yours.

The most basic step to achieve this is to build up telecommunications infrastructure. That is why part of the ten-point program of our administration, one of the ten points, is to develop a network of not only transport but digital infrastructure to connect the entire country. And the most cost-effective way to do this would have been to set up a national broadband network, and that is why we obtained financing from China for that purpose.

But when the NEDA Secretary alleged to me a bribery attempt attending the deal, involving a constitutional officer not under the administrative supervisory jurisdiction of the President of the Philippines, I advised the Executive Secretary and the DILG Secretary about it with the view of having the matter discreetly investigated. ES directed the National Security Adviser to carry out the investigation while the DILG Secretary conducted his own. The findings reported back to me were “inconclusive.” Nevertheless, for the sake of propriety, I moved to cancel the project after explaining the matter to the President of China.

Unfortunately, there are a lot of unsubstantiated allegations and gossip and innuendos mixed up with the facts of the case. This is part of our immature political system. It is part of our immature institutions. And this immaturity hurts the growth of the nation. That is why after economic reform, I have long called for fundamental reform of our political system and our institutions.

I have worked tirelessly to change our economy, and I have set it on a path of reform. That is why the World Bank in 2008 upgraded our income standing from a low-income country to that of a middle-level income country. With our rise in status, from low-income to middle-income the expectations for accountability and transparency arise. Per the benchmarks of the U.S. Millennium Challenge Corporation, we pass the score card of a low-income country standard for ruling justly including control of corruption, investing in people and economic freedom. But now that we have moved to middle-income level status, we must hurdle a higher benchmark.

That is why once again I call for fundamental reform of our political system to ensure greater accountability and transparency. But also reform to make politics less destructive.

The media can also do so much to ensure greater accountability and transparency, and you can also do so much to make politics less destructive. Of course, I do not expect you to be part of a government propaganda machine. But I and certainly our people expect you to deliver truthful stories based on facts. And that is I’m sure the guiding principle of your self-regulation as an industry.

You are self-regulating because you are free, except for the martial law period; the Philippines have always had one of the freeist media environments in the world. What has changed, however, between then and now is the speed in which news travels. This is again part of technology and this is part of what your conference is all about. This newly competitive news that utilizes so many fantastic technologies has the upside that you must seize but there is also a downside. The downside is the huge temptation to get the story out quickly rather than spending time to get the facts right. And this can lead to innuendo and rumor presented as facts.

So with the great power of the new technology comes the great responsibility to be evermore mindful that your primary duty is to tell the truth, exercising objectivity and impartiality, always with an eye to the repercussions for the country that your stories may create. And again, that is your great responsibility because you are a self-regulating industry.

You are performing a function not only of your media institution as private sector business institutions but a function that other countries sometimes exercise from the regulator’s point of view. But you are the one exercising that, so you are also in that sense — public servants.

And as you continue to render your services to our people, I wish you well in responsibly exercising this self-regulating function that becomes even more compelling with the growth of technology. And on top of that, I also wish that media would spend more time imparting a message of hope and of renewed opportunities. Everyday there are numerous stories waiting to be told that inspire our people.

So, as you continue to render your services to our people, I congratulate the KBP for upholding loyalty to professional standards. You have become a valuable partner in development, congratulations!

And when Butch was talking about “Beyond Broadcasting” we’re not only talking about how the different media are now converging but also what you do as KBP beyond your broadcasting business, you have your own corporate social responsibility as KBP. And in this connection, I am supporting your nationwide tree planting project that you have called “Broadcastreeing.”

This is a welcome contribution to our efforts to confront the challenges of climate change. For KBP to have pioneered in this I am sure of your success and in advance, I am most grateful. I also congratulate the many members of the KBP who keep to the straight and narrow path because of your loyalty to your professional standards, you have indeed become among our heroes who are gathering the stones to help build a strong republic.

To all of you, thank you very much. May you have a successful convention.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the opening ceremonies of the 35th Top Level Management Conference of the Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster ng Pilipinas (KBP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133907/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26807&Itemid=38